num oklahoma department of transportation transportation commission division num member carlisle mabrey iii okmulgee division num vicechairman james h. dunegan calera division num chairman dan b. overland earlsboro division num member jackie r. cooper oklahoma city division num member loyd benson frederick division num member bruce benbrook woodward division num member bradley w. burgess lawton division num member peter j. regan tulsa secretary of transportationdirector gary ridley preface these special provisions with the exception of section num are generally written in the imperative mood and active voice .
in sentences using the imperative mood the subject the contractor is implied .
reference to the contractor is also implied in this language by the use of shall shall be or similar words and phrases .
in material specifications the subject may also be the supplier fabricator or manufacturer supplying material products or equipment for use on the project .
wherever directed required prescribed or other similar words are used the direction requirement or order of the engineerresident engineer is intended .
similarly wherever approved acceptable suitable satisfactory or other similar words are used the words mean approved by acceptable to or satisfactory to the engineer .
the word will generally pertains to decisions or actions of the engineer .
purpose intent and interpretation of specifications the purpose of these specifications is to establish where applicable minimum acceptable standards or a range for acceptable results .
it is the intent of these specifications that the contractor be fully and exclusively responsible for producing an acceptable end product .
in producing this end product the contractor shall exercise control of the project .
department of transportation personnel except where specifically provided for herein will make inspections for the state to document that an acceptable product is being produced .
interpretation of these specifications will be done in such a manner as to allow the contractor to control hisher project to the greatest degree possible in producing an end result product which is in all respects acceptable .
these specifications should not however be interpreted in any manner which allows a contractor to produce an unacceptable product or endanger the traveling public .
an acceptable end result product is the essence of the contract .
only projects in substantial conformance with the plans and specifications will be accepted by the department of transportation .
in order to avoid cumbersome and confusing repetition of expressions in these specifications it is provided that whenever anything is or is to be done if as or when or where contemplated required determined directed specified authorized ordered given designated indicated considered necessary deemed necessary permitted reserved suspended established approval approved disapproved acceptable unacceptable suitable accepted satisfactory unsatisfactory sufficient insufficient rejected or condemned it shall be understood as if the expression were followed by the words by the engineer or to the engineer .
i table of contents section page no .
chapter num general provisions num num general information definitions and terms num num bidding requirements and conditions num num award and execution of contract num num scope of work num num control of work num num control of material num num legal relations and responsibility to public num num prosecution and progress num num measurements and payment num chapter num soils num num clearing and grubbing num num earthwork num num test rolling num num salvaging topsoil num num clay plating num num machine grading num num obliterating abandoned road num num management of erosion sedimentation and storm water pollution prevention and control num num temporary sediment control num num nylon erosion control mat num num ditch liner protection num num sodding and sprigging num num planting num num seeding num num mulching num num fertilizing and agricultural liming num num mowing num chapter num bases num num general requirements for bases num num aggregate base num num caliche base num num subgrade treatment num num subgrade num num processing existing base and surface num num cement treated base num num econocrete base num num opengraded bases num num separator fabric for bases num num geosynthetic reinforcement num chapter num general requirements for surfaces num num general requirements for surfaces num num trafficbound surface course num ii num chip seal num num thin surface courses num num permeable friction course num num opengraded friction surface course num num fog seal and tack coat num num prime coat num num fabric reinforcement for hot mix asphalt pavement num num hot mix asphalt num num coldmilling pavement num num rumble strip num num portland cement concrete pavement num num concrete joint sealing num num dowel bar retrofit num num diamond grinding concrete pavement num num pressure grouting pavement num num rubblizing portland cement concrete pavement num chapter num structures num num excavation and backfill for structures num num forms falsework and temporary works num num prestressed concrete bridge members num num bridge decks approaches rails and parapets num num overlays for concrete bridge decks num num structural steel num num bearing assemblies num num concrete culverts num num structural concrete num num earth retaining systems num num reinforcing steel for structures num num painting num num repair of concrete bridge decks num num driven foundation piles num num penetrating water repellent treatment num num drilled shaft foundations num num posttensioning num num structural concrete repair by sealing and injection num num pneumatically applied mortar num num concrete surface repair by sealing num chapter num incidental construction num num riprap num num gabions and revetment mattresses num num steel jetty bank protection num num integral curb combined curb and gutter asphalt curbing and header curbing num num concrete or asphalt sidewalks driveways dividing strips and tactile warning devices num num manholes drop or curb inlets and junction boxes num num adjustment of existing structures num num drainage conduits num num wick drains and strip drains num num sanitary sewer pipe conduits num iii num water pipe and fittings num num removal of buildings structures and obstructions num num removal of underground storage tanks num num pipe railing and miscellaneous pipe work num num guardrail and end treatments num num fences num num removal and storage or reconstruction of fencing and guardrail num num monuments num num concrete longitudinal barrier num num hightension cable barrier num num mailboxes num num field office or laboratory num num mobilization num num construction staking num chapter num materials num num portland cement concrete num num supplementary cementitious materials num num bases and miscellaneous aggregates num num select borrow num num lime num num thin surface courses num num plant mix bituminous bases and surfaces num num electrical conduit num num delineators num num traffic stripe num num construction fabrics num num erosion control stone num num masonry brick num num signs num num overhead sign structures num num galvanized steel sign posts num num reinforcing steel num num structural steel num num miscellaneous metals num num drainage conduits num num paint for structural steel num num timber perservatives and treatment num num materials for guard rail guide posts bridge rail miscellaneous railing and fences num num miscellaneous materials num num material for roadside development and erosion control num num pavement markers num num concrete surface finish for structures num num electrical conductors num num pull boxes num num traffic signal backplates num chapter num traffic control facilities num num performance and operational tests for highway lighting and traffic signals num num electrical conduit num iv num pull boxes and ground boxes num num concrete footings num num removal of traffic items num num poles and mast arms num num breakaway bases highway lighting num num piermounted pole brackets num num luminaires num num power supplies num num electrical conductors highway lighting num num high mast poles num num high mast lowering device num num traffic signal controller assembly num num solidstate flashing contoller num num vehicle loop detector and loop wire detector wire num num pedestrian push button num num traffic signal heads num num opticallyprogrammed adjustable traffic signal heads num num traffic signal backplates num num electrical conductors for traffic signals num num regulatory or warning sign assembly num num railroadhighway crossbuck signs num num signs num num galvanized steel sign posts num num overhead sign structures num num delineators num num traffic stripe paint num num traffic stripe paint num num traffic stripe multipolymer num num construction zone pavement markings num num pavement markers num num sandfilled impact attenuation modules num num truck mounted impact attenuators num num portable longitudinal barrier num num modular glare screen num num construction signing and traffic control num num changeable message sign num num bridge guardrail retrofits num num chapter num general provisions section page no .
num general information definitions and termsnum num bidding requirements and conditions num num award and execution of contractnum num scope of work num num control of worknum num control of materialnum num legal relations and responsibility to public num num prosecution and progressnum num measurements and paymentnum general information definitions and terms num num section num general information definitions and terms num purpose intent and interpretation of specifications the purpose of these specifications is to establish where applicable minimum acceptable standards or a range for acceptable results .
it is the intent of these specifications that the contractor be fully and exclusively responsible for producing an acceptable end product .
in producing this end product the contractor shall exercise control of the project .
the contractor may deviate from any method required by these specifications if the following conditions are met such deviation will produce an end product substantially similar to the end product that would have resulted from the method required by these specifications and the department approves of such deviation .
oklahoma department of transportation department personnel except where specifically provided for in these specifications will make inspections for the state to document that the contractor is producing an acceptable product .
the department will interpret these specifications to allow the contractor to control the project to the greatest degree possible in producing an end result product that is in all respects acceptable .
these specifications should not however be interpreted in any manner that allows a contractor to produce an unacceptable product or endanger the traveling public .
an acceptable end product is the essence of the contract .
the department will only accept the work performed by the contractor if the work substantially meets the contract requirements as defined by the contract documents .
the department presumes that references in these specifications to manuals and standardized industrial guides are references to the latest published edition unless otherwise specified .
the titles or headings of the sections and subsections of these specifications are intended for the convenience of reference and shall not have any bearing on their interpretation .
num active voice imperative mood the department has rewritten this edition of the standard specifications for highway construction with an emphasis on the active voice .
in a sentence written in the active voice someone acts on something .
for example the resident engineer will take a sample .
a similar sentence in the passive voice a sample will be taken would be unclear about who was responsible for taking the sample .
this edition of the standard specifications also makes use of the imperative mood .
the imperative mood is used when the party issuing an instruction and the party receiving it are already understood .
in these standard specifications the department is stating its requirements or directions for the work to the contractor such statements have the same force as if they contained the word shall .
in an imperative sentence such as pour the concrete the department is indicating that it requires the contractor to num general information definitions and terms num num general information definitions and terms pour the concrete .
before an award of a contract imperative statements are directed to the bidders .
after a contract has been awarded imperatives are directed to the contractor .
the department will identify parties other than the bidder or contractor to whom it gives a responsibility in these standard specifications .
in phrasings where the responsible party has already been clearly identified or in factual statements when it is not important to do so the department may use the passive voice .
num abbreviations and acronyms where the following abbreviations and acronyms are used in these specifications contracts bid forms or on plans they indicate the following expressions table num abbreviations and acronyms short form long form aaa american arbitration association aan american association of nurserymen aar association of american railroads aashto american association of state highway and transportation officials aci american concrete institute agc associated general contractors of america aia american institute of architects aisc american institute of steel construction aisi american iron steel institute ansi american national standards institute ara american railway association area american railroad engineering association artba american road and transportation builders association asa american standards association asce american society of civil engineers asla american society of landscape architects astm american society of testing and materials atssa american traffic safety services association awpa american wood preservers association awwa american water works association aws american welding society cfr code of federal regulations epa united states environmental protection agency faa federal aviation administration fast guide field acceptance sampling testing guide fhwa federal highway administration fss federal specifications and standards general services administration ies illuminating engineering society of north america imsa international municipal signal association ite institute of traffic engineers mutcd manual on uniform traffic control devices for streets and highways nchrp national cooperative highway research program nec national electrical code nema national electrical manufacturers association odeq oklahoma department of environmental quality odot oklahoma department of transportation general information definitions and terms num num table num abbreviations and acronyms short form long form opdes oklahoma pollution discharge elimination system osha occupational safety and health administration sae society of automotive engineers ul underwriters laboratory usace united states army corps of engineers usfws united stated fish wildlife services num measurement symbols where the following measurement symbols are used in these specifications contracts bid forms or on plans they indicate the following expressions table num dualunit measurement symbols si metric u.s .
customary english symbol unit name physical characteristic unit name symbol nm nanometer microinch μin μm micrometer mil num inch mil mm millimeter length inch in cm centimeter foot ft m meter yard yd km kilometer mile mi square inch in² mm² square millimeter square foot ft² m² square meter area square yard yd² km² square kilometer square mile mi² ha hectare acre acre pint pt ml milliliter quart qt l liter volume gallon gal m³ cubic meter cubic inch in³ cubic foot ft³ cubic yard yd³ g gram ounce oz kg kilogram mass weight pound lb metric ton ton short num lb ton c degree celsius temperature degree fahrenheit f ms millisecond millisecond ms sec second time second sec min minute minute min hr hour hour hr kmh kilometers per hour speed miles per hour mph pa pascal kpa kilopascal pressure poundforce per square inch psi mpa megapascal w watt watt w kw kilowatt power energy and kilowatt kw ma milliampere electrical milliampere ma a ampere ampere a v volt volt v va voltampere voltampere va num general information definitions and terms num table num dualunit measurement symbols si metric u.s .
customary english symbol unit name physical characteristic unit name symbol ω ohm ohm ω hz hertz hertz hz j joule joule j lm lumen power energy and electrical lumen lm lx lux footcandle fc cd candela horsepower hp n newton poundforce lbf kn kilonewton force num poundsforce kip nmm newton per millimeter load pound per linear inch pli nm newton meter torque poundforce foot lbfft pas pascal second viscosity centipoises cp dynamic poise p m²s meter squared per second viscosity kinematic centistokes cst h henry inductance henry h ppm parts per million concentration parts per million ppm ls liter per second flow gallon per minute gpm db decibel sound decibel db table num engineers estimate pay unit symbols symbols pay unit english metric acre ac calendar day cd cd day day day dollar dol dol each ea ea each group eagp eagp foot drilled f dr gallon gal hectare ha hour hour hour kilogram kg kiloliter kl kilometer km kilotonne meter kt.m kilowatthour kwh kwh liter l pound lb linear foot lf luminaire day lmdy lmdy lump sum lsum lsum meter m meter drilled m dr square meter mnum cubic meter mnum thousand feet board measure kfbm general information definitions and terms num num table num engineers estimate pay unit symbols symbols pay unit english metric num gallon kgal thousand tonfeet ktft sign day sd sd square foot sf station sta sta square yard sy metric ton t track mile tkmi ton per mile tm ton ton ton foot tonf track foot trkf track meter trkm vertical foot vf vertical meter vm num definitions a .
acceptance date .
the date on which the contractor completes and delivers documents certificates proofs of compliance and final estimates to the resident engineer .
see subsection num.c final acceptance .
b. addendum .
a revision to the proposal forms developed by the department after bid notice and before opening of bid proposals .
c. award .
the commissions selection of the lowest responsive bid from a responsible bidder .
d. base course .
see pavement structure .
e. bid bond .
see bond .
f. bid form schedule of items .
the approved form on which bidders are to provide bid item unit prices in their bid proposals .
g. bid item .
an item of work on the bid form for which a bidder shall provide a bid item price .
h. bid item price .
the amount a bidder provides in its bid for performing the work represented by the quantity of a bid item on the bid form .
i .
bid item unit price .
the amount a bidder provides in its bid for performing each unit of a bid item .
j .
bid notice .
a formal announcement by the department which uniformly and equally notifies the public and prospective bidders of the intent of the department to award a public construction contract in accordance with the public competitive bidding act of num num o.s .
num .
the bid notice of a project will contain its location the type and extent of work which will be required and the date time and place of the bid opening .
k. bid opening letting .
the opening of the bid proposals submitted by bidders on the date and time defined by the department in the bid notice .
l. bid price .
the total of all bid item prices for a bid submitted by a bidder .
num general information definitions and terms num m. bid proposal .
the written offer from the bidder submitted on the bid form or electronic media presenting bid prices for work and materials necessary to complete the proposed project .
num .
standard proposal .
the offer of the bidder to perform the work described in the plans and specifications within the contract time and to provide the labor and materials at prices quoted by the bidder .
num .
ab proposal .
outlines the bid price element a and the bidders estimated construction time element b .
the department will assign a value to each day of the construction time .
the sum of the assigned values multiplied by the number of days bid is added to the bid price .
the combined sums are used to rank the bid proposals .
rarely a third element c is included to account for time needed to complete a key element of the project .
n. bidder .
an individual or legal entity submitting a bid proposal for the work .
o. bituminousasphaltic .
containing or treated with the brownishblack heavy ends of petroleum source generally used as a cementitious material .
p. bond .
a guaranty issued by a surety and submitted by a bidder to ensure fulfillment of the contract coverage of department overhead or quality of the work and materials .
the department requires the following bonds num .
bid bond proposal guaranty .
a guaranty to ensure execution of the contract .
a certified check cashiers check or irrevocable letter of credit for num percent of the bid price to ensure the bidder will enter into the contract if the bidders is awarded the contract .
the proposal guaranty repays the department for republishing notices to bidders expenses incurred by the defaulting bidder and the difference between the bid of the defaulting bidder and the bidder to whom the contract is awarded .
total expenses must not exceed the amount of the proposal guaranty if the bidder fails to execute the contract or fails to provide bonds and insurance to the department .
num .
maintenance bond .
a bond of at least the total contract price to protect the department from defective work and materials for one year after final acceptance of the contract .
num .
performance bond .
a bond of at least the total contract price which ensures prompt completion of the project .
num .
statutory and payment bond .
a bond of at least the contract price that guarantees the contractor will pay all expenses the contractor or the subcontractor incurs including the following state and local taxes accrued as a result of the contract liquidated damages provided by the contract and assessed by the department overpayment of progressive estimates that result in a balance due to the department required by the statutes of the state of oklahoma .
q. bridge .
a structure and supports erected over a depression or obstruction with a passageway for carrying traffic .
a bridge has an opening of more than num ft num m between undercopings of abutments or extreme ends of general information definitions and terms num num openings for multiple boxes measured along the center of the roadway .
it may include multiple pipes where the distance between openings is less than half of the smaller contiguous opening .
num .
bridge length .
the distance along the line of survey stationing backto back of backwalls of abutments or endtoend of the bridge floor but at least the total clear opening of the structure .
num .
bridge roadway width .
the width of the structure measured at right angles to the center of the roadway between the bottoms of curbs or between the inner faces of the parapet or railing .
num .
substructure .
the section of a bridge below the bearings of simple and continuous spans skewbacks of arches and tops of footings of rigid frames together with the backwalls wingwalls and wing protection railings .
num .
superstructure .
the entire structure of the bridge except the substructure .
r. bridge engineer .
a department engineer responsible for engineering decisions related to the design and construction of bridges .
s. calendar day .
see contract time .
t. change order .
a written order to the contractor for additional work changes in quantities changes in the price of contract pay items and additions or modifications to the contract .
u .
channel .
a natural or artificial watercourse .
v. commission .
the transportation commission of the state as constituted by state law and charged to administer the affairs of the department acting directly or through the director .
w. completion date .
the date on which the project and any exceptions are completed .
see subsection num.b project completion .
x .
construction limits .
that portion of real property as defined by the plans in which the contractor is authorized to perform contractually required activities .
it is constrained laterally by the slope stakes and linearly by the project stationing .
the contractor may be allowed to work or stockpile materials outside the construction limits when allowed by the engineer .
y .
contract .
the written agreement between the department and the contractor that sets the performance of the work the basis of payment and other obligations of the parties .
the contract includes the bid notice bid proposal contract form bonds specifications supplemental specifications special provisions plans the work order and any change orders or supplemental agreements that are required to complete the project .
z .
contract amount .
the amount of the original contract agreed to by the department and contractor including any departmentapproved adjustments .
aa .
contract time .
the number of working days or calendar days allotted for completing the work including authorized time extensions or a date by which the contractor shall complete the work .
num general information definitions and terms num num .
calendar day .
any day shown on the calendar beginning and ending at midnight .
in these specifications when the term day is used the implied meaning is a calendar day .
num .
fixed completion date .
the date by which the project is to be completed .
num .
working day .
every day shown on the calendar excluding saturdays sundays and holidays during weather and other conditions that allow construction to proceed for at least six hours with workers engaged in the work .
the department will consider saturdays sundays and holidays on which workers engage in regular work requiring the presence of an inspector to be working days .
ab .
contractor .
the individual or legal entity contracting with the department for performance of the work on the project .
ac .
control of access .
the condition where an owners or occupants right to access light air or view his or her abutting land in connection with a highway is fully or partially controlled by public authority .
num .
full control of access .
the authority to control access used to give preference to throughtraffic by providing access connections with selected public roads only and prohibiting crossings at grade or direct private driveway connections .
num .
partial control of access .
the authority to control access used to give preference to throughtraffic so that in addition to connections with selected public roads there may be some crossings at grade and some private driveway connections .
ad .
critical path .
the longest continuous sequence of work for which the combined duration of the works individual scheduled activities produces the minimum overall project duration .
ae .
culvert .
any structure under the roadway with a clear opening of num ft num m or less measured along the center of the roadway .
af .
delay .
a temporary suspension of all or a portion of the work .
the various delays are as follows num .
excusable delay .
a delay caused by the department or an event beyond the contractors control that impact the work and are critical to the progress and completion of the project .
acts of suppliers fabricators or subcontractors are considered under the contractors control exceptions in subsection num.dnum administration and extension of contract time general and will not be considered as an excusable delay or for an extension of contract time .
num .
nonexcusable delay .
a delay to the project or milestone date that was within control of the contractor for which no monetary compensation or time extension will be granted .
num .
compensable delay .
an excusable delay for which the contractor may be entitled to additional monetary compensation .
general information definitions and terms num num num .
noncompensable delay .
an excusable delay for which the contractor may be entitled to an extension of time but no additional monetary compensation .
ag .
department .
the department of transportation of the state authorized by article xvi section num of the constitution of the state as provided by enactment of the oklahoma legislature .
ah .
differing site conditions .
subsurface or latent physical conditions at the site that meet one of the following criteria differ materially from those shown on the plans differ materially from those normally encountered or recognized as inherent in the work or are unknown physical conditions of an unusual nature .
ai .
director .
the executive officer appointed and authorized by the commission to direct and control the department .
aj .
disincentive provision .
see incentive provisiondisincentive provision .
ak .
easement .
a grant by an owner to use property for a certain purpose .
al .
engineer .
the chief engineer of the department and the assistants or representatives authorized by the director acting within the scope of their assigned duties or authority .
am.equipment .
machinery tools and apparatus necessary for performing the work as required by the contract .
an .
estimates .
an electronically generated report containing quantities of materials placed and work performed and detailing compensation paid to the contractor .
the two types of estimates include num .
progressive estimate .
a record of materials placed and work performed during a period of time and detailing compensation paid to the contractor for those materials and work .
see subsection num progress payments .
num .
final estimate .
a record generated after the project has been completed containing audited quantities of materials used and integrating additions and subtractions from final quantities of work to establish a payment or collection from the contractor to reflect a final contract price .
see subsection num final payment .
ao .
fast guide .
field acceptance sampling testing fast guide .
consists of guidelines defining minimum sampling and testing frequencies of materials conducted on projects for acceptance and independent assurance .
the departments materials division will develop and implement the fast guide .
ap .
final estimate see estimates .
aq .
final stabilization .
when all earthdisturbing activities are complete and permanent erosion and sediment controls are established and functional .
the stabilized site is protected from erosion from waterflow and rain .
unpaved areas except graveled shoulders crushed aggregate base course or other areas not covered by permanent structures are protected by a uniform num general information definitions and terms num blanket of perennial vegetation at least num percent native background cover or equivalent stabilization measures including riprap geotextiles gabions or paved ditches .
see section num management of erosion sedimentation and storm water pollution prevention and control .
ar .
fixed completion date .
see contract time .
as .
gauge .
u.s. standard gauge as defined in num u.s. code section num when referring to sheet iron and plate steel .
galvanized sheet gauge when referring to zinc coated sheets .
american wire gauge awg when referring to nonferrous wire .
most commonly used in specifying copper and aluminum conductors .
awg is sometimes known as brown and sharpe bs wire gauge .
at .
holiday .
any day proclaimed a holiday by executive order of the governor .
au .
incentive provisiondisincentive provision .
contract provisions allowing adjustments to the contract price for each day the work is completed ahead or behind specified milestone dates or the completion date .
num .
incentive payments .
additional money for the contractor for each day work is completed before specified milestone dates or the completion date .
the department will determine the maximum number of days it will pay incentives based on lane rental amounts and other factors .
num .
disincentive assessment .
an assessment to deduct money owed a contractor for failure to complete work before specified milestone dates or the completion date .
the department will determine the deduction amount based on lane rental cost formulas defined as the cost to the traveling public per increment of time for losses attributable the failure of the contractor to have a facility or a designated portion fully available for use by the given date .
av .
inspector .
an authorized representative assigned by the resident engineer to inspect the work .
aw.laboratory .
the official testing laboratory of the department or any other testing laboratory designated by the director or engineer .
ax .
letter of credit .
an irrevocable letter of credit used in lieu of a bond for the benefit of the state .
see subsection num bonding requirements .
ay .
letting .
see bid opening .
az .
liquidated damages .
monetary damages charged to the contractor at a specified rate when work is not completed within the contract time to recover a portion of cost incurred by the department for additional engineering inspection and overhead for continued supervision of the project after the contract time expires .
see subsection num failure to complete on time .
ba .
lot .
a specific quantity of work or materials .
bb .
maintenance bond .
see bond .
bc .
major and minor contract items .
items considered major or minor under the terms of the contract are based on the percent value of the original contract price .
projects that are awarded as either mandatory or optional general information definitions and terms num num tied projects shall have quantities of similar bid items combined for determining major or minor contract items .
num .
major items .
the following schedule will determine major items table num major item values per contract amount contract amount major item as percent of contract amount num num num num num num of the contract amount over num num num num num of the contract amount over num num num num of the contract amount over num num .
minor items .
all items less than the above percentages will be considered minor items except when added quantities cause the cost to exceed the above percentages .
bd .
manufacturer recommendations .
instructions directions or procedures provided by the manufacturer of a product material equipment etc .
for the proper use of the product .
be .
materials .
substances used in the construction of the project and its appurtenances .
bf .
materials division .
an internal division within the department responsible for the design testing and approval of materials to be used in the work .
bg .
materials engineer .
a department engineer responsible for engineering decisions related to design testing and approval of materials .
bh .
notice of intent noi .
the opdes general permit application to start earthdisturbing activities of at least one acre for storm water discharges .
see section num management of erosion sedimentation and storm water pollution prevention and control .
bi .
notice to proceed .
written notice to the contractor to begin work .
when applicable the notice will include the start date of the contract time .
bj .
notice of termination not .
the opdes general permit application indicating the end of earthdisturbing activities and the attainment of final stabilization .
see section num management of erosion sedimentation and storm water pollution prevention and control .
bk .
partial acceptance .
acceptance of a part of the contract as determined by the resident engineer .
see section num project completion and acceptance .
bl .
partial acceptance date .
the date on which the resident engineer determines a part of the contract to be acceptable .
see section num project completion and acceptance .
num general information definitions and terms num bm.partial completion .
completion of a part of the contract as requested by the contractor and determined by the resident engineer .
see section num project completion and acceptance .
bn .
partial completion date .
the date on which the resident engineer determines a part of the contract to be complete .
see section num project completion and acceptance .
bo .
pavement structure .
the combination of subbase base course and surface course placed on a subgrade to support and distribute the traffic load to the roadbed .
num .
surface course .
layers of a pavement structure designed to accommodate the traffic load .
the top layer sometimes called the wearing course resists skidding traffic abrasion and disintegrating climate effects .
num .
base course .
layers of specified materials placed on a subbase or a subgrade to support a surface course .
num .
subbase .
layers of specified materials thickness placed on a subgrade to support a base course .
num .
subgrade .
compacted soils treated or untreated upon which the pavement structure is constructed .
bp .
pay item .
a specific unit of work recorded in the contract .
bq .
performance bond .
see bond .
br .
plans .
approved contract drawings showing the location type dimensions and details of work required .
the plans include the following num .
standard plans .
detailed drawings approved for repetitive use .
num .
plan notes .
insertions on standard plans to facilitate design considerations .
whenever a conflict in plan notes appears the contractor shall notify the resident engineer before starting the affected work .
the resident engineer will determine the applicability of the plan notes in question .
num .
working drawings .
supplemental design sheets or similar data that the contractor is required to submit to the resident engineer such as shop drawings bending diagrams for reinforcing steel and plans for erection false work framework and cofferdams .
num .
work plans .
supplemental procedures or data developed by the contractor as the method for completing the work .
bs .
prequalification .
the process of qualifying a prospective bidder before issuing the bid documents in accordance with the rules regulations policies and procedures of the commission .
bt .
prequalification questionnaire .
the approved form of the department where the prospective bidder provides information regarding financial condition experience the equipment to be used and the ability to finance and perform the work .
bu .
profile grade .
the trace of a vertical plane intersecting the top surface of the proposed surface course and usually along the longitudinal centerline of the general information definitions and terms num num roadbed .
profile grade means either elevation or gradient of the trace according to the context .
bv .
progressive estimate .
see estimates .
bw.project .
the specific section of the road proposed road or other facilities together with all appurtenances and construction to be performed under the contract .
bx .
proposal forms .
the documents and information available to bidders including the plans for creating and submitting a bid proposal for the work .
by .
proposal guaranty .
see bid bond .
bz .
resident engineer .
the direct representative of the department with the authority to oversee all aspects of the construction .
the resident engineer will serve as the point of contact for the contractor during the project .
the department representative may or may not be a licensed professional engineer and may be a consultant retained by the department .
see subsection num authority and duties of the resident engineer .
ca .
responsive bid .
a bid that meets all requirements of the bid notice .
cb .
responsible bidder .
a bidder that the department determines has the ability to perform the work .
cc .
rightofway .
a general term denoting land property or an interest therein acquired for highway purposes for the project .
cd .
road highway or street .
a general term denoting a public way for vehicular travel including the entire area within the rightofway .
the following are types and parts of the road num .
divided highway .
a highway with separated roadways for traffic in opposite directions .
num .
expressway .
a divided arterial highway for through traffic with full or partial control of access and generally with grade separations at intersections .
num .
freeway .
an expressway with full control of access .
num .
frontage road .
a road constructed on departmentowned rightof way adjacent and parallel to but separate from the highway that connects to the highway for service to abutting property and for control of access .
num .
grade separation .
a structure carrying highway traffic over or under another highway street or any railroad tracks .
num .
interchangecollector distributor road .
a road constructed on a departmentowned rightofway parallel to the mainline that collects and distributes traffic between ramps where the mainline is not connected to any crossroads .
num .
local road .
a road with one connection to the highway constructed on departmentowned rightofway to provide access to property abutting or adjacent to the highway .
num general information definitions and terms num num .
median .
the part of a divided highway that separates the traveled ways of traffic .
num .
parkway .
an arterial highway for noncommercial traffic with full or partial control of access and usually located within a park or a ribbon of parklike development .
num.public road .
a road constructed on departmentowned rightofway to connect other public roads or streets but not connected or allowing access to the highway .
num.ramp .
a connecting roadway between two intersecting highways at a highway separation or a road connecting the highway with other roads .
num.roadbed .
the graded portion of a highway with top and side slopes prepared as a foundation for the pavement structure and shoulders .
num.roadside .
the area adjoining the outer edge of the roadway and large areas between divided highways .
num.roadway .
the part of the rightofway between the outer edges of the shoulders .
num.shoulder .
the part of the roadway contiguous with the traveled way designed for emergency use and lateral support of base and surface courses .
num.sidewalkbicycle path .
the part of the rightofway constructed for pedestrian use bicycle use or both .
num.speed change lane .
an auxiliary lane including tapered areas for the acceleration or deceleration of vehicles entering or leaving the highway .
speed change lanes are described as acceleration lanes deceleration lanes or median lanes .
num.traveled way .
the part of the roadway for the movement of vehicles excluding shoulders .
ce .
roadside development .
those items necessary to preserve or replace landscape materials and features that include plantings or ground cover to preserve and enhance the appearance and stability of the highway rightof way or acquired easements for scenic improvements .
cf .
shut down order .
a written order issued by the resident engineer to the contractor instructing the contractor to cease all or a specific part of the work .
the contractor shall not resume work prohibited by the shut down order until the resident engineer issues a written authorization rescinding the shut down order .
cg .
specifications .
the provisions and requirements for the performance of work .
num .
standard specifications .
the book of specifications approved for general application and repetitive use .
num .
supplemental specifications .
the book of approved additions and revisions to the standard specifications .
num .
general use special provisions .
revisions or amendments to the standard and supplemental specifications approved for general use .
general information defintions and terms num num num .
project specific special provisions .
revisions or amendments to the standard and supplemental specifications applicable to an individual project and designated with the identifying project number .
ch .
state .
the state of oklahoma .
ci .
statutory and payment bond .
see bond .
cj .
structure .
a bridge culvert catch basin drop inlet retaining wall cribbing manhole endwall headwall building sewer service pipe underdrain foundation drain and other features that may be encountered in the work and not classified .
ck .
subbase .
see pavement structure .
cl .
subgrade .
see pavement structure .
cm.subgrade treatment .
chemical treatment of subgrade soils or aggregates to modify or stabilize .
num .
modification .
chemical treatment of subgrade soils or aggregates by incorporating materials that will increase loadbearing capacity in order to provide a sound working platform for paving equipment .
modification does not provide structural value to the pavement section .
num .
stabilization .
chemical treatment of subgrade soils or aggregates by incorporating materials in order to provide structural value to the pavement section .
cn .
subcontractor .
a legal entity approved by the department that the contractor by written agreement employs to perform a designated segment of work .
the subcontractor is responsible for supplying personnel equipment and materials required for completing the subcontracted segment of the work .
co .
superintendent .
the contractors authorized representative in charge of the work .
cp .
supplemental agreement .
a written agreement signed by the department and the contractor to add compensation for materials and time not included in the plans bid by the contractor and which the resident engineer deems necessary to improve the project .
cq .
surety .
the insurance company or other body authorized under the laws of the state to issue bonds to insure the contractors performance of the contract .
cr .
surface course .
see pavement structure .
cs .
traffic engineering division .
an internal division within the department responsible for the design and construction of traffic control devices to be used in the work .
ct. unbalanced bid .
a bid proposal that contains unbalanced bid item unit prices based on one of the following characteristics num .
mathematically .
a bid containing lump sum or unit bid items that do not reflect reasonable estimated costs a reasonable proportionate share of the bidders anticipated profit overhead costs and other indirect costs .
num general information defintions and terms num num general information defintions and terms num .
materially .
a bid that generates reasonable doubt that the award to the bidder submitting a mathematically unbalanced bid will result in the lowest ultimate cost to the department .
cu .
unilateral change order .
a change order issued by the resident engineer that the contractor does not agree with or sign or that is administrative in nature and does not require the acknowledgement of the contractor .
cv .
value engineering .
the formal technique by which the contractor may suggest methods for performing the requirements more economically and share in the resulting savings without impairing essential functions or characteristics .
cw.work .
all resources including labor materials equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the project in accordance with the contract requirements .
cx .
working day .
see contract time .
section num bidding requirements and conditions num prequalification the department requires prequalification of prospective bidders as a prerequisite for bidding unless prohibited by law or waived by the department .
the department will perform bidder prequalification in accordance with the most current issue of the oklahoma administrative code .
copies of the code and prequalification questionnaire are available from the office engineer oklahoma department of transportation num n.e .
numst street oklahoma city oklahoma num num notice to prospective bidders the department will publish a bid notice to notify the public and prospective bidders of the intent to award a public construction contract in accordance with section num of the oklahoma public competitive bidding act of num num os num et seq ..
the bid notice will provide the following information the location and description of the proposed work how to access the proposal forms plans and specifications the requirement for a proposal guaranty and the date time and location of the bid opening .
the bid notice will become part of the contract .
bidding requirements and conditions num num num contents of proposal forms the proposal forms include the following information the location and description of the construction a schedule of items estimated quantities for the items a timeline for work completion the proposal guaranty amount the date time and location of the bid opening special provisions and addenda as issued .
the department considers all documents attached to or referenced in the proposal forms including the plans standard specifications supplemental specifications and special provisions to be part of the proposal forms .
the department will require prospective bidders to pay for each copy of the proposal forms and each set of plans in the amount published in the bid notice .
num refusal of proposals the department may refuse to issue proposal forms to or to receive or open proposals from a prospective bidder for the following reasons the bidder lacks competency financial stability or adequate machinery plant and other equipment listed in the prequalification questionnaire in accordance with subsection num prequalification .
the department determines that the prompt completion of additional work might be hindered or prevented because of a bidders uncompleted work on another department contract .
the bidder fails to pay or satisfactorily settle bills due for labor and material on any open department contract by the bid opening .
the bidder fails to comply with prequalification regulations .
the bidder defaults under a previous department contract .
the bidder performs unsatisfactory on previous or current department contracts .
the bidder has failed to execute and submit the final estimate on a previous department contract .
the bidder has been indicted for or convicted of a felony involving moral turpitude or offenses against the public contracting laws federal or state which may as the department determines affect the bidders ability to perform future work .
the department will consider a plea of guilty or nolo contendere as equivalent to a conviction .
the bidder is currently suspended or debarred by the department or another government agency .
the bidder has failed to comply with disadvantaged business enterprise requirements of a previous department contract .
the bidder fails to pay subcontractor or release subcontractor retainage on a previous or current project in accordance with subsection num payment to subcontractors .
the bidder has failed to maintain insurance on a previous department contract .
num bidding requirements and conditions num num the bidder has failed to provide skilled and qualified supervision or workers on a previous department contract .
the bidder has made a misrepresentation or false statement or has failed to conform to any requirement contained in the bidders unsworn statement under penalty of perjury on a previous department contract .
the bidder has failed or refused to cooperate or has impeded review of the bidders records on a previous or current department contract by the department state auditors or federal authorities whose duties require access to such records .
num interpretation of quantities and bid proposal the quantities in the proposal forms are estimates only to be used by the department for the purpose of comparing proposals and the department reserves the right to increase decrease or eliminate estimated quantities of work or materials in accordance with section num scope of work .
the department will pay for the actual quantities of work performed and accepted or materials provided as required by the contract in accordance with section num measurements and payment .
num examination of plans specifications special provisions and the work site each bidder is responsible for examining the following before submitting a proposal site of the proposed work proposal forms plans standard specifications supplemental specifications and special provisions .
if a bidder chooses to not perform site investigations and the department awards the contract to that bidder the bidder will be responsible for all site conditions that would have been discovered had the bidder performed a reasonable site investigation .
do not take advantage of any apparent error or omission in the proposal forms .
upon discovering an error or omission immediately notify the department .
the department will make corrections to accurately describe the intent of the proposal forms .
the department may perform boring and subsurface investigations to determine design criteria .
if the department has performed these bidders may inspect boring logs and other records of subsurface investigations relevant to the currently advertised project at the following address during normal business hours department of transportation office engineer num n.e .
numst street oklahoma city oklahoma num do not rely on information from the departments boring and subsurface investigations to assess the difficulty of the work described in the proposal forms or to describe the actual conditions that may be encountered .
do not substitute the departments investigations for bidder investigation interpretation and judgment .
the department considers submission of a proposal as evidence that the bidder understands and is satisfied with the work conditions and the requirements of the proposed contract .
bidding requirements and conditions num num the department will not be bound by statements or representations concerning conditions or description of the work unless included in the proposal forms plans standard specifications supplemental specifications special provisions or related contract documents .
oral explanations or instructions given by department employees or agents before the award of the contract are not binding .
for requests for explanation of department intent of the proposal form plans standard specifications supplemental specifications special provisions or related contract documents allow the department time to reply to all prospective bidders before submission of proposals .
the department will issue explanations as addenda to the proposal forms and will provide addenda to all prospective bidders plan holders by certified mail or facsimile before the bid opening .
acknowledge receipt of addenda on the proposal forms in the space provided .
num preparation of proposal submit the proposal in the format required by the bid notice .
for each item on the proposal forms type or write in ink the unit price and the product of the unit price and estimated quantity on the proposal forms in the space provided .
show the total proposal amount by adding the products of the unit prices and the estimated quantities .
acknowledge any change to a unit price the product of a unit price and quantity or the total proposal amount with the initials of the person signing the proposal adjacent to each change .
if a discrepancy occurs on the proposal between the unit price and the product of the unit price and quantity the department will use the unit price .
if a unit price or the product of a unit price and quantity is omitted for any item listed on the proposal forms the department will consider the proposal nonresponsive and will reject the proposal .
if there is a discrepancy between the submitted electronic media and written proposal the department will use the written proposal .
if the department requires a printout of electronic media and a discrepancy occurs between the printout and the electronic media the department will use the printout .
an individual all members of a partnership a duly authorized officer of a corporation or all members of a joint venture shall sign the proposal in black or blue ink .
for proposals submitted by a corporation show the name of the corporation and business address .
for proposals submitted by the internet bidding process the department will require an electronic signature only .
include a noncollusive bidding certification with the proposal in accordance with subsection num noncollusive bidding certification .
num nonresponsive proposals the department will consider a proposal nonresponsive and may reject it for any of the following reasons the bidder submits a proposal on an unapproved form or format if computergenerated or the form is altered incomplete or disassembled .
the bidder submits a proposal using a form other than the latest approved proposal form .
the department determines that proposal irregularities such as unauthorized additions and conditional or alternate bids may tend to make the proposal incomplete indefinite or ambiguous .
num bidding requirements and conditions num num the proposal does not contain a unit price for each item listed except for authorized alternate items .
the proposal is mathematically or materially unbalanced .
the department considers a proposal mathematically unbalanced if that proposal contains items with lump sums or unit prices that do not reflect reasonable estimated costs plus reasonable proportionate share of the bidders anticipated profit overhead costs and other indirect costs .
the department considers a proposal materially unbalanced if that proposal creates a reasonable doubt that award to the bidder submitting a mathematically unbalanced bid will result in the lowest total cost to the department .
the proposal is not properly signed .
the proposal is not typed or completed in ink .
the bidder fails to provide a properly executed proposal guaranty or irrevocable letter of credit .
the bidder fails to sign the unsworn statement made under penalty of perjury .
the proposal fails to comply with any material requirement of the bid notice .
the bidder fails to properly comply with disadvantaged business enterprise requirements or to properly list eligible disadvantaged businesses if participation in accordance with the proposal forms .
num proposal guaranty submit a proposal guaranty or irrevocable letter of credit with the proposal in the amount of at least num percent of the bid price unless otherwise specified in the proposal forms made payable or subject to forfeiture to the department .
num delivery of proposal proposals shall be either placed in a sealed envelope plainly marked with identifying information as required .
addressed to the department in care of the official in whose office the proposals are to be received .
proposal data may be delivered electronically by compact disk or diskette as provided for in the current department procedures .
the title and address of the official designated to receive proposals is office engineer num n.e numst street oklahoma city oklahoma num .
in the event of a conflict between electronic media and the written submission the written submission shall be binding .
delivered by electronic submission over the internet as provided by the current department procedures .
file proposals before the time and at the place specified in the bid notice and proposal forms .
if the department receives a proposal after the time specified in the bid notice the department will return the unopened proposal to the bidder .
num withdrawal of proposal the bidder may withdraw its proposal with an authorized representatives notarized written request any time before the established bid opening time .
the department will return requests to withdraw a proposal to the bidder unread if received after the bid opening .
bidding requirements and conditions num num num combination bids the department may issue proposal forms for combined projects separate projects or both .
the department reserves the right to recommend awards on combination proposals or separate proposals most advantageous to the department .
the department will not consider combinations of proposals other than those specifically advertised by the department .
num public opening of proposals the department will publicly open and read proposals on the date and at the hour and place specified in the bid notice and in the presence of the director or representative .
num rejection of proposals the department may reject a proposal if in the opinion of the department the best interests of the people of the state of oklahoma would be best served by doing so .
the department may reject a proposal in accordance with subsection num refusal of proposals subsection num nonresponsive proposals and the following a bidder submits more than one proposal for the same proposed contract under the same or different name .
currently having one or more department projects in liquidated damages .
failure to repay the department for overpayments made on a current or previous department contract .
num vacant num noncollusive bidding certification include with the proposal the following statement subscribed or affirmed by the bidder as true under the penalties of law .
sign notarize and submit the noncollusive bidding certification with the proposal .
use the form included in the proposal which will be in substantially the following form num bidding requirements and conditions num noncollusive bidding certification state of oklahoma county of ___________________ a .
for purposes of competitive bids i certify num .
i an the duly authorized agent of __________________________ the bidder submitting the competitive bid to which this statement is attached for the purpose of certifying the facts pertaining to the existence of collusion among bidders and between bidders and state officials or employees as well as facts pertaining to the giving or offering of things of value to government personnel in return for special consideration in the letting of any contract pursuant to the bid to which this statement is attached num .
i am fully aware of the facts and circumstances surrounding the making of the bid to which this statement is attached and have been personally and directly involved in the proceedings leading to the submission of such bid and num .
neither the bidder nor anyone subject to the bidders direction or control has been a party to the following a .
any collusion among bidders in restraint of freedom of competition by agreement to bid a fixed price or to refrain from bidding b .
any collusion with any state official or employees as to quantity quality or price in the prospective contract or as to any other terms of such prospective contract and c. any discussions between bidders and any state officials concerning exchange of money or other thing of value for special consideration in the letting of a contract .
b. i certify if awarded the contract whether competitively bid or not that neither the contractor nor anyone subject to the contractors direction or control has paid given or donated or agreed to pay give or donate to any officer or employee of the state of oklahoma any money or other thing of value either directly or indirectly in procuring the contract to which this statement is attached .
certified this ________ day of _____________ num___ .
signature print name position in company the department will not award a contract to a bidder that has not complied with the statements in the noncollusive bidding certification .
when the bidder submits an electronic bid the electronic media will prescribe the certifications .
award and execution of contract num num the following do not constitute a disclosure within the meaning of part num of the non collusive bidding certification the bidder has published price lists rates or tariffs covering items being procured .
the bidder has informed prospective customers of proposed or pending publication of new or revised price lists for such items .
the bidder has sold the same items to other customers at the same prices being bid .
section num award and execution of contract num consideration of proposals the department will publicly open and read the proposals .
for each submitted proposal the department will review and verify the product of the unit price and estimated quantity for each item and the total proposal amount .
the department will compare its estimate for each item with the products of the unit price and estimated quantities in each proposal compare acceptable proposals and publicly announce the results .
the commission reserves the right to promote the states best interest by rejecting any or all proposals waiving an administrative error that would void an otherwise valid award readvertising for new proposals or proceeding to do the work by other procurement methods .
the department may deem as nonresponsive and reject a proposal that fails to fully comply with all requirements of the bid notice and proposal forms .
num award of contract with the recommendation of the director the commission will award the contract to the lowest responsible bidder with a responsive proposal in accordance with the departments requirements .
the commission will award the contract within the time period allowed by law .
num cancellation of award the commission may cancel the contract award at any time before the execution of the contract in accordance with subsection num failure to execute contract .
the department and commission will not incur any liability for this action .
for federalaid projects concurrence and funding by the federal agency is required before the department will execute the contract .
if these requirements are not met the commission may unilaterally rescind the award of the contract even after execution of the contract .
if the commission rescinds the award the department will return the proposal guaranty to the successful bidder and release both parties from obligations and liabilities created by the contract .
the department may cancel the award of a contract if the contractor fails to timely provide bonds or irrevocable letter of credit or num award and execution of contract num num fails to provide proper evidence of project specific insurance .
num return of proposal guaranties the department will return proposal guaranties to unsuccessful bidders immediately after the selection of the lowest responsible and responsive bidder .
the department will return the successful bidders proposal guaranty after the contract and bonds have been signed by the contractor and received and executed by the department .
num bonding requirements return the signed contract to the department with the following a performance bond a statutory and payment bond and a maintenance bond if required by the contract .
the successful bidder may submit a single irrevocable letter of credit instead of the bonds described above on any department contract .
submit an irrevocable letter of credit on the form prescribed by the department of central services with the state identified as the beneficiary .
the letter of credit must be issued by a financial institution insured by the federal deposit insurance corporation or the federal savings loan insurance corporation .
the successful bidder shall obtain the departments approval of the surety .
the surety shall provide bonds in compliance with the rules regulations policies and procedures of the commission addressing the departments terms for the bonds executed by the surety and accompanied by valid and acceptable powers of attorney .
the department of central services will prescribe the form of the letter of credit .
num vacant num execution of contract the contract shall be signed in black or blue ink by the individual all members of a partnership or joint venture or a duly authorized officer of the corporation to whom the contract was awarded .
the successful bidder shall return the signed contract to the department within the time limit specified in the proposal forms .
the department will execute the contract within num working days after receiving the signed contract from the successful bidder and will return a copy of the executed contract to the successful bidder .
the department will not allow construction to begin until the contractor receives the notice to proceed and notifies the designated resident engineer .
num approval of contract the contract will not be binding upon the department or commission until executed by the director or authorized designee approved as to form and legality by the general counsel or authorized designee and delivered to the contractor .
scope of work num num num failure to execute contract the commission will rescind the contract award if the successful bidder fails to do the following comply with any of the requirements of the proposal forms sign the contract provide project specific certificates of insurance or provide the bonds or irrevocable letter of credit required by law .
if the commission rescinds the award the department may require forfeiture of the proposal guaranty .
section num scope of work num purpose of contract the purpose of the contract is to provide details for the construction and completion of the work .
the contractor is responsible for providing all labor materials equipment and incidentals required to complete the work in accordance with the contract .
no alterations based upon the increase or decrease in pay item quantities may be entered into that increase the length or extent of a project by more than num percent .
num special work as necessary the department may prepare special provisions describing work included in the proposal forms .
the department will consider special provisions attached to or incorporated by reference in the proposal forms to be part of the contract .
num differing site conditions during the progress of the work if subsurface or latent physical conditions are encountered at the site differing materially from those indicated in the contract or if unknown physical conditions of an unusual nature differing materially from those ordinarily encountered and generally recognized as inherent in the work provided for in the contract are encountered at the site the party discovering such conditions shall promptly notify the other party in writing of the specific differing conditions before the site is disturbed and before the affected work is performed .
upon written notification as provided in subsection num notification of differing site conditions changes and extra work the resident engineer will investigate the conditions and if it is determined that the conditions materially differ and cause an increase or decrease in the cost or time required for the performance of any work under the contract an adjustment excluding anticipated profits will be made and the contract modified in writing accordingly .
the resident engineer will notify the contractor of the determination whether or not an adjustment of the contract is warranted .
no contract adjustment which results in a benefit to the contractor will be allowed unless the contractor has provided the required written notice as specified in subsection num notification of differing site conditions changes and extra work .
num scope of work num num no contract adjustment will be allowed under this clause for any effects caused on unchanged work .
if the contractor has provided written notification of differing site conditions as provided in subsection num notification of differing site conditions changes and extra work and the resident engineer determines that differing site conditions exist payment will be made in accordance with subsection num differing site conditions changes and extra work and adjustments to contract time will be made as provided in subsection num administration and extension of contract time .
num significant changes in the character of work the engineer reserves the right to make in writing at any time during the work such changes in quantities and such alterations in the work as are necessary to satisfactorily complete the project .
such changes in quantities and alterations shall not invalidate the contract nor release the surety and the contractor agrees to perform the work as altered .
if the alterations or changes in quantities significantly change the character of the work under the contract whether such alterations or changes are in themselves significant changes to the character of the work or by affecting other work cause such other work to become significantly different in character an adjustment excluding anticipated profit will be made to the contract .
the basis for the adjustment shall be agreed upon prior to the performance of the work .
if a basis can not be agreed upon then an adjustment will be made either for or against the contractor in such amount as the engineer may determine to be fair and equitable .
if the alterations or changes in quantities do not significantly change the character of the work to be performed under the contract the altered work will be paid for at the unit price as bid by the contractor .
the term significant change shall be construed to apply only to the following circumstances when the character of the work as altered differs materially in kind or nature from that involved or included in the original proposed construction or when a major item of work as defined in subsection num.bc is increased in excess of num percent or decreased below num percent of the original contract quantity .
any allowance for an increase in quantities shall apply only to that portion in excess of num percent of original contract item quantity or in case of a decrease below num percent to the actual amount of work performed .
if directed changes require additional time to complete the project adjustments in the contract time will be made as provided by subsection num administration and extension of contract time .
payment for changed major item quantities or altered work will be made as provided in subsection num payment for increased or decreased quantities or subsection num differing site conditions changes and extra work as appropriate .
scope of work num num num suspension of work ordered by the resident engineer the resident engineer may suspend all or any portion of the work for any reason during performance of the contract .
suspension of all or any portion of the work will be done by written shut down order to the contractor .
if the performance of all or any portion of the work is suspended or delayed by the resident engineer in writing for an unreasonable period of time not originally anticipated customary or inherent to the construction industry and the contractor believes that additional compensation contract time or both is due as a result of such suspension or delay the contractor shall submit to the resident engineer in writing a request for adjustment within num calendar days of receipt of the notice to resume work .
the request shall set forth the reasons and support for such adjustment .
upon receipt the resident engineer will evaluate the contractors request .
if the resident engineer agrees that the cost andor time required for the performance of the contract has increased as a result of such suspension and the suspension was caused by conditions beyond the control of and not the fault of the contractor its suppliers or subcontractors at any approved tier and not caused by weather the resident engineer will make an adjustment excluding profit and modify the contract in writing accordingly .
the contractor will be notified of the resident engineers determination whether or not an adjustment of the contract is warranted .
no contract adjustment will be allowed unless the contractor has submitted the request for adjustment within the time prescribed .
no contract adjustment will be allowed under this clause to the extent that performance would have been suspended or delayed by any other cause or for which an adjustment is provided or excluded under any other term or condition of this contract .
if the contractor has submitted a request for adjustment within the time prescribed and the resident engineer determines that an adjustment is warranted payment will be made as provided in subsection num differing site conditions changes and extra work and adjustments to contract time will be made as provided in subsection num administration and extension of contract time .
num notification of differing site conditions changes and extra work the contractor shall notify the resident engineer of alleged changes to the contract due to the following before beginning or continuing with the affected work differing site conditions altered work beyond the original work department action that changed the contract requirements or extra work .
the contractor shall discontinue performance of affected work and not incur additional expenses on alleged changes to the contract unless otherwise directed by the resident engineer in writing .
a. verbal and written notice of intent to file claim the contractor shall immediately notify the resident engineer verbally of the alleged differing site condition change or extra work and submit the following num scope of work num information to the resident engineer in a written notice of intent to file claim within num calendar days of encountering the alleged change or action the date of occurrence and the nature and circumstances of the occurrence that constitute a change name title and activity of each department representative knowledgeable of the alleged change identify any documents and the substance of any oral communication involved in the alleged change basis for a claim of accelerated schedule performance basis for a claim that the work is not required by the contract and particular elements of contract performance for which compensation is requested including pay items that have been or may be affected by the change labor materials or both that will be added deleted or wasted by the change and equipment that will be idled or added existing or anticipated delays and disruptions in contract performance procedure or sequence adjustments to contract prices delivery schedules staging and contract time estimated due to the alleged change and estimate of the time within which the department must respond to the notice to reduce project cost delay or disruption .
the contractors failure to provide both verbal and written notices to the resident engineer constitutes the contractors waiver of the right to file claims resulting from an alleged change .
b .
contract work continuation and claim response after notifying the resident engineer the contractor shall not begin work affected by the alleged change .
continue diligent prosecution of unaffected work required by the contract .
the resident engineer will investigate the notice of intent to file claim .
within num calendar days after receipt of the notice the resident engineer will respond in writing to the contractor for the following purposes confirm that a change occurred and if necessary direct the contractors further performance deny that a change occurred and if necessary direct the contractors further performance or advise the contractor that the notice did not include adequate information and identify additional required information and the date for its submission for further review by the resident engineer .
the resident engineer will review the additional information and respond to the contractor within num calendar days after receipt of the amended notice .
the resident engineer will not adjust the contract for claims of increased costs or time extensions for delay resulting from the contractors failure to submit the additional requested information .
scope of work num num num maintenance of traffic the contractor shall keep all roads open to all traffic as shown on the plans .
if required by the contract or approved by the resident engineer the contractor may detour traffic on an approved detour route .
the contractor shall maintain the section of the project used by traffic in a safe and accommodating condition .
the contractor shall provide erect and maintain barricades warning signs delineators striping flaggers and pilot cars in accordance with the traffic control plan the mutcd and section num construction signing and traffic control .
the contractor shall maintain the road improvements including all temporary approaches or crossings and intersections with trails roads streets businesses parking lots residences garages farms and other necessary features at no additional cost to the department .
the department will not require the contractor to perform snow and ice removal during winter work suspensions .
the department will pay for providing installing and maintaining traffic control in accordance with section num construction signing and traffic control .
the department will provide additional compensation for the following maintenance activities a .
maintenance of traffic during suspension of work num suspensions ordered by the resident engineer the contractor shall construct and open project sections and temporary roadways to traffic as agreed between the contractor and the resident engineer during the suspension period .
during the suspension period the department will maintain the temporary roadway and project sections .
when work resumes the contractor shall replace or restore any work or materials lost or damaged because of traffics temporary use of the project and remove work or materials used for the projects maintenance .
the contractor shall complete the project as if the work had been continuous and without interference .
the department will pay for additional work caused by the suspension and beyond the contractors control at contract unit prices or as extra work .
num other suspensions of work if the resident engineer suspends work for the following reasons the contractor shall incur all costs for maintenance of the roadway to accommodate traffic during the suspension period excluding snow and ice removal seasonal or climatic conditions the contractors failure to correct conditions unsafe for the workers or the general public the contractors failure to implement direction from the resident engineer or other reasons caused by the contractor .
b .
maintenance directed by the resident engineer the department will pay for directed special maintenance for the benefit of traffic not otherwise required by the contract by contract unit prices or in accordance with num scope of work num num subsection num significant changes in the character of work .
the resident engineer will determine the special maintenance work .
num rights in and use of materials found on the work the resident engineer may authorize the contractor to use material found in the excavation suitable for completing work items .
the department will pay the contractor for the removal of material at the corresponding contract unit price and for the placement of material at the corresponding contract unit price .
the department will not charge the contractor for the material used on the project .
the contractor shall replace the removed material with material approved by the resident engineer and compact replacement material to the density for roadway embankment construction in accordance with the contract requirements at no additional cost to the department .
the department will not allow the contractor to excavate or remove material within the rightofway but outside the grading limits without the resident engineers written approval .
unless otherwise required by the contract the contractor may temporarily use material from structure removals in the erection of the new structure .
do not cut or damage temporarily used material without approval of the resident engineer .
num removal and disposal of salvaged materials structures and obstructions unless otherwise required by the contract all salvaged material shall become the property of the contractor .
ownership of salvaged materials implies the responsibility to dispose of the salvaged material in accordance with all applicable local state and federal rules and regulations .
the department will not allow the contractor to bury or otherwise dispose of material within the project or on any publicly owned property without the resident engineers prior written approval .
num final clean up the resident engineer will not assign a completion date until the contractor completes the work and removes from the rightofway all machinery equipment surplus and discarded materials rubbish and temporary structures .
remove stumps or portions of trees cut all brush and weeds within the rightofway and leave the project and borrow pits in a neat condition as approved by the resident engineer .
do not dispose of cleared material on property adjacent to the rightofway .
dispose of all waster generated on the project in accordance with all applicable local state and federal rules and regulations .
finish all areas or slopes in a neat condition approved by the resident engineer .
repair any areas slopes or turf damaged by operations at no additional cost to the department .
the resident engineer will not assign a completion date until the contractor achieves final stabilization as determined by the resident engineer in accordance with the requirements of the contract .
the department considers the cost of final cleanup as incidental to other relevant contract items .
scope of work num num num restoration of surfaces opened by permit the department reserves the right at any time to allow construction or reconstruction of any utility service within the project or to grant permits to public utility companies for utility service construction or reconstruction or to authorities of the municipality where the project is located .
the contractor is not entitled to any damages from the department except in accordance with subsection num administration and extension of contract time for delay due to utility service construction or reconstruction by a third party .
the contractor shall make repairs in accordance with contract requirements to work due to utility service access and the resident engineer will direct and the department will pay for work in accordance with subsection num significant changes in the character of work or as otherwise required by the contract .
the department may issue permits to individuals firms or corporations wanting to place a utility construct a driveway make a curbcut or otherwise access the departments highway rightofway .
the contractor shall allow parties with a permit to access the highway rightofway .
num contractors responsibility for work until the resident engineer assigns a completion date the contractor is responsible for the work including change order work .
the contractor shall protect the work against damage from all causes whether from the execution or nonexecution of the work except as described in subsection num.bnum suspensions ordered by the resident engineer .
the contractor shall rebuild repair restore and make good all losses or damage to any portion of the permanent or temporary work occurring before the resident engineer assigns a completion date at no additional cost to the department except damage to permanent work caused by the following acts of god acts of a public enemy acts of governmental authorities or damage by a third party to permanent work completed by the contractor and paid and placed in to service by the department .
these damage exceptions shall not apply if the contractor does not take reasonable precaution or exercise sound engineering and construction practice in performing the work .
if the contractor experiences delays to the performance of the work as a result of damage by others the resident engineer will evaluate a time extension in accordance with subsection num administration and extension of contract time .
if permanent work is damaged by a third party and the contractor recovers payment from the third party the department will not pay the contractor for the same damages .
the department considers the contractor responsible for correcting or replacing any defective work or materials in accordance with subsection num removal of unacceptable and unauthorized work and any damage resulting from the contractors operations or negligence .
the contractor shall provide a competent supervisor experienced in the project scope num scope of work num num of work and trained in accordance with all applicable local state and federal laws and regulations .
delegate authority to the supervisor to make binding decisions on behalf of the contractor and to provide labor equipment and material required for effective project work progress .
the department expects the supervisor to be available full time for contact and communication on the project .
num environmental protection the contractor shall comply with all local state and federal laws and regulations controlling pollution of the environment .
avoid pollution of streams lakes ponds and reservoirs with fuels oils bitumens chemicals or other harmful materials and pollution of the atmosphere from particulate and gaseous matter within the project and contractor operated off site facilities .
avoid impacts to listed endangered species threatened species and the critical habitats of both .
the department will not allow fording of streams unless otherwise approved by the resident engineer and performed in a manner that minimizes stream siltation .
for work areas or pits located in or adjacent to streams the contractor shall separate the work from the main stream by dike or barrier to keep sediment from entering the stream .
exercise care during the construction and removal of barriers located in or near streams to minimize siltation of the stream .
the contractor shall treat water from aggregate washing or other work resulting in sediment by filtration settling basins or other means to reduce the sediment concentration of the discharge to no more than that of the stream or lake receiving the discharge .
the contract shall address other requirements for temporary and permanent erosion sedimentation and storm water pollution controls in accordance with chapter num earthwork and roadside development .
num contractors responsibility for utility property and services for contractor work areas adjacent to properties of railroad telephone power companies other utilities or facilities located within the project the contractor shall not begin work until completing contract required arangements for the protection of the properties or facilities .
avoid damage to these properties or facilities that could result in considerable expense loss or inconvenience .
the contractor shall cooperate with owners of underground or overhead utility lines during utility removal or relocation operations to allow these utility operations reasonable progress minimal duplication of work and avoidance of unnecessary service interruptions .
the contractor shall comply with the underground facilities damage prevention act num o.s .
num et .
seq .
including amendments .
obtain copies from the resident engineer .
for interruptions to water or utility services from accidental breakage or for exposed or unsupported lines the contractor shall immediately notify the proper authority .
the contractor shall cooperate with the proper authority to promptly restore service .
the department will not allow an interruption to water service to continue after working scope of work num num hours .
maintain access to fire hydrants for the fire department at all times and do not stockpile material within num ft num m of a fire hydrant .
the contractor shall verify the location of all water services water mains sanitary sewers and other utilities shown on the plans .
damage to these facilities from contractor operations is the responsibility of the contractor in accordance with the underground facilities damage prevention act num o.s .
num et seq .. num value engineering proposals by the contractor a .
general cost savings from value engineering proposals vep offered by the contractor and approved by the department shall be shared equally between the contractor and the department .
do not anticipate the departments approval of a vep in submitting a proposal .
contract unit prices shall reflect contract requirements .
if the department rejects a vep complete the project at the contract unit prices .
if the department determines that the time for review and response is insufficient as indicated in the contractors submittal in accordance with subsection num c submittal of proposal the department will promptly notify the contractor .
the department will evaluate the need for a noncompensable delay adjustment to the contract if the departments additional review and response time affects the contractors schedule .
the contractor shall have no claim against the department for compensable or noncompensable delay to the contract based on the department not responding within the time indicated in the submittal in accordance with subsection num.b submittal of conceptual vep and subsection num c submittal of vep if the department requires additional information from the contractor to complete the review .
the department considers as valid a vep that could produce a savings to the department without impairing essential functions and characteristics of the facility including but not limited to service life economy of operation ease of maintenance desired appearance and safety .
to avoid unnecessary costs in preparing a vep the contractor may submit a conceptual vep to the resident engineer for the departments review .
this review need not address the total economics of the proposal nor the specific engineering designs .
b. submittal of conceptual vep submit a conceptual vep with the following material and information num .
a statement identifying the submittal as a conceptual vep .
num .
a brief description of the difference between the contract requirements and the proposed change with the cooperative advantages and disadvantages including num .
effects on service life num .
economy of operations num .
ease of maintenance num scope of work num num .
desired appearance and num .
safety .
num .
an estimate of the contract costs and quantities compared to the new costs and quantities generated by the vep .
num .
a statement establishing the date that the department must respond to the conceptual vep to obtain the maximum cost reduction for the contract .
num .
a statement estimating the impact of the vep on the contract completion time .
num .
a description of any previous use or testing of the alternative means or methods proposed and the conditions and results .
if the department rejects the conceptual vep the contractor shall not pursue the matter any further .
if the department approves the conceptual vep the contractor may proceed with the vep .
approval of the conceptual vep will not obligate the department to approve the vep .
c. submittal of vep submit a vep with the following material and information a statement identifying the submittal as a vep .
a brief description of the difference between the contract requirements and the proposed change and the cooperative advantages and disadvantages including effects on service life economy of operations ease of maintenance desired appearance and safety .
a complete set of plans and specifications prepared and sealed by an oklahoma registered professional engineer that show the proposed revisions relative to the original contract features and requirements .
a complete analysis indicating the contract costs and quantities to be replaced by the vep compared to the new costs and quantities generated by the vep .
a statement establishing the date that the department must execute a change order adopting the vep to obtain the maximum cost reduction for the contract .
a statement estimating the impact of the vep on the contract completion time .
a description of any previous use or testing of the alternative means or methods proposed and the conditions and results .
if previously submitted on another department project indicate the date project number and the action taken by the department on the vep .
d. conditions the department will consider the contractors vep that meets all of the following conditions the vep applies only to the contract referenced in the vep and becomes the property of the department .
the vep shall contain no restrictions imposed by the contractor on the veps use or disclosure .
the department retains the right to use duplicate and disclose any data necessary from the vep and use an accepted vep on other projects without obligation to the contractor .
the department will not deny the contractors rights provided by law for patented material or process .
scope of work num num if the department is already considering certain revisions to the contract or has approved contract changes that the contractor subsequently incorporates in a vep the department will reject the vep with no obligation to the contractor .
the contractor shall have no claim against the department for additional costs or delays resulting from the departments rejection of a vep including but not limited to development costs loss of anticipated profits increased material or labor costs .
the department will determine if a vep qualifies for consideration and evaluation .
the department may reject any vep that requires excessive time or costs for review evaluation or investigation or that is not consistent with the departments design policies and criteria for the project .
the vep shall not include experimental features but proven features used under similar conditions on other projects or locations approved by the department .
the department will not consider vep that include options already required by the contract .
the cost savings generated by the vep must be sufficient to warrant the additional cost of the departments review and evaluation of the vep .
the department will not consider a vep that changes the type or thickness of the pavement structure .
the contractor may submit a vep for an approved subcontractor .
subcontractors may not submit a vep except through the contractor .
the contractor shall promptly provide additional information to the department for evaluation of the vep .
the department will reject a vep if the contractor does not promptly submit additional information .
for a vep with design changes the additional information may include results of field investigations and surveys design calculations and field change sheets .
the resident engineer will reject all or any portion of work performed for an approved vep if the work yields unsatisfactory results .
the resident engineer will direct the removal of rejected work and require the contractor to proceed with work in accordance with the original contract requirements .
the resident engineer will not pay for work performed for the vep or for removal of unsatisfactory work .
if the resident engineer approves modifications to the vep to adjust to field conditions the total amount payable for the vep work will be limited to the amount of the removed contract units in accordance with the original contract requirements .
the contractor shall have no claim against the department for additional costs or delays resulting from the departments rejection of work or limitation of payment for work .
e. payment if the department approves a vep the resident engineer will authorize a change order with the changes and payment requirements .
the department will pay the contractor as follows num .
for revised work by changes in quantities of contract pay items new agreed pay items or both in accordance with the contract .
num .
for savings the department will pay the contractor num percent of the vep savings calculated as the difference between the cost of the revised work and the cost of the related work required by the original contract at contract unit prices .
the department will pay the num percent value engineering cost savings num scope of work num num to the contractor in a lump sum as soon as savings have been earned and quantities calculated .
num .
if requested by the contractor the department may consider payment to the contractor for a maximum of onehalf of the contractors cost of development design and preparation of the vep .
if approved the department will add this amount to the lump sum payment for savings .
num railroadhighway grade crossings for work on railroad rightofway or on rightofway occupied jointly by the highway and railroad the contractor shall take precautions to ensure the safety of railroad operations .
the contractor and the contractors surety shall indemnify and save harmless the railroad company and department from all actions or claims of any character name or description brought for or on account of any injuries or damages received or sustained by any person persons or property resulting from any act omission neglect or misconduct of the contractor or the contractors employees in the performance of the work .
num railroadhighway grade separation structures and approaches a .
general the construction of grade separation structures and approaches is a joint undertaking of the department and the railroad company whose tracks are crossed and representatives of the railroad company shall have full authority to make inspections of the work as it progresses .
unless otherwise required by the contract for the project or by a separate rightof entry agreement between the contractor and the railroad company the contractor shall provide written notification to the railroad company identified by the contract requirements at least num working days before beginning work on the railroad companys property .
in addition notify the railroad company num hours in advance of beginning construction of falsework over or of construction of piers adjacent to the railroad company tracks .
during all work affecting the railroad company the contractor shall cooperate to the fullest extent possible .
the contractor shall plan and execute the work creating the least interference with the traffic and operations of the railroad company .
the department requires the contractor to provide a clear area for the maintenance of railroad traffic during construction kept free at all times of any falsework equipment material or other obstructions .
unless otherwise shown on the plans or on a separate rightofentry agreement between the contractor and the railroad company provide a minimum vertical clearance of num ft num m above the top of the highest rail and a minimum horizontal clearance of num½ ft num m on each side of the centerline of the tracks measured at right angles to the tracks .
the contractor shall not disrupt the track drainage system .
the department will not allow equipment or material to remain in the track ditches and obstruct the flow of water .
the contractor shall immediately remove any material spilled into the ditches .
if the railroad company allows the contractor by written agreement to encroach on the clearances specified in this subsection the contractor shall take precautions and scope of work num num erect and maintain telltales or warning devices required by the railroad company at no additional cost to the department .
if the contractor is required or elects to haul material across the railroad companys tracks the contractor shall arrange with the railroad company for necessary private crossings and provide for the installation maintenance use and protection of crossings at no additional cost to the department .
the contractor shall ensure the safety of the railroad operations through the project .
the contractor shall prepare and submit for approval by the department and the railroad company detailed plans for all falsework over the tracks or caissons or sheeting for piers or abutments adjacent to or under the tracks before beginning work .
after obtaining approval of the detailed plans from the departments bridge engineer and the railroad company the contractor may construct the falsework sheeting or caissons in accordance with the approved detailed plans .
the department neither accepts nor assumes any liability for defects or errors in the plans by approval of the contractors detailed plans .
the department makes no warranty either expressed or implied as to the accuracy or fitness of the contractors detailed plans .
the contractor is responsible to the railroad company for all damage to railroad property resulting from the contractors operations and may be subject to additional conditions required in the railroad companys rightofentry agreement .
the department will not pay the contractors final estimate until the contractor provides the resident engineer satisfactory evidence in the form of a photocopy of a letter sent by the contractor to the railroad company by certified mail notifying the railroad company of completion of the work required by the contract .
the letter shall indicate that the railroad company has num calendar days to notify the contractor and the department of potential claims .
upon completion of the work the contractor shall remove all equipment unused materials rubbish and temporary structures and leave the premises in a condition satisfactory to the railroad company and the department .
if included in the contract requirements certain construction operations may necessitate the suspension of railroad traffic .
avoid any disruptions of train schedules by performing and completing work as quickly as possible .
before beginning work the contractor shall advise and obtain approval from the railroad company and the department of the proposed method the amount and character of equipment and the probable time required to complete the work .
the departments approval shall not relieve the contractor of the responsibility for the safety of the work method or equipment or the completion of the work as required by the contract .
b. overpass highway overhead bridge the department will provide a vertical clearance of num ft num m measured from the base of the rail for telegraph telephone and signal services .
if the contractor requires more clearance the contractor shall provide additional clearance at no additional cost to the department .
c. underpass railroad overhead bridge the department will provide a vertical clearance of num ft num m measured from the base of the rail for telegraph telephone and signal services crossing over the proposed construction .
if the contractor requires more clearance the contractor shall provide additional clearance at no additional cost to the department .
num scope of work num num scope of work d. railroad company requirements the railroad company may as a condition for working on or over railroad rightof way impose both vertical and horizontal clearance requirements .
the railroad companys specific clearance requirements for working on or over railroad rightofway will be contained in the right of entry agreement between the contractor and the railroad company .
num railroad flagging the contractor shall reimburse the railroad company directly for the cost of all railroad flagging required and provided by the railroad company for work on railroad property .
the contractor shall include the cost of flagging in the contract unit prices for other relevant pay items unless a pay item for railroad flagging is included in the proposal forms .
the department will not pay the contractors final estimate until the contractor provides satisfactory evidence in the form of a notarized certificate that the contractor reimbursed the railroad company for flagging services provided by the railroad company .
section num control of work num authority and duties of the resident engineer the resident engineer will decide questions about the following issues quality and acceptability of materials provided by the contractor quality and acceptability of work performed by the contractor rate of work progress interpretation of the contract requirements or compliance of work with the contract requirements .
a .
suspension of work the resident engineer may suspend part or all of the work if the contractor fails to do the following correct conditions unsafe for the project personnel or public perform requirements of the contract or respond to directives from the resident engineer .
the resident engineer may also suspend part or all of the work based on the following periods of unsuitable weather conditions the resident engineer considers unsuitable for the prosecution of the work or any other condition or reason the resident engineer determines in the departments best interest .
control of work num num b .
appeal process for disagreements with any decision of the resident engineer appeal the decision in accordance with established dispute resolution procedures specified in subsection num claims for adjustment and the special provisions .
c. engineering details the resident engineer is responsible for implementing the projects engineering details and is responsible for inspection and documentation of the work and ensuring work in accordance with contract requirements .
the authority of the resident engineer includes making binding decisions based on contract requirements on behalf of the department selecting and delegating authority to the departments representative on the project rejecting defective materials or workmanship and suspend work not in compliance with contract requirements .
d. removal of contractor staff the resident engineer may direct the contractor to remove any of the contractors or subcontractors supervisors foremen or other employees for any of the following reasons failure or refusal to follow directives from the resident engineer safety violations poor workmanship or other causes .
the resident engineer will direct removal by written notice to the contractor effective upon the contractors receipt of the notice .
num plans and working drawings a .
general the department will provide plans showing details of all structures lines grades typical sections and a summary of pay items listed on the proposal forms .
prepare working drawings and work plans as required by the contract and as needed to adequately control construct and inspect the work .
when applicable working drawings shall include the following traffic control drawings false work drawings coffer dam drawings steel sheet piling drawings mse retaining wall drawings post tensioned concrete structure drawings prestressed concrete member shop drawings precast structure drawings excluding pipe structural steel shop drawings structural steel transportation drawings anchor bolt layouts num control of work num erection drawings or any combination of these items .
when applicable work plans shall include the following stress sheets for post tensioning painting plans plans for drilling shafts mix designs plans for pile hammers other equipment lists quality control plans or site specific erosion control plans .
the contractor shall keep and make available one set of plans approved working drawings and work plans on the project for the duration of the project .
the department will review working drawings and work plans before the contractor performs any work shown on those drawings or plans .
do not make changes or deviations from the reviewed working drawings or work plans without prior approval by the resident engineer .
the departments reviews do not relieve the contractor of responsibility for the successful completion of the work .
the department considers the cost of providing work drawings and work plans to be included in the contract unit prices of the relevant pay items .
b. submissions the contractor shall submit working drawings and work plans to the appropriate design division .
the engineer will review working drawings and work plans and return to the contractor .
if returned for correction the contractor shall correct and resubmit .
unless otherwise required by the contract for the engineers review allow at least six weeks per submission of railroad structures and at least four weeks per submission of all other structures .
submit complete sets of working drawings and work plans except if submitting corrections or revisions .
the engineer will not review partial sets of working drawings or work plans without prior approval .
submit working drawings and work plans with a transmittal letter including the following project number jobpiece number county structure number a list of enclosed working drawing sheets and a list of changes when applicable .
c. working drawing requirements the contractor shall use drafting and lettering on working drawings clearly legible under field conditions and when microfilmed .
orient working drawings similar to the drawings shown on the plans .
the contractor shall use sheets no larger than num in num in num mm num mm for drawings .
include a title block in the lower right hand corner of each page .
the title block shall include the following control of work num num project number jobpiece number county location description structure number sheet number contractors name and the name of the supplier fabricator or manufacturer supplying material product or equipment to the project when applicable .
provide a space num in wide num in high num mm num mm near the title block for the approval stamp .
for revisions of previously approved drawings list all revisions and include a description of each revision near the title block on each sheet .
place the initials of the drafter and checker on each revised working drawing sheet and the date completed .
the drafter and checker shall be two separate individuals qualified in drafting and checking the required contract item details .
on the working drawings the contractor shall describe all materials intended for use on the project including the specifications for materials and other unique characteristics and ordering information .
working drawings including necessary calculations and changes to the project design shall bear the seal and signature of a state of oklahoma registered professional engineer proficient in the relevant design field .
use the following matrix to determine if working drawings require approval signature and seal of a state of oklahoma registered professional engineer .
if specific standard specifications apply to required working drawings and the standard specifications differ from those in the following matrix follow the requirements of the specific standard specifications table num working drawing approval guide working drawings for requires registered professional engineers signature seal and date requires department approval alternate or optional designs submitted by contractor yes yes supplementary fabrication and shop drawings for structural items no unless shown on the plans see applicable item contractor proposed temporary facilities that affect the public safety not shown on the plans yes yes num conformity with plans and specifications work performed and materials provided shall be uniform in character and meet the dimensions and material requirements within contract required tolerances .
if a maximum or minimum tolerance value or both as specified in the contract control the production and processing of material and work performance to ensure the statistically consistent quality of the finished product .
num control of work num num to assure compliance with these requirements provide quality control personnel as necessary .
the contractor shall be responsible for the process control of all material during handling blending mixing and placing operations to produce an acceptable product .
the resident engineer will not direct to the contractor or producer to set dials gauges scales or meters .
however the resident engineer may advise the contractor about operations or sequence of operations that will result in noncompliance with contract requirements .
if material provided work performed or the finished product does not conform with the contract but meets the design purpose the resident engineer will determine the conditions that the material work or product will be approved unless contract requirements address this determination .
if the resident engineer makes the determination the resident engineer will document the basis of approval by change order .
the change order will include an adjustment in the contract unit price for material work or product necessary to support the resident engineers determination .
for temporary pavements quality characteristics of materials and construction will be measured except for smoothness .
the department will withhold deductions for deficiencies the same as those for permanent pavements .
upon removal of temporary pavements if no significant failures occurred in these pavements during required use the resident engineer will release deductions withheld for deficiencies .
if failure occurs the cause of failure need not be associated with deficiencies for the resident engineer to deny release of deductions withheld .
the contractor is responsible for maintenance and reconstruction of the temporary pavement during required use if necessary .
if the material work performed or the finished product does not conform with the contract requirements and results are unsatisfactory the resident engineer will direct the contractor to remove and replace or otherwise correct the material work or product at the contractors expense .
if the contract allows the acceptance of material or work not in compliance with the minimum requirements the resident engineer will use pay adjustment factors for the material or work included in the applicable measurement and payment section of the contract .
num coordination of plans specifications and special provisions these plans standard specifications supplemental specifications special provisions and all supplementary documents are essential parts of the contract and a requirement in one is as binding as if in all .
the department intends them to be complementary and to describe and provide a complete contract .
in case of discrepancy between these contract documents the order of precedence is as follows for dimensions for information project plans project specific special provisions standard plans project plans calculated general use special provisions supplemental specifications standard plans standard specifications supplemental specifications scaled standard specifications external technical documents external technical documents control of work num num oral changes received at prebid conferences are not binding .
binding changes must be received by the contractor in writing and issued by the department as addenda to the proposal forms .
the contractor shall not take advantage of any apparent error or omission in the contract .
if the contractor discovers an error or omission the contractor shall promptly notify the engineer so the department can make corrections and interpretations necessary to fulfill the intent of the contract .
if plan notes appear to be in conflict or require clarification contact the engineer for resolution before starting work .
num cooperation by contractor the department will provide the contractor at least two sets of plans and one copy of the contract .
make one set of plans standard specifications supplemental specifications and special provisions available on the project for the duration of the contract .
the contractor shall continually manage and facilitate the work on the project and shall cooperate with the resident engineer inspectors and contractors on other department projects .
num cooperation with utilities the department will identify utility items to be relocated or adjusted by the utility owner others or the contractor as required by the contract .
utility facilities and appurtenances located within the project will be shown on the plans and will be relocated or adjusted at the utility owners expense unless otherwise required by the contract .
the locations of utilities especially for underground installations are provided by the utility owners and may not be exact .
the contractor shall employ work procedures that account for the possible inaccuracy of these representations .
the contractor shall cooperate with utility owners in the removal and relocation of underground or overhead utility facilities to minimize interruption to utility service and duplication of work by the utility owners .
the contractor shall use work procedures to identify and protect utility facilities or appurtenances that will remain in place during construction .
the department will notify utility agencies utility companies and pipeline owners affected by the contract work and will provide for necessary adjustments of utility fixtures and appurtenances within or adjacent to the construction limits by the time limits listed in the proposal forms or before the notice to proceed whichever occurs first .
the contractor may request a waiver of these requirements to facilitate beginning work if project conditions can accommodate a waiver .
if the contractor interrupts utility services due to breakage within the project the contractor shall notify and cooperate with the affected utility authorities until service has been restored .
do not start work around fire hydrants until the local fire authority approves plans for continued service .
if the contractors carelessness or omissions cause damage to utilities the contractor shall not repair the utilities but shall be financially responsible for the repair of the utilities to a condition similar or equal to that existing before the damage occurred .
notify the resident engineer if utility facilities or appurtenances not included in the contract are encountered .
the resident engineer will determine if adjustment or num control of work num num relocation of the utility is necessary to accommodate construction and will arrange for additional work necessary to continue the project with the utility owner or the contractor .
num cooperation between contractors the department reserves the right to perform other work within or near the project .
if the commission awards separate contracts within the same project limits the respective contractors shall minimize interference with the progress or completion of the work being performed by the other contractors .
contractors working on the same project shall coordinate operations to facilitate prompt completion of the contract work .
the department may declare in default contractors failing to cooperate with other contractors .
the contractor shall minimize interference with the operations of contractors under other contracts on the same project by properly arranging the work timely placing and disposing the material being used joining work with that of the others in an acceptable manner and performing work in proper sequence to that of the other contractors .
at contract required grade separations bridge structures or both the grading contractor shall immediately start fills and grading operations at abutments and shall complete the fills adjacent to abutments without delay .
at contract required grade separation structures with roadway excavation through the structure location the grading contractor shall immediately start excavation and grading operations at these locations and shall complete this work without delay .
perform excavation at these locations as shown on the underpass plans .
do not extend excavation work beyond the width shown on the underpass plans .
the bridge contractor shall complete the bridge boxes and the backfills around the bridge boxes to the lower of the top of the box or to the natural ground line as soon as possible after the contract notice to proceed .
the grading contractor shall complete the roadway fills over the bridge boxes .
if the grading contractor completes the roadway fills except for those over bridge boxes before the bridge contractor completes the bridge boxes the bridge contractor shall complete the roadway fills over the bridge boxes to the typical section and subgrade line shown on the plans .
each contractor is responsible for all work performed under the respective contract and shall save and hold harmless the department its officers agents and employees from any and all damages or claims arising from the contractors conduct and experience and based on inconvenience delay or other loss because of the presence of other contractors working with the project .
num construction stakes lines and grades the contract requirements will establish if the contractor shall provide construction stakes lines and grades in accordance with section num construction staking .
control of work num num num vacant num duties of the project inspectors the department will authorize project inspectors to inspect the work .
inspection may involve any part of the work including the preparation fabrication or manufacturing of the materials to be used .
project inspectors are not authorized to alter or waive the contract requirements .
num inspection of work the contractor shall allow the department access to the work and provide information and assistance required to make a complete and detailed inspection and documentation of the materials and the work .
inspections may be made by the resident engineer or authorized representative the fhwa or other federal agencies the odeq or other state agencies counties cities and other public or private entities having supervisory regulatory or financial interest in the project .
the contractor shall make a reasonable good faith effort to perform all work and incorporate materials into the work in the presence of a department representative .
if a department representative is unavailable for inspection or is otherwise absent at the time of the work the contractor shall document efforts to contact the project inspector .
if the contractor fails to provide good faith effort or document the work not inspected by the department the department may require the contractor to remove and replace the work at no additional cost to the department .
if a department representative is given a written notice that the work was to be performed num hr in advance and an inspection has not been performed the contractor is exempt from any removal or replacement expenses .
at any time before acceptance of the work the contractor shall remove or uncover portions of the finished work as directed by the resident engineer .
after inspection the contractor shall restore those portions of the work in accordance with the contract requirements .
if the exposed or inspected work meets contract requirements the department will pay the cost of uncovering or removing and the cost of replacing the removed work in accordance with subsection num significant changes in the character of work .
if the exposed or examined work does not meet contract requirements the contractor shall replace the removed or uncovered work with material meeting the contract requirements at no additional cost to the department .
for contract work funded by another unit of government or political subdivision or any railroad company representatives from that entity may inspect the work .
these inspections are a contract requirement but do not make the unit of government political subdivision or railroad company a party to this contract .
num removal of unacceptable and unauthorized work the department will consider work not performed in accordance with the contract requirements unacceptable unless accepted under the provisions of subsection num conformity with plans and specifications .
work determined unacceptable by the resident engineer before the final acceptance shall be removed and replaced by the contractor at no additional cost to the department .
num control of work num num the department will not pay for the following work until the resident engineer approves work performed contrary to the resident engineers direction work performed beyond the project limits or work performed without approval from the resident engineer .
the contractor shall perform corrective work to meet the contract requirements at no additional cost to the department .
if the contractor does not perform corrective work directed by the resident engineer the resident engineer may have unacceptable work removed and replaced by others and deduct the cost of that work from the amount of money due the contractor .
num load restrictions the contractor shall observe legal load restrictions if hauling materials on public roads outside the limits of the project .
a special permit does not relieve the contractor from liability for damage resulting from moving material or equipment .
the contractor shall not exceed legal load limits within the project limits unless approved in writing by the resident engineer .
do not operate equipment or use haul loads that cause damage to structures roadway or other construction .
do not store materials on any bridge deck that are in excess of the bridge design load .
provide weight and axle load information on all equipment used on the project if requested by the resident engineer .
obtain written permits from the resident engineer before crossing any bridges with equipment or other device exceeding num lb per axle .
for any load equipment or material stored or crossing the bridges provide analysis for review and approval prepared by a professional engineer registered in oklahoma .
examples include bur are not limited to material transfer devices milling machines haul trucks pavers and conveyors .
based on the condition of the bridges on the project permits may require emptying the device before crossing keeping the devices wheels on top of the bridge beams or transporting the device on vehicles with more axles to distribute the load .
keep permits in project records .
the resident engineer may restrict hauling material over any completed work within the project limits .
the resident engineer will not allow loads on hydraulic cement concrete construction before the minimum curing time or specified strength is obtained in accordance with subsection num.h load on decks and approach slabs .
num maintenance during construction the contractor shall continuously and effectively perform and maintain the work until the project is accepted .
the resident engineer will immediately notify the contractor of noncompliance with these contract requirements .
if the contractor does not remedy the unsatisfactory maintenance within num hr of the notice the resident engineer will maintain the project by others and will deduct the cost of that maintenance from the amount of money due the contractor .
if the contract includes the placing material on or using a previously constructed subgrade base course pavement or structure the contractor shall maintain the previously constructed work during construction operations .
the department will consider the cost of maintenance work during construction and before the project is accepted to be included in the contract unit price for the relevant pay item .
control of work num num num opening sections of project to traffic the resident engineer may direct certain sections of work opened to traffic before completion or acceptance of the work .
opening these sections to traffic does not constitute acceptance of the work or waiver of the contract requirements .
on opened sections the department will compensate the contractor for the cost of maintaining the roadway in accordance with subsection num differing site conditions changes and extra work .
the department will execute a change order to compensate the contractor for additional expenses and time if the section opening is not due to the fault of the contractor .
if the contractor is late in completing features of the work in accordance with the contract or progress schedule the resident engineer will give written notice establishing a time period for completing these features .
if the contractor fails to complete these features or make a reasonable effort to complete the work in accordance with the written notice the resident engineer may direct all or a portion of the project opened to traffic .
the contractor shall not be relieved of liability or responsibility for maintaining the work and shall perform the remaining construction operations with minimum interference to traffic at no additional cost to the department .
the contractor shall repair damage to the project not caused by traffic or from slides at no additional cost to the department .
before removal of slides the resident engineer will determine a removal approach and provide to the contractor .
num furnishing rightofway before construction begins the department will secure rightofway and will ensure that it is available for the contractors unrestricted operations except as otherwise required by the contract .
num project completion and acceptance a .
substantial completion substantial completion is defined as follows all pavement markings and safety appurtenances have been installed traffic has been placed in its final lane configuration and no further lane closures will be necessary to perform remaining contract work .
for projects not opened to traffic substantial completion occurs if the project is available for a subsequent project or the designated use .
the department may identify project specific features or requirements in the contract requirements .
b .
project completion after the contractor has completed the work the resident engineer will make an inspection .
if all work is completed in accordance with the contract requirements any change orders or applicable supplemental agreements the resident engineer will assign a completion date and relieve the contractor of all construction site responsibilities .
if the inspection discloses work not completed in accordance with the contract requirements any change orders or applicable supplemental agreements the resident engineer will give written notice to the contractor of the noncompliant work found in the inspection .
the resident engineer will not declare the project complete num control of work num num until the contractor addresses the noncompliant work to the satisfaction of the resident engineer .
c. final acceptance final acceptance occurs after the contractor executes and submits all documents certificates proofs of compliance and the final estimate .
when the contractor submits and the resident engineer accepts all contract required project documentation and the final estimate the resident engineer will assign an acceptance date .
final payment will not be due to the contractor until the acceptance date has been assigned .
in accordance with statutes and regulations the acceptance date will govern the payment of any interest or monies due the contractor .
d. partial completion at any time during the project if the contractor or a subcontractor completes a part of the contract the contractor may request the resident engineer make a final inspection of that part .
if the resident engineer finds that part completed in accordance with the contract requirements any change orders or applicable supplemental agreements the resident engineer may assign a partial completion date and relieve the contractor of further responsibility for that part .
the decision to declare partial completion is the sole responsibility of the resident engineer .
a partial completion decision by the resident engineer does not void or alter any terms of the contract .
e. partial acceptance the contractor may request the resident engineer inspect a part of the project .
partial acceptance may occur for a designated part of the contract if the resident engineer assigns it a partial completion date determines final quantities for the designated part of the contract and the contractor submits and the resident engineer accepts all required material certifications and documentation .
once the resident engineer assigns a partial acceptance date and submits a progressive estimate the contractor shall be relieved of further responsibility for that contract part .
once the resident engineer determines audited final quantities for a designated part of the contract work and the department pays for that work those audited final quantities will not be revised or adjusted .
if after partial acceptance the contractor or a subcontractor damages the accepted work part the contactor shall repair or replace the damaged work in accordance with the contract requirements and to the satisfaction of the engineer at no additional cost to the department .
num claims for adjustment the contractor may submit a claim for contract adjustment after the resident engineer has received reviewed and denied a contractor request for compensation time or both .
if the contractor considers additional compensation due for work or material not covered in the contract or considers additional time due for completion of contract requirements the contractor shall submit a written notice of intent to file claim notice to the resident engineer in accordance with subsection num notification of differing site conditions changes and extra work .
the contractor shall submit the notice before beginning work not covered by the contract work caused by a change of control of work num num plan or continuing work that has been altered by changes in methodology location or differing site conditions directed by the resident engineer .
the department requires the contractor to submit this notice no exceptions before the submission of a claim and before beginning or continuing affected work .
if the contractor fails to submit a notice within the time and in the manner specified in subsection num notification of differing site conditions changes and extra work the contractor waives any claim for additional compensation .
the notice will allow the department to evaluate options mitigating the impact of the claim .
the resident engineer will respond to the notice in accordance with subsection num.b contract work continuation and claim response .
the contractor shall cooperate with the resident engineer and provide information during the period of notification review and evaluation to resolve the contract issue and avoid if possible further claim process actions .
if the contractor does not give written notice and does not allow the resident engineer the opportunity to keep strict account of actual costs the contractor waives any claim for additional compensation .
notice by the contractor and cost accounting by the resident engineer shall not be construed as substantiating the validity of the claim .
within num days after completion of the work for which extra compensation or time has been requested the contractor shall submit to the resident engineer specific cost information justifying the request for additional compensation .
place this information on the latest edition of the departments form entitled cost breakdown for support of supplemental agreement .
if the contractor does not submit a fully documented claim to the resident engineer within num days the department will not allow any extra compensation or additional time .
a .
requirements for contractor claims submit claims in sufficient detail to allow the resident engineer to determine the basis for entitlement and the resulting costs .
the department will not accept a claim against a unit pricebased contract for additional costs lost profits or for any other compensation based on a total cost or modified total cost calculation that would result in a total costplus or a total unit cost compensation .
for the purpose of these specifications the department considers the terms total cost claim or modified total cost claim to include all work required by the contract or any portion unit part or parts of the work required by the contract however such portion unit part or parts of the work may be identified categorized or isolated from remaining work and any claim for compensation for all work on the contract or for any portion unit part or parts of the work of the contract using any form technique method or mode which results in a total cost figure sum or result from cost computation .
provide the following minimum information with each claim submitted detailed factual statement of the claim providing all necessary dates locations and items of work affected by the claim .
see the required format for a factual statement at the end of this list .
the date actions resulting in the claim occurred or conditions resulting in the claim became evident .
a copy of the written notice of intent to file a claim filed by the contractor for the specific claim .
num control of work num the name title and activity of each department employee knowledgeable about facts that gave rise to such claim .
the name title and activity of each contractor employee knowledgeable about facts that gave rise to such claim .
the specific contract requirements that support the claim and a statement why the requirements support the claim .
a weekly listing of all construction equipment in use or held in standby condition as approved by the resident engineer due to the work that is the subject of the claim including the type make model and year of manufacture .
the listing will reflect hours that equipment was in use or standby condition due to the work that is the subject of the claim .
no equipment costs will be allowed on a claim for those periods of time that the contractor failed to file the equipment listing .
the identification of any relevant documents relating to the claim .
a statement that the additional compensation or extension of time is based on the provisions of the contract or on an alleged breach of contract .
for time extension claims the specific days sought and the basis for the claim for time as determined by an analysis of the contractors progress schedule provided to the department in accordance with subsection num.a activities schedule chart asc and written narrative wn or subsection num.b critical path progress schedule before starting the work .
the amount of additional compensation sought and a breakdown of that amount in accordance with subsection num differing site conditions changes and extra work .
failure to submit a claim before the department makes final payment on the contract shall constitute a waiver of all claims .
the detailed factual statement shall include the following minimum information num introduction the purpose of the introduction is to present a general background in sufficient detail to provide an overview of the claim .
num contract requirements the purpose of the contract requirements is to establish what provisions in the contract documents that the contractor relied on to prepare the bid and schedule to perform the work .
this section establishes what contract provisions the contractor relied on and provides the basis for measurement of the differences between what the contractor anticipated and what actually occurred .
the contractor shall establish a right under the contract on which the contractor relied to provide a basis for the contractors claim .
num contractors schedule the purpose of this section is to provide an opportunity to demonstrate that the contract elements identified in subsection num.anum contract requirements were critical to its scheduled completion of the contract requirements .
the contractor shall demonstrate in this section that its reliance on the aboveidentified contract requirements was reasonable for establishing the contractors progress schedule the means and methods which heshe planned to perform the work .
the contractors progress schedule used to support this subsection shall be the control of work num num schedule provided to the department in accordance with subsection num.a activities schedule chart asc and written narrative wn or subsection num.b critical path progress schedule before start the work .
estimated cost for performance of required contract work may be supported by either bid documents used in bidding the project or by empirical data from the contractors performance on previously completed projects .
num variations in the contract requirements encountered on the project the purpose of this section is to allow the contractor to clearly demonstrate that the actual conditions and circumstances encountered in building the project differed materially from the requirements of the contract .
num effects of the variations the purpose of this section is to allow the contractor to explain how the changes in conditions and circumstances impacted the contractors plan and affected the contractors work .
b .
required certification of claims the claim submittal shall include a written certification under oath by the contractor and any subcontractor presenting a claim through the contractor attesting to the following the claim is made in good faith .
supportive data is accurate and complete to the contractors subcontractors best knowledge and belief .
the amount of the claim accurately reflects the contractors subcontractors true cost incurred .
the amount of the claim has been adjusted and reduced to reflect change orders related to the claim for which the contractor subcontractor has previously been compensated .
in complying with this requirement the contractor and any subcontractor presenting a claim through the contractor shall use the departments certificate of claim form as follows num control of work num certificate of claim under the penalty of law for perjury or falsification the undersigned name title company hereby certifies that the claim for extra compensation and time if any made herein for work on this contract is a true accurate and complete statement of all actual costs incurred and time sought and is fully documented and supported under the contract between the parties .
i further certify that i am authorized to submit this claim on behalf of ________________________ and to bind this company as to this matter .
this claim has been adjusted and reduced to reflect change orders related to this claim for which this company has previously been compensated .
the above information is true and correct to the best of my knowledge authorized signature social security no .
or federal id no .
warning it is a felony to make or present a false fictitious or fradulent claim for payment of public funds .
the state of oklahoma will prosecute and conviction may result in criminal penalities .
num o.s.num num state of oklahoma county of __________________ on the ________day of ___________________ num ____ before me personally appeared ___________________________________ to me known to be the persons named herein and who executed the foregoing document and acknowledge to me that ____________________ voluntarily executed the same .
my commission expires the _____ day of _________ num___ .
notary public seal control of material num num c. documentation of claims the department will assess claims for additional compensation for differing site conditions changes in the character of work or for extra work and will determine their value in accordance with subsection num differing site conditions changes and extra work .
the department will evaluate claims for extension of contract time in accordance with subsection num administration and extension of contract time .
d. review of request for additional compensation or time the resident engineer will review and respond in writing to the contractors request for additional compensation or time within the following time periods for claims in the amount of num or less num calendar days from the receipt of the contractors claim including all required supporting documentation for claims in an amount of more than num num calendar days from the receipt of the contractors claim including all required supporting documentation .
the resident engineer and the contractor may agree in writing to an extension of the departments review time limits required above .
if the resident engineer does not issue a written response to the contractors claim within the required time period the contractor may proceed as if the claim had been formally denied in accordance with the currently adopted dispute resolution procedure included in the contract .
if no agreement is reached between the contractor and the department within num calendar days after the departments response to the contractor the contractor may proceed as if the claim had been formally denied in accordance with the currently adopted dispute resolution procedure included in the contract .
nothing in this section shall be construed as establishing any claim contrary to the terms of subsection num notification of differing site conditions changes and extra work or subsection num administration and extension of contract time .
num control of material num section num control of material num source of supply and quality requirements the contractor shall provide material meeting the quality requirements of the contract .
notify the resident engineer of proposed sources of materials before delivery to the project .
the resident engineer may conditionally approve material at the supply source .
if the resident engineer finds that conditionally approved material incorporated into the work does not produce acceptable results the contractor shall remove and replace or otherwise correct the material as approved by the resident engineer at no additional cost to the department .
use new materials unless otherwise required by the contract .
a .
material acceptance the department will evaluate acceptance of material in accordance with one of the following processes sampling and testing in accordance with subsection num samples tests and cited specifications .
materials certification in accordance with subsection num materials certifications .
approved products list apl as established and maintained by the departments materials engineer .
the process required for evaluation of a specific material is designated in the fast guide .
b .
buy america follow the buy america provisions as required by title num code of federal regulations num .
except as expressly provided herein all manufacturing processes of steel or iron provided under this contract shall occur in the united states including the application of coating galvanizing painting and other coating that protects or enhances the value of steel or iron products .
the following are exempt unless processed or refined to include substantial amounts of steel or iron material and may be used regardless of source in the domestic manufacturing process for steel or iron material pig iron processed pelletized and reduced iron ore material or processed alloys .
the requirements do not prevent a minimal use of foreign steel if the cost of such materials does not exceed num percent of the total contract amount or num whichever is greater .
the contractor shall submit to the resident engineer the origin and value of any foreign material used .
the contractor shall submit a certification stating that all manufacturing processes involved with the production of steel or iron materials occurred in the united states .
control of material num num num local material sources the department may designate possible sources of local material in the contract .
the contractor shall determine the amount of equipment and work required to produce a material that meets the contract requirements .
consider variations in material quality within source deposits usual and expected .
the resident engineer may direct selection of material from specific locations within a source deposit .
the resident engineer will reject locations of source deposit that do not meet the contract requirements .
the department may acquire designated sources material and use the property for plant site stockpiles and haul roads as required by the contract .
for material from sources not designated by the contract acquire the rights to purchase and use of the material and assume all costs for exploring and developing the sources as well as hauling and placing the material on the project .
the resident engineer will not allow use of material from sources not designated in the contract until testing indicates that the material is of equal or better quality than the designated source .
the resident engineer may make conditional acceptance of the material .
locate borrow pits gravel pits and quarry sites no closer than num ft num m from the rightofway of any road or highway on the state or county system to limit visibility from roads unless otherwise approved by the resident engineer .
following completion of the work leave the site as well as any pits and quarry sites in a neat and presentable condition in accordance with subsection num final clean up .
num samples tests and cited specifications the resident engineer will inspect test and approve material before its incorporation in the work .
the resident engineer will perform sampling and testing at frequencies in accordance with the fast guide .
unless otherwise specified tests will be performed using the most recent cited standard methods or specifications of the department aashto astm or other referenced authority .
for differing test procedures the resident engineer will use the following order of precedence the departments standard materials test methods aashto and astm .
unless otherwise required by the contract the department will perform tests at its own expense .
for acceptance testing samples will be taken and tested by certified technicians registered by the oklahoma highway construction materials technician certification board .
lab tests will be performed by labs qualified and approved by the departments materials engineer .
the resident engineer may inspect test or reject material before or during its incorporation into the work .
the resident engineer will address unacceptable material in accordance with subsection num conformity with plans and specifications .
the resident engineer may retest material and reject material that does not meet the requirements of the contract even if the material was previously tested and conditionally num control of material num num approved at the source of supply .
the resident engineer will provide copies of test results to the contractor upon request .
the contractor is responsible for quality control of material during construction and shall not rely on the departments acceptance testing for this purpose .
if required by the contract the contractor shall submit a formal quality control plan to the resident engineer .
num material certifications a .
description the requirements and procedures for the issuance and distribution of material certifications are designated in the fast guide .
materials not addressed specifically by the fast guide will be handled in accordance with the contract requirements .
b .
general requirements the contractor is responsible for obtaining all certifications and delivering to the contract required destinations .
ensure a responsible representative of the company that issues the certification signs the material certification .
ensure the title of the signer is clearly shown beneath the signature .
provide all certifications in duplicate with each copy showing the following information project number name of contractor identification markings on shipment if applicable and for type a certifications required by the fast guide the quantity of material .
c. types of certifications unless otherwise required by the contract provide one of the following types of certification num .
type a manufacturer prepared certification consisting of a certified report detailing tests conducted by a laboratory approved by the department on samples obtained from the lots of material in the shipment .
num .
type b manufacturer prepared certification showing the limits of test values as determined by a department approved manufacturers laboratory a qualified commercial laboratory or another approved laboratory .
num .
type c manufacturer prepared certification certifying that the material in the shipment conforms to the same formula or is essentially the same as the material previously approved by the departments materials engineer .
num .
type d manufacturer prepared certification stating that the material meets the contract requirements listed by specification reference number section reference or other appropriate identification approved by the resident engineer .
num .
type e fabricator prepared certification covering a composite item e.g .
signs overhead sign structures etc .
incorporating two or more materials previously approved on an individual basis but that lose their identities when incorporated into the composite item .
the fabricator is responsible for the following control of material num num identifying all material used in the fabrication certifying that all materials used in the fabrication of the item in question were previously approved by the department for use and maintaining test reports and other pertinent identifying records of the individual items incorporated into the composite item until approved by the resident engineer .
d. distribution of certifications the contractor shall submit certifications to the resident engineer with another copy mailed to materials engineer oklahoma department of transportation num northeast numst street oklahoma city oklahoma num e. basis of acceptance if one of the above types of certification is required by the fast guide the resident engineer may accept the material on the basis of a certification provided the following all contract requirements have been met and the resident engineers visual inspection at the destination shows satisfactory workmanship and condition of the material .
the contractor shall mark all material provided by certification with a lot number heat number order number or other identification matching those numbers listed on the certification .
do not incorporate any material accepted by certification into the work until the resident engineer approves of the certification .
the departments materials engineer will evaluate type a and type b certification for compliance with the contract requirements and forward approved copies to the resident engineer .
the resident engineer will evaluate and approve other types of certifications .
the resident engineer may accept materials listed on the approved products list without further certification .
num plant inspection the engineer may inspect manufacturing plants for compliance with specified manufacturing methods .
the engineer may also inspect material at the manufacturing plant or source and will obtain material samples for testing compliance with material quality requirements in the contract .
ensure the following when plant inspection is made by the engineer cooperation and assistance of the supplier and contractor .
full access at any time to areas where the relevant materials are manufactured or produced .
use of a building by the inspector located conveniently near the plant in accordance with subsection num field office laboratory if required by the contract .
adequate safety measures .
num control of material num num crushing or screening facilities equipped with automatic or semiautomatic mechanical sampling device .
for fabricated structural steel members or precast concrete walls and bridge elements requiring department inspection and approval at a manufacturing plant or source of supply located more than num mi num km from oklahoma city oklahoma pay the additional expense of inspection over the cost of providing the same inspection at oklahoma city .
for all other fabricated items i.e .
epoxy coated reinforcing steel reinforced concrete pipe and boxes etc .
requiring department inspection and approval at a manufacturing plant or source of supply located more than num mi num km from oklahoma city oklahoma pay the additional expense of inspection over the cost of providing the same inspection at oklahoma city .
the department will calculate miles traveled based on the most recent edition of the rand mcnally road atlas or an equivalent such as mapquest .
if applicable the department will also calculate vicinity mileage .
the department will calculate travel expenses in accordance with the current departments administrative order bnum for state travel expenses reimbursement plus the current contract price for the inspectors travel time .
contact the departments materials engineer to obtain the current contract prices and contact the supplier to determine the fabrication time to allow the department to estimate inspection expenses .
the department may retest material previously tested and conditionally approved at the source and may reject all materials that when retested do not meet the contract requirements .
num field office or laboratory provide and maintain for each field office or laboratory required by the contract a resident engineer approved weatherproof building or trailer in accordance with section num field office or laboratory .
num foreign material unless otherwise specified in the contract perform all testing within the united states in the presence of the engineer at the discretion of the department .
if required by the contract provide and pay for any required sampling and testing that the department can not perform .
for materials or processes requiring tests performed or witnessed at a foreign source reimburse the department for all inspection expenses incurred in accordance with subsection num plant inspection .
provide a certificate of compliance with each lot of foreign material in accordance with subsection num materials certifications .
if required for the material attach mill test reports to the certificate of compliance .
provide steel or iron in accordance with subsection num.b buy america .
for structural materials requiring mill test reports the department will only accept material from those foreign or domestic manufacturers having previously established adequate inplant quality control to assure delivery of uniform material meeting contract requirements .
the department will determine adequacy of quality control by its review of detailed written proof submitted by the fabricator or through a plant inspection by the department .
the department will not accept structural materials that do not have certificates of compliance and if required mill test reports .
control of material num num num storage and handling of material store and handle materials to preserve their quality and fitness for the work .
a .
general store and handle materials to preserve their quality and fitness for the work .
transport bulk materials in vehicles constructed to prevent loss or segregation after loading and measuring .
store materials to facilitate prompt inspection .
materials will be subject to inspection and retesting before incorporation in the work in accordance with subsection num samples tests and cited specifications .
the department will allow the use approved portions of the rightofway for storing materials and the contractors plant and equipment .
provide additional storage space as necessary at no additional cost to the department .
do not use private property for storage without prior written permission of the owner or lessee .
if requested provide copies of such written permission to the resident engineer .
restore storage and plant sites on the rightofway to their original condition at no additional cost to the department .
b. delivering and stockpiling aggregates handle all aggregates to preserve their quality gradation and fitness for the work .
the provisions for transporting aggregates shall be such to assure a continuous and adequate supply of material to the work .
build up aggregate stockpiles to ensure the delivery of acceptable materials to the plant or project .
do not stockpile aggregates from different sources and different gradations together .
the gradation requirements for the individual stockpiles and proportioning from the stockpiles is the responsibility of the contractor .
the department will consider aggregates that have become segregated or mixed with earth or other foreign material to be unacceptable and will not allow their use in the work until the contractor integrates the aggregate piles or removes all earth and foreign materials .
num unacceptable material material that does not meet the contract requirements will be addressed in accordance with subsection num conformity with plans and specifications .
num departmentprovided material provide all material necessary to complete the work except departmentprovided material as required by the contract .
the department will deliver or make available departmentprovided material to the contractor at the locations specified in the contract .
include in the contract unit price for the relevant pay item the cost of handling and placing all departmentprovided material once made available .
the contractor is responsible for the departmentprovided material made available .
the department will make deductions for material shortages or deficiencies damage or demurrage charges .
num control of material num control of material num guarantees and warranties obtain and assign to the department manufacturer and producer warranties or guarantees for items materials and equipment consistent with those provided as customary trade practice .
warrant or guarantee for six months after department and local government acceptance mechanical and electrical equipment and material light bulbs excepted free from any defects or imperfections in workmanship and material .
repair or replace malfunctions or defects that develop during the sixmonth period at no additional cost to the department .
supply manuals for equipment included in the project providing the following information operational procedures complete nomenclature wiring diagrams schematics showing test voltages or procedural methods functional description of circuits parts lists cross reference to standard part numbers flow diagrams and testing procedures and other pertinent data if required by the contract .
the provisions of this section are additional to and run concurrent with any maintenance or warranty bonds required by the contract .
section num legal relations and responsibility to public num laws rules and regulations to be observed the contractor shall observe the following and the effects of the following on individuals engaged or employed on the project or the conduct of the work on the project federal and state laws local laws and ordinances and regulations orders and decrees of bodies or tribunals having jurisdiction or authority .
the contractor shall protect and indemnify the department and its representatives against any claim or liability arising from the violation of any of the above bulleted items whether violated by the following parties or any of their employees contractor subcontractors suppliers of materials or services or other companies engaged by the contractor .
the contractor shall comply with federal state and local laws rules and regulations that set forth unlawful employment practices including that of discrimination because of race religion color sex or national origin and that define actions required for affirmative action and minority disadvantaged business programs .
legal relations and responsibility to public num num if the contractor discovers any discrepancy or inconsistency between the contract and any law ordinance regulation order or decree except as noted in subsection num federal aid participation the contractor shall immediately submit written notification to the resident engineer .
num permits and licenses the department does not require the contractor to obtain work permits or licenses from local governmental agencies for operations related to the prosecution of the work within the project rightofway .
the contractor shall contact all local governmental agencies with jurisdiction within the project limits to determine if local stormwater permits are required .
num patented devices materials and processes if the contractor uses designs devices materials or processes covered by letters of patents copyrights or trademarks the contractor shall provide a suitable legal agreement with the patentee or owner .
the contractor and surety shall indemnify and save harmless the department the state and any political subdivision and any affected third party from any and all claims including costs expenses and damages the department may be obliged to pay for infringement on such patents copyrights or trademarks during the prosecution of the work or after completion of the project .
num federal aid participation if any contract provision on a federalaid project conflicts with federal laws rules or regulations the federal requirements shall prevail take precedence and be in force over and against any conflicting provision .
for federalaid projects the department will administer the contract but the appropriate officials of the federal government shall have the right to inspect and approve the work without the federal government becoming party to the contract .
num public convenience and safety the contractor shall minimize obstructions to traffic in accordance with subsection num maintenance of traffic provide for the safety and convenience of the public and protect property adjacent to or near the project .
the contractor may not close any public road unless approved or directed by the resident engineer .
the contractor shall not sever or remove existing fence or make alteration to fences required by the contract until approved by the resident engineer .
temporary fences when required to control livestock shall be suitable for the purpose intended .
the contractor shall provide temporary fences used for the convenience of the contractor at no additional cost to the department .
if the contractor does not comply with these requirements the resident engineer may issue a shut down order and may do such work as necessary for the safety of the public .
num legal relations and responsibility to public num num the cost for any work performed by the department will be deducted from any monies due the contractor .
num barriers barricades and warning signs the contractor is responsible for the following providing erecting and maintaining barriers barricades lights temporary signals signals signs warning signs and other traffic control and safety devices to control and direct traffic taking necessary precautions to protect the work and safety of the public protecting highway sections closed to traffic using effective barriers and barricades clearly delineating obstructions to the normal flow of traffic during darkness erecting warning signs in advance of operations that may interfere with the use of the road by traffic and at locations where new work crosses or coincides with an existing road placing and maintaining warning signs in accordance with the traffic control plan and the contract and not dismantling or removing barriers barricades lights temporary signals signals signs warning signs or other traffic control and safety devices without prior direction or approval by the resident engineer .
ensure barriers barricades lights temporary signals signs warning signs and other traffic control and safety devices are in accordance with the mutcd and section num traffic control .
num use of explosives if using handling loading transporting or storing explosives or blasting agents the contractor shall follow all applicable laws and ordinances including the oklahoma explosives and regulation act num os num section num et seq .
and corresponding rules and regulations of the oklahoma department of mines the state fire marshall and the department of public safety .
if the use of explosives is necessary for the prosecution of the work the contractor shall exercise care to protect life property and completed work .
the contractor shall assume all risks and be solely responsible for all damages resulting from the use or storage of explosives on the project .
the contractor shall store explosives in a secure manner and clearly mark all storage places with the phrase dangerous explosives .
if no local laws or ordinances apply the contractor shall store explosives in accordance with occupational safety and health act osha regulations and no closer than num ft num m from any place of human occupancy .
the contractor shall provide in advance written notification to the resident engineer adjacent property owners and public utilities and railroads having facilities adjacent to the site of the work of its intentions to use explosives including the location date time and approximate duration of the blasting .
the department requires the contractor to provide this notification sufficiently in advance of the blasting to allow the property owners and utility and railroad companies to take any steps as they may deem necessary to protect their property from damage .
legal relations and responsibility to public num num the contractor shall erect suitable warning signs to alert the public on all roads in the immediate vicinity of blasting operations .
the signs shall include instructions to turn off all portable radio transmitters cellular telephonic devices and any other electronic transmitting device while in the vicinity .
the department considers vicinity to be the total length of the blast area plus one additional mile from each end of the blast area .
if necessary or required by the contract the contractor shall control traffic using flaggers and guards in the blasting danger zone .
num protection and restoration of property and landscape the contractor shall preserve public and private property during the prosecution of the work and not move disturb or damage land monuments and property marks until directed by the resident engineer .
the contractor is responsible for damage to public or private property resulting from any of the following acts omissions neglect or misconduct in the contractors method of performing the work defective work or materials or nonperformance of the contract .
the contractor is responsible for restoring damaged property to a condition similar or equal to that existing before the damage occurred at no additional cost to the department .
num protection of archeological and unmarked human burial sites the contractor shall observe all laws and regulations when establishing offsite facilities including plant sites borrow pits waste areas haul roads storage sites parking areas and similar areas associated with the acquisition production and delivery of borrow material and related road building materials .
examine all intended locations of offsite facilities for archeological significance .
identify the intended location legal description of the ¼ section to the resident engineer who will examine the site and confer with the proper authorities for this determination .
allow up to num working days for the archeological investigation .
if the resident engineer and proper authority determine a site to be of potential or established archeological significance requiring further investigation the contractor shall either postpone the excavation until the artifacts have been removed or obtain an alternate location for the source of borrow material .
whenever encountering archeological remains during construction operations on the project site or during the excavation of a previously approved offsite facility immediately cease the operation and notify the engineer who will contact state archeological authorities to determine the disposition of the remains or artifacts .
the contractor shall temporarily discontinue construction operations if remains of prehistoric dwelling sites or artifacts of historical or archaeological significance are encountered on the project site or on a previously approved offsite facility and notify the resident engineer .
the resident engineer will contact the state archaeological authorities to determine the disposition of the remains or artifacts .
the contractor shall num legal relations and responsibility to public num num excavate the site to preserve the artifacts and remove and deliver them to the custody of the proper state authorities as directed by the resident engineer .
for offsite facilities if the delay for the archeological investigation is too long the contractor may consider an alternate source of material .
in such case with approval of the archeological authorities it may be possible to rebury the archeological materials and move to another location .
the contractor shall remove or rebury the archeological material in compliance with the national historic preservation act and the archaeological resources protection act of num the oklahoma state register of historic places act and the oklahoma violating sepulcher and the remains of the dead act refer to oklahoma statute num section num and section num section num os num chapter num section num .
the department will pay for this removal work as extra work and adjust the contract in accordance with subsection num differing site conditions changes and extra work .
if the construction operation is delayed due to archeological finds in an offsite facility the department will compensate a contractor only with an extension of time commensurate with the amount of delay involving items on the critical path .
monetary compensation will not be allowed for these purposes .
when an unmarked human burial is discovered immediately cease all activity in the surrounding area and notify the resident engineer .
do not resume activity until specifically authorized by the resident engineer .
num forest park and public land protection the contractor shall perform work within or adjacent to a state or national forest in compliance with the regulations of the oklahoma state fire marshal oklahoma conservation commission oklahoma department of agriculture food and forestry forestry services united states department of agriculture forest service and other authorities having jurisdiction governing the protection of forests .
if performing work within or adjacent to state or national forests parks or public lands the contractor shall comply with all regulations of the oklahoma state fire marshal oklahoma conservation commission oklahoma department of wildlife conservation oklahoma department of agriculture food and forestry forestry services united states department of agriculture forest service or other authority having jurisdiction governing the protection of forests .
the contractor shall keep the areas in an orderly condition dispose of all refuse obtain permits for the construction and maintenance of all construction camps stores and other structures in accordance with the requirements of the duly authorized official .
the contractor and its employees and subcontractors shall take all reasonable precautions to prevent and suppress forest fires and to notify a forest official immediately of the location and extent of any fires .
num third party beneficiary clause it is specifically agreed between the parties executing the contract that it is not intended by the contract provisions to create a third party beneficiary or to authorize anyone else to maintain a suit for personal injuries or property damage pursuant to the provisions of the contract .
legal relations and responsibility to public num num num responsibility for damage claims the contractor agrees to indemnify and save and hold harmless the state of oklahoma the commission the department and their officers agents and employees from all suits actions or claims of any kind or character brought because of injuries or damages received or sustained by any person persons or property regardless of fault arising out of or as a result of any act or failure to act whether or not negligent in connection with the perfor mance of the work to be performed pursuant to this contract by the contractor or on account of any operations of the department or contractor the officers agents and employees of either of them performing work the project work zone as well as subcontractors or any others authorized by the contractor to perform work on the project .
the contractor agrees to defend and pay all costs of defending these claims including attorneys fees .
the contractor shall carry insurance of the following kinds and amounts on the contract a .
general the insurance hereinbefore specified shall be acquired from state of oklahoma licensed insurance companies to provide such coverage in the state of oklahoma and shall be maintained in full force and effect during all times when work is being performed under the terms of the contract until all work required to be performed under the contract is deemed as completed by the resident engineer in accordance with subsection num project completion and acceptance .
the contractor shall provide to the department certificates of insurance showing that the contractor is carrying insurance in at least the specified minimum amounts .
said certificates shall further provide that said insurance will not be cancelled by the insurer without the insurer first giving the department num calendar days written notice of cancellation .
the contractor shall not cause any insurance policy to be cancelled or permit it to lapse and all insurance policies shall include an endorsement to the effect that the insurance policy or certificate shall not be subject to cancellation or to a reduction in the required limits or liability or amounts of insurance until notice has been mailed to the department stating the date when such cancellation or reduction shall be effective which date shall not be less than num calendar days after such notice .
if the contractor cancels allows to lapse fails to renew or in any way fails to keep the project specific liability insurance policy or any other required insurance policy in full force and effect the department will suspend all progress andor final payments for the project until the required insurance is obtained .
further the department may deem the contractor ineligible to bid on future projects in accordance with subsection num refusal of proposals .
the contractor shall provide the department with copies of certificates of insurance evidencing coverage as to commercial general liability and workers compen sation and employers liability with the signed contract for inclusion in the contract file .
failure to submit certificates of insurance with the executed contract and bonds will result in a default under the terms of the proposal guaranty and may result in forfeiture by the contractor of the guaranty sum .
b .
contractors public liability and property damage liability insurance the contractor shall obtain an insurance policy that provides commercial general liabiltiy coverage to a specific by project number for each project awarded by the department to the contractor .
the contractor shall provide a certificate of insurance to the department that with respect to the work to be performed by the contractor under the insured contract the contractor carries regular contractors public liability insur ance providing for a combined amount of not less than num of coverage for all damages arising out of bodily injury death and property damage for each occurence num legal relations and responsibility to public num with an aggregate limit of num for the term of the policy or as otherwise required by the proposal forms .
for projects requiring railroad protective insurance policies re fer to the special provisions of the contract for additional limits of public liability cover age that may be required .
the contractor shall have the department named as an addi tional insured pursuant to num o.s .
section numbnum on the contractors public liability and property damage liability policy to the extent of the states liability under the pro visions of the governmental tort claims act num o.s .
section num et seq .
for payment of any amounts the department may become legally obligated to pay .
currently the limits provided by the governmental tort claims act are num for property damage num for any claimant for a claim arising out of a single occurrence or accident and an aggregate amount of num for all claims arising out of any single occurrence or accident .
the contractor may acquire such additional insurance as the contractor deems appropriate either through the separate policy specific to the project or through a general liability policy .
in no event shall the contractor endorse the department on a blanket general liability policy or for coverage that exceeds the limits of the governmental tort claims act on a separate project specific policy .
c. insurance for subcontractors and contractors protective public liability and property damage liability insurance if the contractor subcontracts or assigns any of the work or if the work is otherwise to be performed by anyone other than the contractors own employees then such insurance shall cover all operations of any such contractor of any tier and shall be maintained until project completion .
d. workers compensation insurance and employers liability insurance the contractor shall provide certificate of insurance to the department that with respect to the work the contractor carries regular workers compensation and employers liability insurance covering the contractors liability under the workers compensation law of the state of oklahoma .
the contractor shall maintain the aforementioned insurance in full force and effect until project completion .
e. railroads protective liability and property damage insurance in addition to the above the contractor shall provide certificate of insurance to the department that with respect to the work the contractor has provided for and on behalf of the railroad companyies involved protective public liability and property damage liability insurance in an amount as may be required by the railroad company as specified in the proposal forms .
policies shall not include liability for negligence on the part of the railroad company its agents or employees except as set out in coverage a coverage b or coverage c of the form of policy or amendments thereto referred to under subsection num.f form of the railroad protective liability policy .
this insurance applies to each and all railroad companies involved in the work .
f. form of the railroad protective liability policy for the purpose of uniformity the aashto with the assistance of the aar the fhwa the national bureau of casualty underwriters of new york and the mutual insurance rating bureau of new york has drafted the standard provisions for general liability policies railroad protective liability form state or federal highway projects .
legal relations and responsibility to public num num the contractor shall provide the original and one copy of the railroad protective liability policy and two copies of certificate of insurance indicating the amounts of coverage in effect to the department for submission to the railroad company for approval .
for contracts that contain a rightofentry agreement provision and the contractor submits the original policy directly to the railroad company the contractor shall provide two copies of the policy to the department .
any questions by the contractor or the surety regarding this insurance should be directed to rail programs division num northeast numst street oklahoma city oklahoma num num personal liability of department employees the departments authorized representatives are acting solely as agents and representatives of the department when carrying out and exercising the power or authority granted to them under the contract .
while acting within the scope of their employment department representatives shall not be liable for actions taken on behalf of the department either personally or as department employees .
num no waiver of legal rights the department shall not be precluded or estopped by any measurement estimate or certificate made either before or after the completion and acceptance of the work and payment therefore from showing the true amount and character of the work performed and materials provided by the contractor nor from showing that any such measurement estimate or certificate is untrue or is incorrectly made nor that the work or materials do not in fact conform to the contract .
the department shall not be precluded or estopped notwithstanding any such measurement estimate or certificate and payment in accordance therewith from recovering from the contractor or sureties or both such damage as it may sustain by reason of contractors failure to comply with the terms of the contract .
neither the acceptance by the department or any representative of the department nor any payment for or acceptance of the whole or any part of the work nor any extension of time nor any possession taken by the department shall operate as a waiver of any portion of the contract or of any power herein reserved or of any right to damages .
acceptance shall be final and conclusive except as otherwise provided in the specifications or as regards latent defects or frauds or such gross mistakes as may amount to fraud or as regards the departments rights under any warranty or guaranty .
latent defects are nonconformities included in the completed contract work that were not visible or apparent at the time of construction and remained hidden and dormant until discovery of the nonconformity .
upon discovery of a disputed nonconformity in the completed contract work which the department has designated as a latent defect the department and contractor agree to submit to arbitration whether or not the disputed nonconformity in the contract work is a latent defect .
the arbitration shall be administered in accordance with the dispute resolution procedure as incorporated in the contract .
a waiver of any breach of the contract shall not be held to be a waiver of any other or subsequent breach .
nothing contained in this section shall operate as a waiver or extension of any applicable statute of limitations with respect to the time within which an action may be brought for the breach of a contract .
num legal relations and responsibility to public num num hazardous material if the contractor encounters or exposes any abnormal condition indicating the presence of a hazardous material or toxic waste the contractor shall immediately suspend the work in the area and notify the resident engineer .
the contractor may continue the work in unaffected areas of the project unless otherwise directed by the resident engineer .
abnormal conditions include but are not limited to the presence of the following barrels drums tanks or other chemical container noxious odors emanating from the soil or water table excessively hot earth or smoke indicating a possible chemical reaction stained or oily soil or groundwater or any other condition that indicates a hazardous material or toxic waste .
the contractor shall treat these conditions with extreme caution and shall not attempt work without appropriately trained qualified and equipped personnel .
if disposing of the hazardous material or toxic waste the contractor shall comply with all applicable local state and federal rules and regulations .
the disposal work may be performed by the contractor under a supplemental agreement to the contract or by the department .
num protection of wetlands the contractor shall obey all laws and regulations when establishing offsite facilities including plant sites borrow pits waste areas haul roads storage sites parking areas and similar areas associated with the acquisition production and delivery of borrow material and related road building materials .
the contractor shall not construct or locate offsite facilities in areas designated as wetlands by the usace before written approval of the usace .
to gain approval the contractor shall do the following contact the regulatory branch of the usace phone num to determine the status of wetlands request approval for proposed locations of offsite facilities present the entire plan for offsite facilities and site restoration to the usace for approval and forward a copy of the approval to the resident engineer before beginning offsite activities .
if the project lies in an area designated as wetlands the contractor shall not disturb the area between the limits of construction and the rightofway line without prior approval of the resident engineer and shall adhere to the requirements of permits included in the contract .
num navigable airspace the contractor shall comply with federal laws rules and regulations pertaining to constructing erecting or installing objects temporary or permanent that could potentially affect navigable airspace including onsite and offsite facilities .
legal relations and responsibility to public num num num navigable waterways the contractor shall perform work over on or adjacent to navigable waters without interfering with free navigation of the waterways or impairing the existing navigable depths except as allowed by permit issued by the u.s. coast guard or the usace as applicable .
num regulated floodways the contractor shall perform work within regulated floodways in compliance with the requirements of permits issued by the federal emergency management agency fema usace or other applicable agencies .
num storm water management the contractor is responsible for complying with the requirements of sections num and num of the clean water act title num u.s.c .
num et seq .
and the oklahoma department of environmental quality odeq general permit for construction activities concerning storm water management .
the contractor shall submit the notice of intent noi to the odeq andor other designated municipal authority to obtain the authorization to discharge storm water runoff from the project .
the department will develop the original storm water management plan swmp as part of the plans .
the original swmp is for preliminary planning and guidance only .
the contractor is responsible for reviewing the swmp and developing the storm water pollution prevention plan swppp in accordance with subsection num.c contractor responsibilities for swppp to conform to actual conditions encountered on the project .
the contractor shall use good construction industry practices and ensure the waterways receiving storm water runoff from the project are protected from siltation and other forms of project originated pollutants .
for projects that do not include a specific swmp the contractor shall use the applicable portion of the plans special provisions and the standard specifications for the swppp .
the contractor is responsible for implementing the swppp for the project and for initiating modifications to the original permit connected with the location of the contractors storage yard plant sites and borrow areas located on or off the rightof way .
the contractor shall protect and hold harmless the state of oklahoma the department and the officers agents and employees of both from all suits claims or administrative actions of any kind or character alleging damages or harm to the environment any adjoining lands or receiving waterways due to improper storm water management .
upon completion of soildisturbing activities and when permanent erosion control measures have stabilized the project to at least num percent of native background cover the contractor shall submit to the odeq a notice of termination not in accordance with subsection num.f notice of termination not .
the contractor shall ensure compliance with the requirements of the not .
num wildlife protection the contractor shall comply with all applicable laws and ordinances protecting threatened and endangered species migratory birds and water quality including the endangered species act title num cfr part num the migratory bird treaty act title num u.s.c .
chapter num subchapter ii and sections num and num of the clean water act num legal relations and responsibility to public num num legal relations and responsibility to public title num u.s.c .
num et seq ..
the contractor shall post on site an illustrated list of all known threatened and endangered species identified in the contractor .
if evidence of any such species is encountered on the project or at a proposed offsite facility the contractor shall suspend work in the area and notify the resident engineer who shall contact the departments biological authorities for an assessment .
the department shall have num working days to evaluate the finding .
if the department determines that the activity may affect a listed threatened or endangered species the contractor shall comply with any requirements and regulations of the united states fish and wildlife service to avoid jeopardizing the species .
num project records the contractor shall maintain all books documents papers accounting records and other evidence pertaining to costs incurred in the prosecution of the work during the contract period and for three years from the date of execution of the final estimate .
all such records and materials shall be made available at contractors offices during normal business hours for inspection by the department the state auditor and inspector and if a federalaid project by representatives of the relevant federal government agency the fhwa and the united states department of transportation .
the contractor shall provide the department with copies of all such records and materials upon request .
failure to cooperate with either state of federal authorities may result in refusal to issue proposals in accordance with subsection num refusal of proposals .
section num prosecution and progress num subletting of contract the department will not allow the contractor to sublet sell assign or otherwise dispose of the contract or any portion thereof or any of the contractors rights title or interest therein without the written or electronic consent of the state construction engineer or an authorized representative .
the contractor shall perform at least num percent of the contract amount based on the contract unit prices using its own organization unless the contract allows a greater percentage .
the department will consider the contractors own organization to include only workers employed and paid directly by the contractor equipment owned or rented by the contractor and materials purchased by the contractor for its use in performing contract work .
this does not include employees equipment or materials purchased by or incorporated into work of any subcontractor assignee or agent of the contractor .
the department considers the use of entire work crews or major components of work crews and equipment of another contractor to be subcontracting subject to approval by the resident engineer .
the department will not allow the contractor to include another contractors work crews or major components of such work crews on the contractors certified payroll .
at any location within the project where work is in progress by either the contractor or an approved subcontractor the contractor shall have a competent superintendent or supervisor who is an employee of the contractor responsible for all construction operations and who has full authority to direct performance of the work in accordance with contract requirements .
prosecution and progress num num all subcontracts shall incorporate the contract either by physical inclusion or by reference .
all subcontracts shall incorporate and include all federally imposed requirements pertaining to equal opportunity disadvantage business opportunity title vi of the civil rights act of num the davisbacon act prompt payment to subcontractors service companies service providers or material suppliers num c.f.r .
num and such other requirements as may be contractually imposed .
the department reserves the right to inspect all subcontract documents .
the contractor shall make all subcontracting documentation available for inspection at hisher usual place of business during normal business hours .
the contractor shall have subcontractors service companies or material suppliers acknowledge the inclusion of a fhwa form num as part of their agreement with the contractor .
the department will approve subcontracts only for entire contract pay items required by the contract by specified unit price and shall include all labor equipment usage materials and manufactured products necessary to complete the unit .
the department will determine the value of subcontracted work using the contract bid price of the subcontracted work unit .
the contractor shall obtain approval of each subcontract before the start of the work included in the subcontract .
the department will not allow labor and equipment only or labor only subcontracts unless otherwise required by the contract .
the department may not pay for work performed by an unapproved subcontractor .
the department will not recognize or approve second or third tier subcontractors .
the contractor and approved subcontractors may retain and use the services of specialized service providers if such services are reasonably necessary for the performance of contract work and if approved by the resident engineer .
the department considers specialized service providers to be companies or individuals that perform services that may require specialized knowledge experience equipment or any combination of these .
specialized services must be necessary to the completion of a portion or component of a work unit and may not be separately identified as a contract item .
the department will not include the cost of work performed by specialized service providers as subcontracted work for the purpose of calculating the subcontracted percentage of work .
specialized services include but are not limited to the following reinforcing steel placement rock blasting beam fabrication pier drilling welding concrete pumping profilographing bump grinding surveying and staking engineering and testing irrigation system or plumbing material hauling and watering .
num prosecution and progress num num if the contract identifies contract pay items as specialty items the department will allow approved subcontractors to perform the work and will deduct the cost of specialty items performed by subcontract from the total contract amount before calculating the amount of work the contract requires be performed by the contractor with its own organization .
specialty items are contract pay items that are specific to the contract and which are not normally found as a part of highway associated construction .
specialty items may require the services of skilled trades for construction of facilities which are ancillary to the highway and may include carpenters licensed plumbing and electrical tradesmen and other skilled craftsmen who are not normally involved in highway construction .
the contractor shall submit requests for permission to sublet or otherwise dispose of any portion of the contract work to the state construction engineer by means of department approved electronic media or in writing .
the contractor shall include in its request a statement showing that the organization subcontractor that will perform the work is particularly experienced and equipped for such work .
the contractor shall give assurance that the minimum wage for labor as stated in its proposal shall apply to labor performed on all work sublet .
no subcontracts or transfers of the contract shall in any case release the contractor of its liability under the contract and bonds .
should the contractor assign any of its right title or interest in the contract said assignment shall be made only with the full knowledge and written consent of the surety .
it is specifically understood that a violation of this subsection will constitute an act of default on the part of the contractor .
num notice to proceed and preconstruction conference the notice to proceed is the written authorization for the contractor to proceed with the contract work .
in no case shall work other than mobilization start before the department issues the notice to proceed .
the department will begin charging contract time from the time work actually starts but not later than the effective date of the notice to proceed .
provisions in the contract may establish projectspecific details regarding access to the work and time charges .
after the contractor receives the notice to proceed and before the start of construction the contractor and resident engineer shall hold a preconstruction conference .
the contractor shall have the following people present at the preconstruction conference the project superintendent other representatives or responsible officials who will be involved during the construction of the project and representatives of any subcontractors .
the resident engineer may invite officials of local county and municipal governments representatives of affected utility companies and other agencies to establish a working understanding and to provide for the coordination of the work among the various parties allowing the work to proceed with minimum delay .
the discussion of the project at the preconstruction conference may include but not be limited to issues regarding the following the contractors plans and schedules prosecution and progress num num location of the work beginning utilities right of way agreements affecting the construction compliance with permits that have been issued unusual conditions compliance with disadvantaged business enterprise dbe goals and other applicable requirements such as stormwater management pollution controls and other pertinent items .
the parties at the preconstruction conference may discuss contract items to ensure that all parties understand the type of materials required the method of construction and the method of measurement and payment .
num prosecution and progress the contractor shall provide sufficient materials equipment and labor to guarantee the completion of the project within the contract time .
the contractor shall submit an asplanned progress schedule to the resident engineer for review and acceptance before starting work .
the progress schedule will establish the contractors planned construction operations .
the resident engineer will use the progress schedule to monitor the progress of the work .
the progress schedule will provide for completion of the project within the contract time and will use all of the time provided by the contract .
the department will allow the contractor to provide a progress schedule in the form of an activities schedule chart asc and written narrative wn in accordance with subsection num.a activities schedule chart and written narrative or a critical path schedule in accordance with subsection num.b critical path method cpm schedule unless the contract specifically requires a cpm schedule .
a .
activities schedule chart and written narrative the asc and wn shall provide a detailed break down of the time working days or completion date involved in performing major construction activities for the duration of the project .
the asc shall be used for the coordination and department monitoring of major work in the contract including the activities of subcontractors vendors and suppliers .
num schedule requirements the contractor shall ensure that all ascs it submits to the department include the following a bar chart chronologically sequenced and time scaled with a number of activities appropriate to the project showing construction prosecution or preparation activities activity descriptions for each activity bar on the chart and activity durations by calendar days .
num written narratives the contractor shall ensure that all wns it submits to the department include the following num prosecution and progress num the proposed work process sequence showing major work activities required for the complete performance of all items of work under the contract including major shop drawing submittals permits fabrication delivery activities etc .
a description of readily identifiable work activities a description for each bar identifying the trade or entity performing the work the duration of the activity in work days and the location of the work and a description indicating work days per week holidays number of shifts per day number of hours per shift and major equipment to be used .
num preparation of initial schedule the contractor shall develop the initial asc and wn and submit two copies of each to the resident engineer at the preconstruction conference .
the department will not allow the construction time indicated by the asc and wn for the entire project or any milestone to exceed the contract time .
following the resident engineers initial review of the asc and wn the resident engineer and contractor shall meet for a joint review correction and adjustment of the schedule if required .
if necessary the resident engineer and the contractor will repeat this process however the contractor shall complete the initial schedule within num calendar days after the preconstruction conference .
if the contractor fails to provide an acceptable initial schedule by that date the department will withhold contract payments until the department receives an acceptable initial schedule .
num progress meetings the resident engineer and contractor shall hold progress meetings coinciding with submittal of progressive estimates to verify actual progress .
in addition the department may require jobsite progress meetings to address change orders time extensions if time extensions total at least num calendar days or other circumstances as directed by the resident engineer .
the contractor shall submit copies of revised progress schedules to the resident engineer .
b .
critical path method cpm schedule a cpm progress schedule shall employ a network analysis system as described below .
the contractor is responsible for developing and implementing this system for the planning and scheduling of construction .
as a minimum the contractor shall prepare the network analysis system in a form acceptable to the department .
the department will consider scheduling methods other than cpm on an individual basis .
the system shall consist of network diagrams computer mathematical analysis calendar and narrative .
the network diagram shall show the order and interdependence of activities and the sequence of the work to be accomplished as planned by the contractor in coordination with all subcontractors and other prime contractors .
the basic concept of the network diagram shall be followed to show how the start of a given activity is dependent on the completion of preceding activities and its completion restricts the start of following activities .
the detailed network activities shall include in addition to construction activities the submittal and approval of materials and shop drawings and the procurement installation and testing of materials and equipment that the resident engineer determines significant .
the system shall show early completion of certain portions of the project as required by the contract .
prosecution and progress num num the department will not allow activity durations longer than num working days unless otherwise approved by the resident engineer .
the department reserves the right to limit the number of activities on the schedule from num activities to num activities .
detailed networks shall show a continuous flow from left to right drafted on paper num in num mm wide and num in num mm long .
the drafted network diagram shall contain readable alphanumeric characters .
the network diagram arrangement shall allow sufficient room between diagram paths for red line modification of existing activity andor diagram arrangement .
the contractor shall ensure the diagram shows the following information for each activity identification number description and duration in calendar days .
the contractor shall ensure that the critical path is highlighted to distinguish it from other diagram paths .
the application software program used shall be capable of compiling all completed and partially completed activities .
the program shall be capable of accepting revised completion dates as modified by approved time adjustments and recalculating all tabulation dates and total float accordingly .
the software program shall be capable of listing the activities in sorts or schedules as follows in order of activity numbers .
by total float .
the contractor shall update the mathematical analysis of the network diagram monthly unless waived by the resident engineer in writing .
the cover sheet for each monthly update shall list the following state job number odot project number and description contractor name reporting period scheduled completion date and actual completion date and variation from schedule .
at the preconstruction conference the contractor shall submit a preliminary network analysis system defining the contractors planned operation for the first num calendar days after the date of the notice to proceed and shall indicate the contractors general approach for the balance of the project .
within num calendar days after the date of the preconstruction conference the contractor shall submit to the resident engineer a complete network analysis system consisting of the computer mathematical analysis and diagram unless extended in writing by the resident engineer .
the contractor shall submit four copies of the initial diagram calendar and computer analysis and four copies of the monthly updated computer analysis .
the resident engineer will review the detailed network analysis system for logic and conformance to the contract requirements including any special notations in the plans pertaining to sequence of operations .
within num calendar days after the resident num prosecution and progress num engineers receipt of the detailed network analysis system the contractor and the resident engineer shall meet for joint review correction and adjustment of the schedule if necessary .
the department will not allow the construction time as determined by the cpm schedule for the entire project or any milestone to exceed the contract time .
the contractor shall revise the schedule logic or activity durations if the schedule does not meet any milestone date or contract completion date .
after this joint meeting but within num calendar days of the resident engineer and contractor agreeing on schedule logic or activity duration changes the contractor shall submit to the resident engineer a revised schedule including four copies of the diagram an activity number order sort and a total float sort .
if necessary the resident engineer and the contractor will repeat this process however the contractor shall complete the initial schedule within num calendar days after the preconstruction conference .
if the contractor fails to provide an acceptable initial schedule by that date the department will withhold contract payments until the department receives an acceptable initial schedule .
the department and the contractor will hold monthly jobsite progress meetings to update the progress schedule .
the resident engineer will review the progress schedule update to verify start and finish dates of completed activities remaining duration of uncompleted activities and proposed revisions to logic time estimate or both .
it is the contractors responsibility to provide the department with the status of activities at these progress meetings and to provide the progress schedule updates once the resident engineer has verified the status of activities .
the contractor shall create new cpm activities to reflect any precise period of delays that will affect the contract completion date .
the contractor and the department will agree on the start date and the finish date of the delay activities and the logicdependent relationship to the activities of the affected predecessor and successor activities .
the contractor shall submit four copies of the progress schedule update illustrating the verified progress no later than the fifth day of each month .
the progress schedule update shall include an activity number sort a total float sort and a written narrative describing the critical path and logic revisions or modifications to the schedule including but not limited to the following changes in the method or manner of the work changes to the contract requirements extra work changes in activity durations and reasons for delay .
the department will not allow logic revisions or modifications without prior approval by the resident engineer .
if the contractor fails to provide a monthly network analysis system update by the date required above the department will withhold contract payments until the department receives the monthly network analysis system update .
the contractor shall also submit two copies of revised diagrams for the following delays to the completion of critical activities actual prosecution of the work that is significantly different than that represented on the schedule as determined by the resident engineer prosecution and progress num num additions deletions or revisions of activities required by contract modification and revisions to the schedules logic or calendar .
the resident engineer will only adjust the contract time in accordance with subsection num administration and extension of contract time .
as determined by computer analysis only delays in activities which affect milestone dates critical path or contract completion dates will be considered for a time extension under this subsection .
if the contractor seeks a time extension of any milestone or the contract completion date the contractor shall furnish documentation as required by the department to enable the department to determine whether a time extension is appropriate under the terms of the contract .
float is a commodity owned by the contract contractor and department and may be used by the department or contractor on a firstcome firstserve basis .
num limitation of operations the contractor shall perform construction operations to ensure the least interference with traffic regarding the location of detours and the provisions for handling traffic .
if the opening of a section of the project is essential to public convenience the resident engineer may direct the contractor to finish that section of the project before starting another section or sections .
num character of workers the contractor shall employ sufficient resources for prosecuting all classes of work in the manner and time required by the contract .
the contractor shall ensure all workers have sufficient skill and experience to properly perform their assigned work .
if a worker employed by the contractor or subcontractors does not perform the work in a proper and skillful manner or is intemperate or disorderly the contractor shall remove the worker from the project at the written request of the resident engineer and shall not be reemployed without the approval of the resident engineer .
if the contractor or subcontractor fails to remove the worker or fails to provide suitable and sufficient personnel for the proper prosecution of the work the resident engineer may suspend the work by written shut down order in accordance with subsection num suspension of work ordered by the resident engineer until the contractor or subcontractor removes the worker or provides sufficient personnel .
if the contractor fails to provide a qualified work force or supervision to properly prosecute work the department may refuse to issue proposal forms for future contracts in accordance with subsection num refusal of proposals .
num methods and equipment the contractor is responsible for the following providing and using equipment of sufficient size and mechanical condition to produce work that meets the contract requirements and ensuring the equipment used does not cause damage to the roadway adjacent property or other highways .
num prosecution and progress num num if the contract specifically requires methods and equipment the contractor is to use the contractor may not use other methods and equipment unless requested in writing and approved by the resident engineer .
the request shall include a description of the methods and equipment proposed and the reasons for changing from those required by the contract .
if the resident engineer approves the change the contractor is responsible for producing work meeting the contract requirements .
the resident engineer may if demonstrable improvement in the work or time savings occur change the following the basis of payment for the involved contract items or the contract time .
if the resident engineer determines that the work produced using the substituted methods or equipment does not meet the contract requirements the contractor shall discontinue use of the substitute methods or equipment and complete the remaining work using the methods and equipment required by the contract .
the contractor shall repair or remove and replace deficient work at no additional cost to the department .
num administration and extension of contract time a .
general the proposal forms and contract will state the contract time .
the resident engineer will provide a monthly statement time and diary report to the contractor showing the number of days charged to the contract for the preceding month and the number of days remaining for completion of the contract as of the end of the preceding month .
if the contractor disagrees with the statement the contractor shall submit a written protest to the resident engineer within num calendar days of receiving the statement and shall include reasons why it believes the statement to be incorrect .
if the contractor fails to submit the protest within num calendar days the contractor will waive all rights to protest that time charge .
a separate written protest of time charges submitted within the required num calendar day period is a requirement that must be satisfied before any corrections will be made to assessed contract time charges .
b .
calendar day contract if the contract time is on a calendar day basis it shall consist of the number of calendar days required by the contract counting from the effective date of the notice to proceed or from the date the contractor begins work whichever is earlier including all sundays holidays and nonwork days except as otherwise required by the contract .
the department will exclude time charges for all calendar days elapsing between effective dates of any orders of the resident engineer to suspend work and to resume work after suspensions not the fault of the contractor .
upon the contractors written request the resident engineer may suspend time charges and work from december num to the following february num .
if the contractor elects to work during this winter time suspension the resident engineer will charge for each day the contractor works .
the contractor shall continue to maintain the project work site during this or any other time suspension in accordance with subsection num maintenance during construction .
the resident engineer may suspend time charges once the project reaches substantial completion as defined in subsection num.a substantial completion .
prosecution and progress num num this suspension is contingent upon the contractors diligence in completing any remaining work .
the resident engineer will grant time extensions or suspensions for a calendar day contract that contains incentivedisincentive provisions for the time period subject to the incentivedisincentive provision in accordance with applicable contract provisions and subsection num incentivedisincentive for earlylate completion .
num extensions for adverse weather the department will consider the occurrence of adverse weather conditions during the contract time to be a basis for extending the contract time if the time or work is not already suspended for other reasons .
the resident engineer will determine extensions of the contract time for adverse weather conditions on a daily basis and will only extend the contract time if adverse weather prevents the performance of work activities critical to milestone or contract completion .
the contractor shall make every reasonable effort to minimize the impact of the adverse weather conditions .
the department will consider days designated by an appropriate authority as ozone alert days to be adverse weather days if that authority requires the contractor to suspend or delay work activities that are critical to milestone or contract completion .
the contractor shall make every reasonable effort to minimize the impact of ozone alert days .
the resident engineer may justify and document an extension to the contract time due to adverse weather by crediting an adverse weather day on the monthly time and diary report with an explanation for the credit .
the contractor may file a written protest of the time charges indicated on the monthly report in accordance with subsection num.a administration and extension of contract time general .
if the resident engineer did not justify and document the extension to the contract time on the time and diary report the resident engineer will justify and document the extension with a change order .
num extension for nonweather related delays beyond the contractors control the department may consider the occurrence of delays to the contractors operations that are beyond the contractors control to be a basis for extending the contract time if the time or work is not already suspended for other reasons .
the contractor shall provide written notice to the resident engineer within num calendar days of the start of any delay the contractor believes justifies an extension to the contract time .
within num calendar days of the end of the delay the contractor shall submit a written request to the resident engineer for the extension to the contract time that includes reasons for the extensions and supporting documentation .
if the contractor fails to provide the written notice or submit the written request within the time allowed the resident engineer will not consider the request for the delay .
the contractor may only request extensions to the contract time for the delays that meet the following criteria beyond the contractors control not the fault of the contractor or its subcontractors suppliers and vendors and num prosecution and progress num prevent or impede the performance of work activities that are critical to milestone or contract completion .
the department will base the number of calendar days in the contract time as awarded on the original quantities in accordance with subsection num interpretation of quantities and bid proposal .
if satisfactory completion of the contract requires additional quantities work greater than those stated in the proposal forms the resident engineer may increase the contract time commensurate with the amount and difficulty of the additional work .
the contractor may use scheduling methods described in subsection numa unless scheduling methodology prescribed in subsection numb is required by the contract .
the resident engineer will only consider time extensions for additional work or delays beyond the contractors control that adversely impact the contractors schedule and sequence of work and extend the contract completion past the contract time .
the department will not consider the following contractor arguments as grounds for an extension to the contract time the proposal forms and the contract did not state a sufficient contract time or previously unprotested time charges were incorrect .
extended contract time approved by the resident engineer shall be in full force and affect the same as though it were the original contract time .
if the resident engineer determines that an extension to the contract time that is due to nonweather delays is justified the resident engineer will justify and document the extension with a change order .
c. fixed completion date contract if the contract time is a fixed completion date the contractor shall satisfactorily complete all work under the contract on or before that date in accordance with subsection num project completion and acceptance .
the contractor may only request extensions to the fixed completion date for the delays that meet the following criteria beyond the contractors control not the fault of the contractor or its subcontractors suppliers and vendors and prevent or impede the performance of work activities that are critical to milestone or contract completion .
the department will not allow extension to the fixed completion date caused by adverse weather foreseeable causes or conditions under the control of the contractor .
subsection num.b calendar day contract shall not apply to any contract containing a fixed completion date .
if the resident engineer determines that an extension to the fixed completion date is justified the resident engineer will justify and document the extension with a change order .
d. delays to contract time all requests for adjustment to contract time shall identify delays actually encountered that prevent or impede the performance of work activities that are critical to milestone or contract completion in accordance with subsection num.bnum extension for nonweather related delays beyond the contractors control or subsection num.c fixed completion date contract at a point in time when such prosecution and progress num num work was scheduled to be in progress .
the contractor may only use a progress schedule submitted to the department in accordance with subsection num.a activities schedule chart and written narrative or subsection num.b critical path method cpm schedule before the start of the delayed work to support the contractors request for an extension to the contract time or delay damages .
num excusable noncompensable delay the department will consider delays caused by the following for extensions to the contract time acts of god acts of the public enemy fires floods epidemics quarantine restrictions strikes freight embargoes documented national or regional material shortages which are industry wide state or national emergency declarations unusually severe weather and delays not caused by the contractors fault or negligence .
delays necessitated by compliance with certain federally mandated programs that occur after the contract is let may provide a basis for an excusable delay .
the department will not allow additional compensation to the contractor for such delays .
num compensable delay the resident engineer will consider additional compensation for department caused delays that prevent the start of work on successive activities and will adversely impact contract completion .
float time in the scheduling of successive work elements is a shared commodity and the department will not pay the contractor for the use of float time .
the department will pay additional compensation by change order in accordance with subsection num compensation for project delays .
num notification of delay within num calendar days of the occurrence of a delay the contractor shall provide written notification to the resident engineer of such a delay and indicate that a request for delay consideration will be filed with the department .
num procedures following notification of delay after notifying the resident engineer of the request for delay consideration the contractor shall keep daily records of all costs for nonsalaried labor material and equipment for all operations affected by the delay .
the contractor shall maintain a daily record of each affected operation including station locations .
the resident engineer will also maintain a daily record of the affected operations .
on the first work day of each week the contractor and resident engineer will meet and compare their previous weeks num prosecution and progress num num daily records and the contractor shall prepare and submit written reports to the resident engineer containing the following information number of days behind schedule a summary of all operations that have been delayed or will be delayed in the case of a compensable delay the contractor shall explain how the departments act or omission delayed each operation and estimate the amount of time required to complete the project and contractor may request compensation for extra costs incurred as identified in subsection num differing site conditions changes and extra work .
the contractor shall provide written notice to the resident engineer within num calendar days of the meeting and shall include any disagreements between the records .
if the contractor fails to meet with the resident engineer to compare daily records or to report disagreements between the records the department will consider the resident engineers records to be accurate .
the department will not allow requests for delay costs allegedly incurred before the contractor notified the resident engineer .
num procedures following completion of work alleged to be delayed the contractor shall submit to the resident engineer a report containing the following information within num calendar days of project completion or completion of phase of work allegedly delayed a description of the operations that were delayed and the documentation and explanation of the reason for the delay including all reports prepared for the contractor by consultants if used an asbuilt chart or other graphical depiction of how the operations were delayed and an item by item measurement and explanation of extra costs requested for reimbursement due to the delay .
the resident engineer will review the contractors report and available inspection diaries records and reports .
the resident engineer will provide a written decision to the contractor within num calendar days of the receipt of the contractors report .
the decision will contain notification of any additional time the resident engineer will grant .
in the case of compensable delays if the resident engineer determines that the department is responsible for delays to the contractors operation the resident engineers written decision will identify the nature and extent of any delay and the compensation which may be due to the contractor in accordance with subsection num compensation for project delays .
num incentivedisincentive for earlylate completion if it is in the publics interest to complete the project at the earliest possible date the contract may include an incentivedisincentive provision detailing applicable dates and work stages covered by the provision .
for each calendar day the project or section of the project is opened to unrestricted continuous traffic before or after the date required by the contract the department will prosecution and progress num num increase or decrease its payment to the contractor by the amount established by the contract .
the department considers unrestricted continuous traffic to mean no lane closures will be granted for any of the contractors operations necessary to complete the project and that traffic will follow the final lane configuration as required by the plans for the finished surface for the roadway with lane striping and permanent safety features completed .
the resident engineer will determine when the project or section of the project is complete to open the roadway to unrestricted continuous traffic .
subsection num failure to complete on time relating to liquidated damages will remain in effect and apply to the total contract time .
concurrent liquidated damages and disincentive assessments may occur .
the department will pay the contractor the amount of incentive in a progressive estimate as funds are encumbered for such payment .
once the contractor earns an incentive the resident engineer will initiate a change order for presentation at the next available commission meeting to request any additional funds necessary for payment of the incentive .
the resident engineer will deduct the amount of disincentive from the next progressive estimate .
should the amount of disincentive or liquidated damages exceed the amount due for work performed in a specific pay period the contractor shall reimburse the department in the amount of the difference within num calendar days of notice that payment is due .
under an incentivedisincentive provision the engineer may grant time extensions for the following when such occurrences adversely affect work on the critical path of the cpm schedule significant change that results in quantity overruns in accordance with subsection num significant changes in the character of work significant error in the plans that delays work on the critical path of the project unknown subsurface utilities and delays that are demonstrably outside the control of the contractor caused by governmental agency or railroad company inactivity .
under an incentivedisincentive provision the resident engineer will not grant time extensions for the following labor disputes or delays in material deliveries unless it can be shown that such disputes or delays are industry wide and adverse weather conditions .
num failure to complete on time for each calendar day the work remains incomplete after the contract time the resident engineer will deduct from the amount due the contractor in accordance with table num schedule of liquidated damages .
liquidated damages are not to be considered as a penalty but rather a recovery of costs incurred by the department due to the added cost of engineering inspection testing and other extra expenditures of public funds made necessary by the contractors failure to complete the work within the contract time .
the resident engineer assesses liquidated damages as an alternative to num prosecution and progress num num the more difficult and time consuming calculation of determining the actual department costs .
table num schedule of liquidated damages contract amount daily assessment rate num num num num num num num num num num num num num the department does not waive its rights under the contract by allowing the contractor or surety to continue and finish work after the contract time has elapsed .
if the resident engineer determines the work is substantially complete and is in a condition for safe and convenient use by the traveling public the resident engineer may terminate the assessment of all or any portion of the accrued liquidated damages except for fixed completion date contracts .
num default of contract the engineer may declare the contract in default and advise the contractor and the surety of the actions required for remedy if the contractor does any of the following fails to start the work by the date required by the contract fails to perform the work with sufficient resources including qualified onsite supervision skilled personnel and equipment necessary to assure the timely completion of the work fails to perform the work in accordance with the contract requirements neglects or refuses to remove and replace rejected materials or unacceptable work discontinues the prosecution of the work fails to resume work within a reasonable time after written notice to do so or becomes insolvent is declared bankrupt or commits any act of bankruptcy or insolvency allows any final judgment to remain unsatisfied for a period of num calendar days makes an assignment for the benefit of creditors fails to comply with contract requirements regarding minimum wage payments or eeo requirements or is convicted of any felony involving fraud moral turpitude or offenses against the public contracting laws of the united states or any state of the united states .
for purposes of this subsection the department will consider entry of a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to be equivalent to a conviction .
the engineer will provide written notice to the contractor and surety of such delay neglect or default .
if the contractor or surety does not proceed in accordance with the notice within num calendar days of receipt the department has full power and authority without violating the contract to take the prosecution of the work from the contractor .
the department may appropriate or use materials at the project site and enter into an agreement with another contractor for the completion of the remaining work .
if the contractor has obtained materials for use on the project and has not incorporated the materials into the work the department may purchase acceptable materials from the contractor at actual cost .
prosecution and progress num num the department will determine the methods used for completion of the contract .
the department will deduct the following from monies due the contractor for completed work all costs and charges incurred by the department as a result of the default including the cost of completing the work under contract and any applicable liquidated damages or disincentives .
if such costs exceed the sum that would have been payable under the contract the contractor and surety shall be liable and shall pay the department the balance of such costs .
if the department determines after termination of the contractors right to proceed that the contractor was not in default the rights and obligations of the parties will be the same as if the termination had been issued for the convenience of the department in accordance with subsection num termination of contract for convenience of the department .
the damages to which a contractor may be entitled as a result of the improper default termination will be limited to appropriate amounts for the items listed in subsection num termination of contract for convenience of the department .
num termination of contract for convenience of the department if the engineer determines that a termination is in the departments interest the department may terminate the entire contract or any portion of the contract .
the engineer will provide a written notice of termination to the contractor specifying the extent of termination and the effective date .
a. submittals and procedures after receipt of a notice of termination the contractor shall immediately proceed with the following obligations stop work as specified in the notice place no further subcontracts or orders for materials services or facilities except as necessary to complete the continued portion of the contract terminate all subcontracts to the extent they relate to the work terminated and settle all outstanding liabilities and termination settlement proposals arising from the termination of the contract .
the contractor shall transfer title and deliver to the department the following items fabricated partially fabricated or unfabricated parts work in progress completed work supplies other material produced or acquired for the work terminated and completed or partially completed plans drawings information and other property that if the contract had been completed would be required to be provided to the department .
the contractor is responsible for the following tasks upon notice of termination complete performance of the work not terminated num prosecution and progress num inventory acceptable materials that the contractor has obtained for use on the project and has not incorporated into the work in conjunction with the resident engineer at a date chosen by the resident engineer and take any action necessary or that the resident engineer may direct for the protection and preservation of the property related to the contract that is in the possession of the contractor and in which the department has or may acquire an interest .
b .
settlement provisions if the engineer orders termination of all or part of the contract effective on a certain date the department will pay for completed items of work at the contract unit price as of that date .
the department will pay for contract items entirely eliminated by such termination in accordance with subsection num payment for cancelled items .
the department will pay for partially completed work either at agreed prices or in accordance with the following num additional costs within num calendar days of the effective termination date the contractor shall submit a claim for additional damages or costs not covered in the contract .
such claim may include the following cost items reasonable idle equipment time mobilization efforts bidding and project investigative costs overhead expenses attributable to the project terminated subcontractor costs not otherwise paid actual idle labor cost if work is stopped in advance of termination date guaranteed payments for private land usage as part of the contract and other costs or damages documented by the contractor .
the department will not consider anticipated profits as part of any settlement .
the contractor and the department may agree upon the whole or any part of the amount due the contractor because of the termination .
the amount may include a reasonable allowance for profit on work completed .
the agreed amount may not exceed the total contract price as reduced by the amount of payments previously made and the contract price of work not terminated .
the department will amend the contract to include this agreed amount and will pay the contractor the agreed amount .
num additional cost review if the contractor and the department fail to agree on the whole amount due the contractor because of the termination of work the department will pay the amounts determined as follows without duplicating any amounts agreed to in accordance with subsection num.bnum additional costs num .
for contract work performed before the effective date of termination the total of the following num.the cost of work performed num.the cost of settling and paying termination settlement proposals under terminated subcontracts not included in the cost of work performed that are properly chargeable to the terminated portion of the contract and prosecution and progress num num num.a sum as profit on the costs determined by the department in accordance with subsection num.bnum additional costs to be fair and reasonable .
the department will not allow profit under subsection num.b settlement provisions if the contractors costs incurred on work performed exceed the bid item payments made num .
the reasonable costs of settlement of the terminated work including the following num.accounting legal clerical and other expenses reasonably necessary for the preparation of termination settlement proposals and support data num.the termination and settlement of subcontracts excluding the amounts of such settlements and num.storage transportation and other costs incurred reasonably necessary for the preservation protection or disposition of the termination inventory num .
the fair market value of termination inventory shall not include items or material that are destroyed lost stolen or damaged to the extent as to be undeliverable to the department or a buyer unless the department expressly accepts the risk of such loss theft or damage and num .
the department will calculate the amount due the contractor under this clause and will deduct the following num.all unliquidated advance or other payments to the contractor under the contract num.any claim that the department has against the contractor under the contract and num.the agreed price for or the proceeds from the sale of materials supplies or other items acquired and sold by the contractor not recovered by or credited to the department .
c. partial termination if the termination is partial the contractor may submit a proposal to the department for and request review of the unit prices on the continued portion of the contract .
the department will review unit prices for the continued portion of the contract and will revise such prices as necessary .
the contractor shall submit the proposal and request for a review of unit prices within num calendar days from the effective date of termination unless extended in writing by the resident engineer .
the department may under the terms and conditions it prescribes make partial payments and payments against costs incurred by the contractor for the terminated portion of the contract if these payments will not exceed the amount due the contractor .
the contractor shall maintain all project records and make them available for audit to the extent necessary to verify amount and value of each item claimed .
project records include all books and other evidence bearing on the contractors costs and expenses under the contract .
the contractor shall make these records and documents available in accordance with subsection num project records .
num prosecution and progress num num prosecution and progress termination of the contract or portion of the contract shall not relieve the contractor of contractual responsibilities for the work completed nor shall it relieve the surety of its obligation for any just claim arising out of the work performed .
num lane rental if required by the contract the contractor shall pay a rental fee to the department to restrict traffic flow on operable highway lanes .
the purpose of this requirement is to encourage the contractor to perform the work during nonpeak traffic periods and to reduce traffic congestion during designated time periods .
the department will impose lane rental fees for all designated time periods for traffic lanes that are totally or partially impaired by contractor operations .
section num measurements and payment num measurement of quantities a .
general the resident engineer will measure all work completed under the contract in accordance with the united states standard measure or the modernized metric international system of units si .
the department defines a station as num ft num km when used as a definition or term of measurement .
the resident engineer will and the contractor shall use methods of measurement and calculation that are generally recognized as conforming to good engineering practice for the determination of quantities of material provided and of work performed under the contract .
for area calculations unless otherwise required by the contract the resident engineer will make longitudinal measurements horizontally and will use the neat dimensions as shown on the plans or as modified by the resident engineer for transverse measurements .
the department will not deduct for individual fixtures with an area of num ft² num m² or less .
if the area unit for measurement and payment is on an acre hectare basis the resident engineer will take measurements on the slope of the ground to calculate the actual surface area in acres hectares for payment .
the resident engineer will measure structures using the neat lines shown on the plans or as modified by the resident engineer to fit field conditions .
unless otherwise shown on the plans the resident engineer will measure items measured by the linear foot meter such as pipe culverts guardrail and underdrains as specified in the method of measurement subsection for the pay item in the relevant section of the specifications .
the specifications will specify and the resident engineer will measure the thickness of plates and galvanized sheet used in the manufacture of corrugated metal pipe metal plate pipe culvert and arches and metal cribbing in decimal fractions in inches millimeters .
the measurement of wire will be by size number in accordance with aashto m num unless otherwise specified .
the department defines a ton as a short ton consisting of num lb and a metric ton as a num kg .
the contractor shall ensure use of competent qualified personnel to weigh materials measured or proportioned by weight on accurate scales at locations approved by measurements and payment num num the resident engineer .
if material is shipped by rail the resident engineer may accept the rail car weight provided that the department will only pay for the actual weight of material however the resident engineer will not accept car weights for material introduced into mixing plants .
each day the contractor shall weigh empty trucks used to haul material paid by weight at such times as the resident engineer directs .
the contractor shall ensure that each truck bears a plainly legible identification mark .
the contractor shall ensure that scales used to weigh truck loads of material paid by weight are adequate to weigh the entire gross load at one weighing on a single set of scales .
the contractor shall ensure the scales are inspected and certified at least every six months or more often as the resident engineer may deem necessary to ensure accuracy .
the contractor shall have on hand at least ten num lb num kg weights for testing scales .
the contractor may use certified commercial scales .
instead of weighing truck loads of material on single sets of scales measuring the gross load the contractor may use a departmentapproved automatic batch weight and printer system .
the approved automatic batch weight and printer system shall be electronically controlled and capable of determining the net batch weight of material being delivered to the transporting truck .
a weigh ticket containing all the required identifying information shall accompany each load as evidence of the weight .
the automatic batch weight and printer system is subject to the same calibration inspection and certification requirements as for the truck scales .
the contractor shall ensure material measured by volume in the hauling vehicle are hauled in vehicles approved by the usdot and the department and measured at the point of delivery .
vehicles used for this purpose may be of any size or type approved by the resident engineer provided that the body is of such shape that the actual volume may be readily and accurately measured .
the contractor shall load all vehicles to at least the strikeoff level or capacity established by the resident engineer if materials are delivered to the project .
the department may require the contractor to level the material in hauling vehicles as deemed necessary and approved by the resident engineer to verify the volume of material delivered to the project .
the resident engineer will establish the capacity of all vehicles and the contractor shall ensure that the capacity is plainly marked on each vehicle .
the department will not allow the capacity or marking to be changed without prior approval by the resident engineer .
if requested by the contractor in writing and approved by the resident engineer material specified to be measured by the cubic yard or ton cubic meter or metric ton may be converted to the other measurement units as appropriate .
the resident engineer will determine the factors for conversion from weight measurement units to volume measurement units and the contractor shall agree to the conversion factors before the resident engineer uses the method of measurement for the pay quantity .
the resident engineer will measure bituminous material by the gallon liter or ton metric ton .
the resident engineer will measure volume at num f num c or correct to the volume at num f num c using astm d num for asphalt and astm d num for tar .
the resident engineer will use net certified scale weights or weights based on certified volumes in the case of rail shipments as a basis of measurement subject to correction when bituminous material has been lost from the car or the distributor wasted or otherwise not incorporated in the work .
num measurements and payment num if the contract requires liquid asphalt measured by the gallon liter and the contractor delivers the liquid asphalt to the project with certified weight bill of lading the resident engineer will convert the weight of the liquid asphalt used in the completed and accepted work to gallons liters using a conversion factor approved by the departments central laboratory .
the resident engineer will measure the volume or weight of the portion of any load delivered to the work and not used in the work in the vicinity of the project and will make the necessary deduction to determine the actual volume or weight of liquid asphalt used in the work .
liquid asphalt when measured by weight and converted to gallons liters shall be paid by the gallon liter .
the contractor shall provide all necessary means and assistance for measuring and calibrating distributors and tanks for determining the quantity of material in the distributors and tanks at any time .
the resident engineer may require that the contractor calibrate distributors before use on the project and at any other time the resident engineer deems necessary .
the contractor shall provide a calibrated gauge strapping stick for each distributor so the resident engineer can determine the volume at any content level .
the contractor shall place the distributor on a level area for these measurements .
the resident engineer will measure portland cement by the pound kilogram or ton metric ton as appropriate .
the department defines lump sum as a pay unit that reflects complete payment for the work of the relevant pay item as required by the contract .
if the contract requires a complete structure or structural unit in effect lump sum work as the pay unit the department considers all necessary fittings and accessories to be included in the contract unit price for the relevant pay item .
if the contract requires standard manufactured items such as fence wire plates rolled shapes and pipe conduit and these items are characterized by standard identifications such as gauge unit weight and section dimensions the department will consider these standard identifications to be nominal weights or dimensions .
unless more stringently controlled by tolerances in cited specifications the department will accept manufacturing tolerances established by the relevant industries for the relevant work .
b .
plan quantities if the contract requires payment of a contract pay item or of a portion of a contract pay item on a plan quantity basis the quantities for payment will be those shown on the plans with deductions from or additions to plan quantities resulting from approved modifications to the plan quantities by change order .
if the contractor and resident engineer disagree on the accuracy of the plan quantities either party may before any work is started that would affect the measurement request in writing that the quantities involved be measured .
the request must be accompanied with adequate information data and calculations to substantiate the belief that the plan quantity is incorrect .
if the contractor fails to provide information data and calculations sufficient to substantiate its claim of the incorrect plan quantity the department will only pay for the quantity required by the contract and approved modifications to the plan quantities at the contract unit price .
if the resident engineer finds the plan quantity to be incorrect the department will base measurements and payment num num acceptance and payment on the actual quantities measured in place or the corrected plan quantity as documented by change order .
num scope of payment the contractor shall accept the payment from the department as herein provided in the contract as full payment for the following providing all materials equipment labor tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work performing all work required by the contract loss or damage arising from the nature of the work or from the action of the elements or from any unforeseen difficulties except as provided in subsection num contractors responsibility for utility property and services which may be encountered during the prosecution of the work until the final acceptance by the resident engineer all risks of every description connected with the prosecution of the work all expenses incurred in consequence of the suspension or discontinuance of the work in accordance with subsection num compensation for project delays any infringement of patent trademark or copyright and completing the work as required by the contract .
the payment of any progressive estimate will not relieve the contractor of its obligations to repair or remove and replace defective work or material .
num payment for increased or decreased quantities the department will pay for actual quantities of the work that vary from the plan quantities required by the contract at the original contract unit price or in accordance with subsection num significant changes in the character of work except as provided in subsection num.b plan quantities .
unless specifically required by the contract the department will not adjust payment to the contractor for increases or decreases in the cost of the work .
sales tax reimbursements will be available in accordance with the applicable rules and regulations of the oklahoma tax commission .
num differing site conditions changes and extra work a .
general if the contractor has notified the resident engineer in accordance with subsection num notification of differing site conditions changes and extra work and the resident engineer and the contractor agree that differing site conditions exist significant changes in the character of work will be required or extra work will be performed that was not included with the scope of the contract the department will pay for such conditions changes and extra work using the following methods as appropriate contract unit prices unit prices agreed upon in the order authorizing the work or lump sum amount agreed upon in the order authorizing work .
num measurements and payment num b .
submitting a claim if the contractor and the resident engineer disagree on a method for evaluation and compensation for differing site conditions significant changes in the character of work or extra work the contractor shall submit a fully documented itemized claim in accordance with subsection num claims for adjustment that lists the costs incurred by the contractor in prosecuting the disputed work .
in its claim the contractor shall segregate all cost listings for disputed work and the supporting documentation from nondisputed work and shall clearly identify the disputed work on the cost listings and supporting documentation by date stationing and type of work .
the contractor may only include cost items defined in subsection num.bnum labor through subsection num.bnum miscellaneous in its request for additional payment .
num labor the contractor may request additional payment for the actual costs incurred by the contractor for labor that is directly attributable to the disputed work .
in the support of the labor costs the contractor shall submit certified time sheets detailing the name of each laborer or supervisor the classification the date of the work the daily hours the total hours the wage rates and extensions .
the contractor may include an additional amount equal to num percent num percent for overhead and num percent for profit of the labor costs attributable to the disputed work .
num materials the contractor may request additional payment for the actual costs incurred by the contractor for materials approved by the resident engineer and used in performance of the disputed work including transportation .
in support of the material costs the contractor shall provide itemized invoices prepared by the materials supplier .
the contractor may include an additional amount equal to num percent num percent for overhead and num percent for profit of the material costs attributable to this disputed work .
num equipment the contractor may request additional payment for the actual costs incurred by the contractor for machinery or special equipment other than small tools approved by the resident engineer and used in performance of the disputed work .
the department will determine the maximum allowable rate as listed in the most current edition of the rental rate blue book published by equipment watch .
the department will calculate the hourly rental rate in accordance with the following equation num o a r m h where h hourly rental rate m monthly rate r regional adjustment a age adjustment and o operating costs .
measurements and payment num num the department will only pay for those pieces of equipment necessary for completion of the disputed work for the period of time that the disputed work was actually in progress .
additionally if the resident engineer directs the contractor to hold equipment on the job on a standby basis the department may pay the contractor at a rate equal to num percent of the established hourly rental rate minus operating costs .
the department will limit payment for standby equipment to no more than num hr per day and no more than num hr per week .
in support of the contractors request for compensation for equipment the contractor shall submit a listing of all equipment used in completion of the disputed work or held by direction of the resident engineer in the standby condition by type manufacturer date of manufacture model type of fuel used horsepower rating attachments and any other information required to determine the proper rate .
the contractor shall also submit daily hours total hours and extensions .
the total hourly rental rate the department will pay for any one piece of equipment will be limited to the original purchase price listed in the green guide for construction equipment published by equipment watch .
if the total hourly rental rate for any one piece of equipment is limited by the original purchase price the department will reimburse the contractor for the operating cost per hour for each hour of actual use .
the contractor may include an additional amount equal to num percent num percent for additional administrative costs and num percent for profit of the cost of equipment used in disputed work or held in standby condition .
num bonds insurance taxes and benefits the contractor may request additional payment for increases in the cost of premiums for property damage and liability insurance workers compensation insurance as well as unemployment insurance contributions and social security taxes directly attributable to the disputed work in accordance with subsection num.bnuma bonds through subsection num.bnumf employee fringe benefits .
a bonds the contractor may request an additional amount equal to num percent of the total of the labor materials and equipment costs less overhead and profit as determined in accordance with subsection num.bnum labor subsection num.bnum materials and subsection num.bnum equipment for increases to bonding costs .
binsurance the contractor may request an additional amount equal to the actual costs incurred by the contractor for property damage and liability insurance for the period the disputed work was in progress .
the department reserves the right to require documentation to support property damage and liability insurance rates .
c workers compensation the contractor may request an additional amount equal to the actual costs incurred by the contractor for each worker performing disputed work at the rate paid by the contractor for workers compensation coverage for the additional costs of workers compensation during the period the disputed work was in num measurements and payment num progress .
the department reserves the right to require documentation to support workers compensation rates .
dunemployment insurance contribution the contractor may request an additional amount equal to num percent of actual labor costs less overhead and profit as determined in accordance with subsection num.bnum labor for the additional costs of unemployment insurance contribution during the period the disputed work was in progress .
e social security taxes the contractor may request an additional amount equal to num percent of actual labor costs less overhead and profit as determined in accordance with subsection num.bnum labor for the additional costs of social security taxes for labor attributable to the disputed work .
f employee fringe benefits the contractor may request an additional amount equal to num percent of actual labor costs less overhead and profit as determined in accordance with subsection num.bnum labor for the additional costs of employee fringe benefits incurred by the contractor for labor during the period the disputed work was in progress .
num subcontracted work if the disputed work is of a nature that it is normally performed by a subcontractor in the highway industry and is subcontracted by the contractor the contractor shall ensure that the subcontractor provides documentation in accordance with subsection num.bnum labor subsection num.bnum materials subsection num.bnum equipment and subsection num.bnum bonds insurance taxes and benefits .
the contractor may request an additional amount of up to num percent for overhead on the subcontracted work .
num work of a nonhighway construction nature if the disputed work was performed by a contractor or a subcontractor not in the highway industry and was performed by workers of a specialized trade or business the contractor may submit invoices for costs incurred for such services including an additional amount of up to num percent for overhead .
num miscellaneous the department will not pay for other overhead and general expense costs of any kind or the cost of any item not specifically and expressly included in subsection num.b submitting a claim .
c. significant change of major item if a major item is significantly changed in accordance with subsection num significant changes to the character of work either the department or the contractor may request a price adjustment .
num significant underrun if a major item is significantly changed to decrease quantities the contractor may request a price adjustment to recover costs which would have been prorated measurements and payment num num per unit on the larger quantity but due to the quantity reduction are now unrecoverable .
the cost which may be recovered by adjusted price are overhead costs associated with labor materials equipment and subcontracted work at the rates specified in subsection num.b submitting a claim property damage and liability insurance as allowed in subsection num.bnum bonds insurance taxes and benefits and other miscellaneous documented costs .
num significant overrun if a major item is significantly changed to increase quantities the department may request a price adjustment to reflect economies achieved by the contractor through reduction in cost per unit for the increased quantity .
the cost which may be recovered by adjusted price are material cost savings overhead cost savings cost savings resulting from increased unit production rate and other miscellaneous costs that were included in the unit price bid such as mobilization .
num payment for cancelled items the department will pay for canceled items in accordance with subsection num significant changes in the character of work and the following the department will pay the contractor for acceptable materials ordered by the contractor or delivered to the project subsequent to the award of the contract and before the date of cancellation alteration or suspension of the work by order of the resident engineer at the actual cost to the contractor .
upon payment these materials become the property of the department .
the contractor shall immediately submit to the resident engineer certified statements covering all expenditures in preparation for work on any canceled item if such preparation has no value to the remaining contract pay items .
the contractor may request a proportionate amount for the preparation costs based on the portion of the contract amount over which such preparation would ordinarily be distributed when other contract items are included in that preparation .
num progress payments the resident engineer will make progressive estimates for the material complete in place and for the amount of acceptable work performed in accordance with the contract during the current period of time since the preceding estimate with the value of this work calculated at the contract unit prices .
the resident engineer may withhold payment of progressive estimates if the contractor fails to timely comply with contract requirements .
these requirements include but are not limited to the following progress schedules certified payrolls work plans and shop drawings materials certifications and storm water management practices .
num measurements and payment num num the resident engineer will make monthly progressive estimates except if the value of the work completed in half a month is equal to num or more the resident engineer may make semimonthly progressive estimates .
the resident engineer will not make a progressive estimate except for the final estimate if the value of the work completed is less than num .
the estimates are approximate only and all progressive estimates and payments are subject to correction in any estimate following discovery of an error .
if the resident engineer or contractor discovers any defective work or material or any overpayment based on quantity or unit price or if the resident engineer reasonably doubts the integrity of any part of completed work before the final acceptance and payment the resident engineer will deduct an amount equal to the value of the defective work or overpayment from the first estimate made after the discovery of such defect or overpayment .
the resident engineer will not include this amount in subsequent estimates until the contractor corrects the defect or addresses the resident engineers doubt .
the resident engineer will determine the value of the suspect or defective work and overpayment using quantities or unit prices established in the contract .
num payment for material on hand the department may pay the contractor for acceptable material stockpiled on the project at other approved or designated locations or at a plant site required for contractors operations as approved by the department .
the department will not pay for material on hand until after it issues the notice to proceed .
payment for material on hand does not constitute final acceptance .
the department will pay for this material in accordance with departments procedure in subsection num.a payment before incorporation through subsection num.f payment confirmation .
a .
payment before incorporation the department may pay for material purchased by the contractor before the material are actually incorporated into the project under the following conditions the contractor specifically purchased the material for incorporation into the work the material meets the contract requirements the contractor delivered the material to the project other approved locations or an approved fabricators yard the contractor will store the material longer than num calendar days the material is not living perishable or susceptible to degradation through weather or other natural phenomenon through the anticipated period of storage and the contractor can verify the purchase of the material with paid invoices .
b. stockpiled material limitation the department will limit the quantity of each type of stockpiled material considered for payment to that amount required for the project and the payment will not exceed each stockpiled materials pro rata share of the contract item or items required by the contract .
payment to the contractor for stockpiled materials does not relieve the contractor of responsibility for replacement of those materials if the stockpiled materials are lost or damaged .
measurements and payment num num c. blended stockpiled material the department will limit the payment for stockpiled material that is to be blended with other material to durable bulky material .
the department will pay for such material if the total value of the material exceeds num and will not pay more than num percent of the contract unit price of the relevant contract pay item .
d. invoiced items the department will pay only for separately invoiced items that are specifically linked to a contract pay item .
the department will limit the payment for individual items or like items that collectively have a gross value greater than num and that are specifically required for a contract pay item .
the department will not pay more than num percent of the contract unit price of the relevant contract pay item .
e. raw structural steel num general to obtain payment for raw structural steel delivered to the fabricators the contractor shall submit to the resident engineer a request for payment of materials on hand including the following items an itemized receipt for the structural steel signed by the fabricator to acknowledge delivery of the steel at the fabricating yard or a notarized statement by the fabricator that certifies that all items shown on the attached itemized invoice from the steel mill has been delivered to the fabricators yard an itemized invoice prepared by the steel mill listing all structural steel items for which the contractor seeks payment that indicates the following price for each item total invoice price and acknowledgement from the steel mill that the contractor has paid the total invoice price a notarized materials certificate prepared by the steel mill that attests to the quality of the structural steel and states that the steel meets the quality standards required by the contract .
subsection num plant inspection subsection num field office or laboratory and subsection num foreign materials also will apply as appropriate and the department reserves the right to do inspections for material inventory and will deduct those costs from the estimate paid to the contractor as required by the contract .
num delivery procedure the contractor shall ensure that all structural steel material are delivered to the fabricators yard in accordance with the following delivery procedures maintain structural steel material separate from other material and inventories held in the fabricators yard mark by means of paint or other indelible marking with a unique identifying number that can be readily correlated to the project number and num measurements and payment num num fully account for the structural steel material throughout the fabrication process to prevent intermixing with general fabricator inventory and possible diversion of the material to another project .
num payment procedure upon receipt of a properly prepared request for payment of materials on hand including all supporting documents the resident engineer will initiate procedures to pay the contractor as a progress payment for the unfabricated structural steel after delivery to the fabricators yard .
the department will not pay more than num percent of the contract unit price of the relevant contract pay item .
num financing statement prepare and submit a duly executed financing statement uccnum in accordance with oklahoma statute title numa section num et seq .
the financing statement shall show the following the project number for which the steel will be used the name and address of the fabricator to whom the steel was delivered the fabricator as the debtor and the contractor as the secured party for an amount equal to the full value of the steel delivered for fabrication and an itemized listing as collateral of all structural steel for which the contractor is seeking payment .
the contractor and fabricator shall execute the financing statement and file it with the appropriate county clerk office within five working days from the time that the fabricator receives payment .
the contractor shall ensure that within num calendar days of the date of the progressive estimate containing payment for material on hand the resident engineer receives three original copies of the financing statement along with the payment confirmation .
the contractor is responsible for ensuring that each delivery statement is properly stamped with a marking indicating that the forms have been placed in the county records of the county in which the fabricators yard is located .
f. payment confirmation the contractor shall ensure that within num calendar days of the date of the progressive estimate containing payment for material on hand the resident engineer receives an original notarized confirmation that the supplier has been paid the total invoice amount for the material for which the contractor was paid .
if the contractor fails to provide the required notarized confirmation within num calendar days the resident engineer will deduct from the next progressive estimate the full amount paid for this material .
num final payment when the resident engineer assigns a completion date in accordance with subsection num project completion and acceptance the resident engineer will prepare a final estimate to reflect the total units incorporated into the work and the total price the department will pay .
the final estimate will include the following price reductions assessed for work or materials not meeting the contract requirements measurements and payment num num liquidated damages assessed for failure to complete the work in the contract time or by milestone dates incentives to be paid and disincentives to be charged .
when complete the resident engineer will send a copy of the final estimate to the contractor .
if the contractor files a claim in accordance with the contract the contractor shall notify the resident engineer of the conditions the contractor believes warrant the claim in accordance with subsection num notification of differing site conditions changes and extra work and prepare the claim if subsequently filed in accordance with subsection num claims for adjustment .
the department will not allow other procedures .
upon review or final adjudication of the claim the resident engineer will place any additional payment determined to be due the contractor on a supplemental estimate and the department will process for payment .
all progress payments will be subject to correction in the final estimate and payment .
acceptance shall be final and conclusive except as otherwise provided in the contract or as regards latent defects or frauds or such gross mistakes as may amount to fraud or as regards to the departments rights under any warranty or guaranty or bond .
if the contractor fails to sign and return the final estimate within num months of receipt the engineer will initiate action to administratively close the project as provided in num os num .
num vacant num compensation for project delays the contractor shall strictly comply with the provisions of this subsection as an essential condition precedent for the contractor to receive compensation for delays .
a. recoverable costs the contractor may request additional costs associated with the following items as compensation for delays direct labor costs in accordance with subsection num.bnum labor and subsection num.bnumc workers compensation through subsection num.bnumf employee fringe benefits costs for materials in accordance with subsection num.bnum materials equipment costs for equipment approved by the resident engineer to be held in a standby condition during the period of the delay at a rate equal to num percent of the rental rate established in accordance with subsection num.bnum equipment minus operating costs .
costs of extended jobsite overhead an additional num percent of the value of the above items to compensate for extended home office overhead and other expenses for which no specific allowance is provided .
b .
no liability items for the department the department and contractor agree that in any adjustment for delay costs the department will have no liability for the following items of damages or expense num measurements and payment num num loss of profit labor inefficiencies based on published manuals of productivity measurement and inefficiencies home office overhead in excess of that provided in the contract consequential damages including but not limited to loss of bonding capacity loss of bidding opportunities and insolvency indirect costs or expenses of any nature and attorneys fees claims preparation expenses or costs of litigation .
num payment to subcontractors the code of federal regulations requires that contractors pay subcontractors suppliers and vendors promptly for work performed or materials provided and release retainage promptly after the subcontractor supplier or vendor completes the work or provides materials certifications .
the department has established that when criteria for payments are met num calendar days is a reasonable time to make payment or release retainage and requires that payment be made within that time .
the num calendar day period for subcontracted work or materials and services provided will commence on the date the contractor receives payment from the department for the work .
if the contractor holds retainage for subcontracted work or materialsservices provided the num calendar day period shall commence on the date that the resident engineer determines that the subcontracted unit or portion of the contract has been completed in accordance with subsection num project completion and acceptance or the project is deemed complete by the department .
services provided to a contractor for support of construction operations or as deemed necessary by the contractor for upkeep of machinery or facilities used directly or indirectly for construction operations shall be paid within num calendar days of the last service provided .
if payment is not made for work material or services or if retainage is not released within the required num calendar day period the subcontractor will be entitled to make a formal written complaint to the department detailing the amounts and date due and the work performed or material provided .
the department will then institute a formal investigation and if warranted conduct a formal hearing .
upon a finding that the contractor failed to perform in accordance with the terms of the contract requirements the department may impose sanctions as provided in subsection num refusal of proposals subsection num rejection of proposal or both .
a subcontractor may initiate a request for a determination that a subcontracted unit or portion of the contract has been completed by making a written request for such determination to the resident engineer with a copy to the contractor as provided in subsection num project completion and acceptance .
at the time the written request is made the subcontractor shall have submitted to the resident engineer required documentation including material certifications payrolls and other such documents as may be required to audit the completed work .
if the resident engineer upon inspection finds that a unit or portion of the contract has been satisfactorily completed the resident engineer will report the fully audited final quantities to the contractor and the subcontractor .
upon receipt from the resident engineer of a determination that the subcontracted work is deemed complete the audited final quantities and payment for those quantities the contractor shall release any retainage held within num calendar days .
however if the contractor or subcontractor working under the direction of the contractor damages the work the contractor shall repair or replace the damaged work at measurements and payment num num no additional cost to the department to the satisfaction of the contract requirements and the resident engineer .
failure of the contractor to complete contract work within the designated contract time or accumulation by the contractor of deductions due to producing nonspecification work may result in the assessment of negative progressive estimates representing the departments overpayment to the contractor for a given contract period .
the assessment of negative progressive estimates does not relieve the contractor of the requirements for prompt payment of subcontractors and for timely release of retainage .
however if the subcontractors work is directly responsible for the liquidated damage or nonspecification work deduction such deduction may be assessed against that subcontractor .
amounts thereafter due to the subcontractor will be the balance owed for the work less the imposed deductions .
payment disputes between the contractor and subcontractors relating to allocation of chargeable contract time and any resultant liquidated damages quantity or quality of items of work subject to a subcontract or other agreement shall be referred to a neutral alternative dispute resolution forum for hearing and decision with the costs for such mediation or arbitration to be shared equally by the parties .
funding for mediation of payment disputes involving disadvantaged business enterprises is available from the department through the dbe supportive service program .
such services are reimbursed by the federal highway administration and are authorized by num cfr num subpart b .
the contractor shall include a clause in any subcontract notifying the subcontractor of their right to resolution of payment disputes through alternative dispute resolution mechanisms .
num chapter num soils section page no .
num clearing and grubbing num num earthworknum num test rollingnum num salvaging topsoil num num clay plating num num machine grading num num obliterating abandoned roadnum num management of erosion sedimentation and storm water pollution prevention and controlnum num temporary sediment controlnum num nylon erosion control matnum num ditch liner protectionnum num sodding and sprigging num num plantingnum num seedingnum num mulchingnum num fertilizing and agricultural limingnum num mowing num clearing and grubbing num num section num clearing and grubbing num description this work consists of clearing grubbing removing and disposing of vegetation and debris .
this work includes protecting vegetation specified to remain .
this work excludes items specified for removal in accordance with other sections of the specifications .
num materials vacant num equipment vacant num construction methods do not disturb or remove hazardous waste material archeological or historic material or human remains or graves without the prior approval of the resident engineer .
immediately notify the resident engineer upon encountering evidence of these items in accordance with subsection num hazardous material and subsection num protection of archeological and unmarked human burial sites .
during clearing and grubbing operations do not scar break or otherwise damage trees and shrubs directed by the resident engineer or shown on the plans to remain .
if the contractor damages these items the department will assess the value of the damage against the contractor .
a .
clearing outside the limits of construction remove trees only as shown on the plans .
within the limits of construction remove trees except those the resident engineer directs to remain .
the resident engineers direction regarding the removal of trees within the limits of construction will comply with the clear zone requirements of the roadway design manual .
remove branches that overhang the roadway to at least num ft num m above the road surface .
use experienced workers for tree trimming and pruning .
when clearing trees logs stumps brush and other debris remove bury burn or dispose of them as approved by the resident engineer .
when burning material obey all laws and ordinances .
supervise the fire to avoid endangering the surrounding vegetation adjacent property or features specified to remain in the rightofway .
obtain the resident engineers approval before removing from the rightofway perishable vegetation and debris that can not be burned .
dispose of the debris off the project and outside the view from the project .
make arrangements with and obtain written permission from the owner of the property intended for disposal of the debris .
b. grubbing grub and dispose of stumps and roots within the rightofway including channels except as specified in subsection num.c preserving areas outside of construction .
in channel areas leave stumps and nonperishable solid objects that extend less than num in num mm above the original ground line or water level .
num clearing and grubbing num num clearing and grubbing c. preserving areas outside of construction preserve areas outside the limits of construction except areas needed for constructing fences or storing topsoil .
do no clear and grub outside the limits of construction except if shown on the plans or if removing debris and dead vegetation .
if an area within the median lies outside the limits of construction equipment may cross the median only at points approved by the resident engineer .
the contractor may use areas outside the limits of construction to store reserved topsoil from areas within the rightofway .
if clearing operations damage areas within the rightofway except for topsoil storage restore the area and obtain the resident engineers approval at no additional cost to the department .
d. selective clearing this work includes the following activities trimming selected trees and shrubs except those directed or shown to remain removing and disposing of logs root pods brush refuse dumps and other undesirable debris and cutting removing and disposing of undergrowth stumps and standing trees .
perform selective clearing at locations shown on the plans and as approved by the resident engineer .
dispose of vegetation and debris in accordance with subsection num.a clearing and subsection num.b grubbing .
when selecting trees for removal leave remaining trees from num ft to num ft num m to num m apart .
sever stumps trees and shrubs flush with or below the original ground line .
remove the stumps of uprooted trees and fill the holes with material approved by the resident engineer .
num method of measurement vacant num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit a clearing and grubbing lump sum b selective clearing lump sum the department will consider the cost of disposing of debris outside the rightofway to be included in the contract unit price for clearing and grubbing or selective clearing .
if a pay item for clearing and grubbing or selective clearing does not exist the department will consider the cost of the work to be included in the appropriate earthwork pay item in accordance with the plans .
earthwork num num section num earthwork num description this work consists of excavating material and constructing embankments which includes hauling stockpiling placing disposing sloping shaping compacting and finishing earth material .
there are three categories of earthwork excavation and borrow embankment and lump sum earthwork .
a. excavation and borrow this work consists of removing disposing of or compacting earth material except material removed under another category .
the types of excavation and borrow are defined as follows unclassified excavation .
excavation of earth material within the rightofway with the exception of muck excavation rock excavation and structural excavation in accordance with section num excavation and backfill for structures .
muck excavation .
excavation of soil mixed with organic matter or other materials not suitable for foundation material regardless of moisture content or other characteristic .
rock excavation .
excavation of sound and solid masses layers or ledges of mineral matter classified as rock using either of the following methods can not be effectively loosened or broken down by ripping with equipment in accordance with subsection num equipment or has a seismic velocity of at least num fts num ms if the seismic velocities are less than num fts num ms use the ripping method to determine material classifications .
unclassified borrow .
material obtained outside the rightofway or easement areas and not classified as select borrow .
select borrow .
borrow material that is in accordance with section num select borrow or that is shown on the plans e.g .
specific soil groups group characteristics or material obtained from a sandstone formation .
selective subgrade topping .
material used to construct the top portion of the roadbed as shown on the plans to ensure the material consistency of the roadbed .
b. embankment this work consists of the following constructing roadway embankments and preparing the areas upon which they are to be placed within the rightofway and placing and compacting approved material .
c. lump sum earthwork this work consists of excavation borrow or embankment necessary to complete the project .
num earthwork num num materials provide materials that are free of hazardous and industrial waste in accordance with num cfr part num through part num and state regulations .
if available the contractor may inspect departmentobtained information related to subsurface investigations in accordance with subsection num examination of plans specifications special provisions and the work site .
a .
borrow provide borrow material free of dispersive clay however if dispersive clay is present in the borrow material the contractor must clay plate the slopes in accordance with section num clay plating at no additional cost to the department .
for projects in field divisions num num num and num if subgrade treatment in accordance with section num subgrade treatment is shown on the plans the department will not allow the use of borrow material with a sulfate content that exceeds the thresholds of ohd lnum and ohd lnum in the top num in num mm of the grading section .
test the sulfate content of borrow material in accordance with ohd lnum .
b .
selective subgrade topping provide materials that meet the following requirements for the classes of selective subgrade topping or as specified by classification or characteristics referenced in aashto m num table num selective subgrade topping classifications class requirements i granular material anum anum anum or anum groups ii section num select borrow iii num to num pi iva siltclay materials anum anum anum anum or anum groups a plans may show additional pi restrictions .
provide selective subgrade topping that passes a num½in nummm sieve unless specified otherwise .
num equipment for classifying rock excavation use a late model wellmaintained tractormounted hydraulic ripper equipped with one digging point of standard manufacturers design sized for use with and propelled by a crawlertype tractor with a minimum net flywheel power rating of num hp num kw operating in low gear .
if seismic testing is required submit to the resident engineer the qualifications of the person performing and interpreting the test at least num days before performing the excavation work .
num construction methods if the contract requires earthwork that affects archeological sites wetlands and existing environmental protection or requires the use of explosives perform the work in accordance with section num legal relations and responsibility to public .
earthwork num num a. excavation and borrow num unclassified excavation a general if salvaging topsoil is shown on the plans remove and stockpile the topsoil in accordance with section num salvaging topsoil before beginning unclassified excavation .
during excavation do not disturb areas outside the limits of construction .
use suitable excavated material to construct fills on the project do not waste .
compact the top num in num mm of the subgrade in accordance with subsection num.anum compaction of fill .
ensure that the top of the finished subgrade meets the tolerances in accordance with subsection num.f tolerances .
obliterate old roadways with grading operations necessary to incorporate the old roadway into the new roadway and surroundings to provide a pleasing appearance from the new roadway as approved by the resident engineer .
bunsuitable materials if excavation to the finished graded section results in a subgrade or slopes of unsuitable soil the resident engineer may require the following removal of the unsuitable materials and backfill to the finished subgrade with an approved material .
allow the resident engineer to measure the necessary crosssections before placing the backfill .
material for backfilling must be equal to or better than the approved surrounding materials in accordance with aashto m num .
if required by the contract provide backfill material in accordance with subsection num.b selective subgrade topping .
the resident engineer may classify trash metal glass other manmade items and soils that can not be compacted as unsuitable materials in accordance with subsection num.anum borrow .
dispose of unsuitable material in accordance with subsection num removal and disposal of salvaged materials structures and obstructions .
if the material is unsuitable due to excessive moisture the contractor may dry and reuse it on the project with prior approval by the resident engineer .
second handling is defined as an operation requiring a second movement or transporting of the material .
num muck excavation the plans show the approximate locations and extent of muck excavation .
perform muck excavation operations so that the resident engineer can measure the volume of unsuitable material before replacing it with approved material .
if muck excavation is not suitable for fills or as topsoil remove and dispose of the material outside the rightofway in accordance with subsection num removal and disposal of salvaged materials structures and obstructions .
if backfilling muck excavations below the water table level use a granular material approved by the resident engineer to prevent contaminated material from mixing with the backfill .
compact the backfill material in accordance with num earthwork num subsection num.anum compaction of fill .
within the roadway fill limits cofferdams and dewatering may be necessary to perform muck excavation .
num rock excavation the plans show the approximate locations and extent of rock excavation .
if the contract requires excavated rock to be used as rock fill provide rock fill in accordance with subsection num.anumbnum rock fill .
excavate rocks or other solid unyielding material to a depth of at least num in num mm below the subgrade elevation and fill excavated areas to the subgrade elevation with material in accordance with subsection num.b selective subgrade topping .
all fill material shall pass a num½ in num mm sieve .
drain depressions or pockets in the undercut or overbreak areas .
in cuts ensure compaction meets the moisture and density requirements in accordance with subsection num.anum compaction of fill or as shown on the plans .
before placing fill obtain the resident engineers approval of the subgrade excavation and the fill material .
if the plans show presplitting the resident engineer will establish the presplitting line .
prior to drilling the presplitting holes completely remove the overburden to expose the rock surface along the presplitting line .
drill bore holes along the presplitting line maintaining the drill holes at the angle shown on the plans and ensuring that the drill holes are in the same plane .
ensure that the diameter spacing and loading of presplit holes will result in a neat break .
drill the presplit holes for the full depth of the ledge .
for the initial presplitting of each rock cut section use a num ft num m test section .
after drilling loading and shooting this test section remove the shot material to determine if the diameter spacing and loading of the presplit holes produced a neat break at the specified slope .
before continuing with presplit drilling completely expose the presplit rock face in the test section for evaluation .
if the resident engineer rejects the results of the presplitting test section adjust the diameter spacing and loading of the presplit holes and perform an additional num ft num m test section .
if the resident engineer approves of the results of the presplitting test section continue the presplitting throughout the rock cut section using the same means and methods .
load the presplitting holes with explosives in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
the resident engineer may direct the contractor to discontinue presplitting operations if rock conditions warrant a different operation .
thoroughly scale and clean rock slopes as directed by the engineer .
for rock excavations involving multiple lifts scale upper lifts prior to drilling and fragmenting of lower lifts .
ensure that scaled rock slopes are stable and free from possible hazards of falling rock or rock slides that endanger public safety .
do not trim the subgrade before completing the scaling operations .
num borrow if the contract requires borrow from a designated offsite source the department will provide the rightofway for the source .
if the plans do not designate an offsite source the contractor may obtain borrow from an undesignated offsite source .
earthwork num num before excavating for borrow ensure borrow is necessary and obtain the resident engineers approval .
after clearing and removing topsoil from a borrow source but before beginning borrow excavation notify the resident engineer so that the resident engineer can take crosssection elevations and measurements of the original ground surface .
to reduce borrow excavation the resident engineer may direct the contractor to widen roadway cuts and special ditches .
obtain written approval from the resident engineer before excavating borrow pits closer than num ft num m to the rightofway .
submit a plan detailing the excavation of a borrow source located in the upstream flood plain of a stream crossing the project .
the resident engineer will evaluate this plan and consider its effect on the project .
do not begin the excavation of borrow until the resident engineer approves the plan .
when borrow excavation is complete ensure the slopes of the borrow source are uniform and the final condition of the source is in accordance with state and federal laws .
shape the surfaces of the borrow source to accommodate the measurement of the excavation .
num compaction of fill a preparation of fill foundation clear and grub the trees and organic matter in accordance with section num clearing and grubbing and remove the topsoil .
break up the cleared ground surface to a depth of num in num mm by plowing or scarifying .
compact the ground surface to at least num percent of the standard density in accordance with subsection num.anumbnum earth fill .
remove existing pavement or reduce it to a maximum particle size of num in num mm however the department will not allow existing pavement in the top num in num mm of fill below the subgrade elevation .
num fills across unstable material incapable of supporting equipment if unstable material is encountered remove or bridge as directed by the resident engineer .
the resident engineer may require a bridge of fill material or a combination of fill material and geogrid fabric .
provide and place the geogrid fabric in accordance with section num geosynthetic reinforcement .
if bridged limit the thickness of the fill material layer to the minimum necessary to support equipment .
dump fill material on top of the constructed fill layer and extend the bridge by pushing the fill material into place and over the unstable material until the bridge is complete .
num fills on existing slopes numhnumv or steeper cut horizontal benches to a width that accommodates placing and compacting operations and equipment .
begin each bench at the intersection of the original ground and the vertical cut of the previous bench .
bconstruction practices begin placement of material and the construction of fills at the low point and place layers in horizontal planes up to the finished grade .
slope the fill to provide constant drainage .
use spreading and disking equipment on each layer num earthwork num to obtain uniform moisture and thickness before compacting .
add or remove water to obtain the specified moisture content and density of the fill .
during all stages of construction route and distribute hauling and leveling equipment over the width and length of each layer of fill material .
do not construct fills on frozen material or place frozen material in fills .
do not place rocks broken concrete or other solid materials at future piling locations .
if placing fill on only one side of abutments wing walls piers retaining walls or culvert headwalls ensure the compactive effort adjacent to the structure will not cause excessive pressure to or overturn the structure .
if placing fills on both sides of a concrete wall abutment end bent or box type structure place and compact fills to the same elevation on both sides of the structure .
if the fill contains rocks or boulders with diameters larger than num in num mm do not place this fill material within num ft num m of a structure .
num rock fill if the fill contains rock that can not be constructed in layers of num in num mm maximum thickness construct the fill in layers to the thickness approved by the resident engineer based on the largest rocks in the material not to exceed num ft num m. place the larger rocks in each layer of approved thickness furthest from the roadway centerline .
further for rocks with diameters larger than num ft num m embed in the fill break into smaller sizes or remove in accordance with subsection num removal and disposal of salvaged materials structures and obstructions .
if the contract requires end dumping dump the rock onto the edge of the fill layer being constructed and push the rock over the leading edge onto the previous layer with a crawler dozer .
use a dozer that weighs at least num lb num kg to ensure adequate initial compaction .
use the smaller rock fill material to fill the voids created by the larger rock .
wet compact level and smooth each layer .
adjust the moisture content for compaction .
for rock fill layers num in num m thick or less compact the full width with one of the following minimum procedures four passes using a num ton num metric ton compressiontype roller four passes using a vibratory roller with a dynamic force of at least num lbf num kn per cycle and a frequency of at least num hz eight passes using a num ton num metric ton compressiontype roller or eight passes using a vibratory roller with a dynamic force of at least num lbf num kn per cycle and a frequency of at least num hz .
for rock fill layers thicker than num in num mm increase the number of rollerpasses for each additional num in num mm increment by the number required for the first num in num mm per respective roller .
operate compressivetype rollers at speeds less than num mph num kmh and vibratory rollers at speeds less than num mph num kmh .
earthwork num num construct rock fills from num in num mm to num ft num m below the subgrade elevation with earth and rocks with diameters no greater than num in num mm ensure that voids are filled and the rock is chinked creating uniform compaction .
construct the top num in num mm of rock fills with approved material placed in layers not exceeding num in num mm in loose thickness and compacted in accordance with subsection num.anumbnum earth fill .
do not place rocks with a diameter larger than num in num mm in the top num in num mm of compacted fill .
num earth fill place earth fill in loose layers of no greater than num in num mm .
compact the earth fill material to at least num percent of maximum density aashto t num methods c or d unless otherwise specified in the contract or directed by the resident engineer .
determine inplace density by aashto t num nuclear .
ensure the moisture content of the earth fill material at the time of compaction is within num percentage points of the optimum moisture content aashto t num unless otherwise specified in the specifications or approved by the resident engineer in writing .
the resident engineer may adjust the moisture content range for earth fill compaction to address unusual conditions and constructability .
for compaction of anum or anum soil groups the contractor may request in writing a lower moisture content range of from optimum to num percentage points below optimum .
compact earth fill layers using rollers .
for inaccessible areas e.g .
areas adjacent to culverts or bridge abutments place the material in loose layers less than num in num mm thick and compact to the specified density using mechanical tampers .
b. embankments construct embankments in accordance with subsection num.a excavation and borrow .
c. lump sum earthwork perform lump sum earthwork in accordance with subsection num.a excavation and borrow .
d. selective subgrade topping if shown on the plans construct the top num in num mm of the subgrade with selective subgrade topping .
before applying additives establish the subgrade elevation every num ft num m along each lane line .
after applying additives and processing the selective subgrade topping reestablish the subgrade elevation every num ft num m along each lane line and break point .
the following are sources of selective subgrade topping materials num sources proposed by contractor submit a proposal to the resident engineer identifying that the quantity of selective subgrade topping as shown on the plans is available .
during excavation develop and reserve that quantity of selective subgrade topping in accordance with the grading plan .
num earthwork num num num mandatory sources designated on the plans if the plans show the source of selective subgrade topping excavate the material at the specified source haul to the specified location and place .
e. sloping shaping dressing and finishing construct and dress the slopes of cuts ditches and fills as shown on the plans or as directed by the resident engineer except that the department will not require rounding where rock extends to the top of a cut .
slope shape and round existing surfaces as shown on the plans or as directed by the resident engineer .
if standard equipment can not obtain neat uniform surfaces handtrim the slopes .
for borrow pits trim and shape slopes and tops of cuts with material approved by the resident engineer and stabilize the material .
dressing includes clearing the right ofway of stumps brush weeds and other rubbish and disposal in accordance with subsection num construction methods .
f. tolerances construct the roadbed to the profile and crosssection shown on the plans within the following tolerances roadbed crosssection within num ft num mm .
roadbed profile within num ft num mm by the algebraic difference for any two points on the roadbed no greater than num ft num m apart .
base of the selected subgrade zone within num ft num mm of the elevation shown on the plans .
for contracts with both grading and surfacing finish the roadbed profile and cross section in accordance with the tolerances in subsection num construction methods .
num method of measurement the final inplace methods of measurement and calculation will match the original methods used to estimate quantities unless the resident engineer approves otherwise .
the resident engineer will take the original and final crosssections on top of the topsoil .
the resident engineer will perform the original and final earthwork surveys with topsoil in place except for borrow sources .
the resident engineer will not adjust earthwork quantities for topsoil volumes .
the resident engineer will calculate excavation borrow and embankment in accordance with the following calculation methods average end area from cross sections .
this method includes calculating the average of the cross sectional end areas and multiplying by the distance between them .
original surface vs .
final surface digital terrain model .
this method includes creating threedimensional surfaces from the original and final surveys data triangulating the data points and calculating the volume .
three dimensional measurements .
this method includes using acceptable measuring practices to calculate volumes for isolated and unusual locations .
earthwork num num a. unclassified excavation the resident engineer will include excavation for overbreakage or slides in backslopes not the fault of the contractor in the measurements for unclassified excavation .
if the plane of the finished subgrade falls within rock the resident engineer will include an excavation quantity for the subexcavation of rock to a theoretical maximum measurement of num in num mm unless the resident engineer approves otherwise .
the resident engineer will include the volume of unsuitable materials excavated in accordance with subsection num.anum unclassified excavation in the measurement of unclassified excavation .
if the resident engineer directs the contractor to widen roadway cuts or special ditches to reduce borrow excavation the resident engineer will measure the volume of additional excavation as unclassified excavation or relevant earthwork pay item .
b. muck excavation if the contract does not specify muck excavation as a pay item the resident engineer will measure muck excavation as unclassified excavation .
c. rock excavation if the contract does not specify rock excavation as a pay item the resident engineer will measure rock excavation as unclassified excavation .
d. borrow the resident engineer will not measure the volume of unapproved borrow excavation .
e. embankments if the contract specifies embankments as a pay item the resident engineer will measure volumes based on the differences between the original ground cross sections and the final ground cross sections .
the resident engineer will not measure material outside the limits of the typical or approved sections or material or work required to correct settlement shrinkage or swell of embankments .
the resident engineer will not deduct volumes for improvements like culverts and manholes .
the resident engineer will include all excavation and borrow necessary to construct the grading section in the volume for embankments .
f. presplitting of rock the resident engineer will measure presplitting of rock by the length of approved and completed presplit rock cut .
measure presplitting in feet along the base of the cut section .
for benched cut face measure along the base of the total cut section .
g. earthwork the resident engineer will not measure earthwork but rely on the estimated quantities shown on the plans .
h. selective subgrade topping if the contract requires selective subgrade topping the department will consider the cost of the selective subgrade topping material to be included in the contract unit prices of the appropriate existing earthwork pay items .
the plans will show the estimated quantity of the selective subgrade topping material .
num earthwork num the department considers the lump sum cost of the selective subgrade topping pay item as payment for any additional handling or separation of the selective subgrade topping material .
num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit a unclassified excavation cubic yard cubic meter b muck excavation cubic yard cubic meter c rock excavation cubic yard cubic meter d unclassified borrow cubic yard cubic meter e select borrow cubic yard cubic meter f embankments cubic yard cubic meter g presplitting of rock linear foot of drilling meter h earthwork lump sum i selective subgrade topping lump sum the department will pay for roadway obliteration as unclassified excavation unless the contract specifies obliterating abandoned road in accordance with section num obliterating abandoned road .
the department will not pay for a second handling of unsuitable material due to excessive moisture unless it is unavoidable and the resident engineer provides prior approval .
upon the resident engineers approval the department will pay for the second handling as unclassified excavation .
the department will only pay for rock excavation below the subgrade and replacement fill if the resident engineer approves before the fill placement .
the department will pay for the quantity of excavated rock as rock excavation and will consider the cost for the quantity of fill material to be included in the contract unit price of the appropriate earthwork pay item .
the department will consider the cost of drilling loading and shooting presplit sections to be included in the contract unit price for presplitting of rock .
the department will consider the cost of the removal of presplit material to be included in the contract unit price of rock excavation .
if the contract does not specify a muck excavation pay item the department will pay for the removal disposal replacement of unsuitable material as the appropriate earthwork pay item .
if cofferdams or dewatering is necessary to perform muck excavation the department will consider the cost of each to be included in the contract unit price for muck excavation or the appropriate earthwork pay item .
the department will consider the cost of the following to be included in the contract unit price for borrow or select borrow building and maintaining haul roads from offsite borrow sources to the project and clearing grubbing stripping or replacing topsoil at offsite borrow sources .
test rolling num num if the contractor provides borrow material consisting of dispersive clay and must clay plate the slopes the department will consider the cost of this clay plating to be included in the contract unit price for borrow or select borrow .
the department will pay for geogrid fabric in accordance with section num geosynthetic reinforcement .
if inaccessible areas of earth fill require compaction using mechanical tampers the department will consider the cost of the mechanical tampers to be included in the contract unit price for the appropriate earthwork pay item .
the department will consider the cost of water used to achieve the required moisture content to be included in the contract unit price for the applicable earthwork pay items .
section num test rolling num description this work consists of test rolling embankments and cut sections with heavy pneumatictired rollers .
num materials vacant num equipment before using rollers obtain the resident engineers approval of the equipment .
provide heavy pneumatictired rollers with at least seven tires .
ensure the pressure in each tire is at least num percent of the tire manufacturers recommended maximum pressure for rolling operations .
ensure the roller wheels and axles allow each tire to carry an equal load .
use a roller with a loading platform and ballast that can carry a load of at least num lb num kg per tire .
provide the resident engineer with the certified weights of the empty roller and the ballast .
ensure the rolling equipment can turn without damaging the area being tested .
num construction methods roll the full width of the grading section shown on the plans using two complete passes .
operate the roller from num mph to num mph num kmh to num kmh as directed by the resident engineer .
if the contract requires test rolling test roll embankments at num ft num m below the subgrade elevation and at the finished subgrade elevation test roll cut sections at the finished subgrade elevation only .
if test rolling reveals soft yielding or unstable areas remove the unstable material and replace it with material approved by the resident engineer in accordance with section num earthwork at no additional cost to the department .
perform test rolling on the corrected area .
num test rolling num test rolling num method of measurement vacant num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit test rolling lump sum section num salvaging topsoil num description this work consists of salvaging natural topsoil from areas of excavation and embankment .
num materials topsoil .
soil consisting of vegetative matter and grass roots or exhibiting other characteristics common to surface soils .
num equipment vacant num construction methods clear brush rock shale or other deleterious material from topsoil salvage areas shown on the plans .
mow weeds and grasses more than num ft num m tall and incorporate into the topsoil .
excavate the topsoil and stockpile at areas approved by the resident engineer .
topsoil depths and quantities shown on the plans are approximate remove all topsoil from salvage areas .
replace contaminated or lost topsoil with an equivalent resident engineerapproved material at no additional cost to the department .
a .
type a salvaged topsoil type a salvaged topsoil consists of the following removing existing untreated topsoil storing the topsoil in a stockpile and placing the topsoil on prepared slopes as shown on the plans or directed by the resident engineer .
finish the roadway excavation and embankment areas as shown on the plans or as directed by the resident engineer .
before placing the salvaged topsoil apply fertilizer of the type and at the rate shown on the plans .
spread the salvaged topsoil to a depth of num in num mm unless otherwise directed by the resident engineer .
salvaging topsoil num num salvaging topsoil b .
type b salvaged topsoil type b salvaged topsoil consists of the following removing existing untreated topsoil and storing the topsoil in a stockpile .
num method of measurement the resident engineer will measure type a salvaged topsoil and type b salvaged topsoil in a stockpile in accordance with subsection num.a measurement of quantities general .
the resident engineer will not subtract measured quantities of type a salvaged topsoil and type b salvaged topsoil from excavation or embankment quantities .
if the plans show type a salvaged topsoil as a lump sum pay item the resident engineer will not measure quantities of salvaged topsoil .
the department will consider type a salvaged topsoil num percent complete when the material has been removed from its original location and stockpiled and num percent complete when the material has been placed in its final location .
the department will consider type b salvaged topsoil num percent complete when the material has been removed from its original location and stockpiled .
num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit a type a salvaged topsoil lump sum or cubic yard cubic meter b type b salvaged topsoil cubic yard cubic meter the department will not pay for additional handling of type a or type b salvaged topsoil .
num clay plating num section num clay plating num description this work consists of constructing a layer of clay soil or other material approved by the resident engineer on exposed slopes composed of dispersive or erosive soils .
num materials if the contract does not specify plating material requirements provide plating material in accordance with the following requirements plasticity index from num to num .
nondispersive using the emerson crumb test and either the pinhole test astm d num or double hydrometer test astm d num .
obtained in accordance with subsection num.anum borrow .
from a resident engineer inspected and approved source .
num equipment vacant num construction methods before placing the plating materials grade shape and level the specified portions of the exposed slopes as required by the contract .
immediately before delivery of the plating material dress or bench slopes as shown on the plans .
deliver and dump the plating material at regular intervals and in amounts that can be uniformly spread and will create layers not greater than num in num mm deep .
compact the layers to at least num percent of maximum density and test in accordance with aashto t num methods c or d. use aashto t num nuclear to determine the inplace density .
ensure the moisture content of the plating material is from optimum to num percentage points above optimum moisture content in accordance with aashto t num .
continue placing spreading and compacting until the plating material reaches the final thickness shown on the plans .
ensure the plating surface conforms to the specified slope .
if sandy subgrade can not support hauling and blading equipment without excessive rutting add moisture and consolidate the subgrade or construct a temporary plated road .
num method of measurement the resident engineer will measure the volume of the compacted inplace clay plating by multiplying the completed length of clay plating by the area of the cross section shown on the plans .
num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit clay plating cubic yard cubic meter the department will consider the cost of water used in the plating process to be included in the contract unit price for clay plating .
machine grading num num section num machine grading num description this work consists of grading using heavy machine blading and some drifting and hauling to move earthwork material between balanced cuts and fills .
for those onemile sections shown on the plans where excavation does not exceed num yd³ num m³ and approximately balances with embankments the engineer will allow the use of machine grading .
num material vacant num equipment vacant num construction methods bring the roadbed to a uniform grade with elevations and typical crosssection as shown on the plans using the following methods drifting or hauling excavated material plowing scarifying blading removing stone and boulders from the roadway compacting and shaping .
grade and shape side slopes and ditches in accordance with the typical crosssection .
excavate rock hard sandstone shale or other solid and unyielding material in the roadbed and backfill with specified material in accordance with subsection num.a excavation and borrow .
construct excavations and embankments in accordance with subsection num.a excavation and borrow and subsection num.b embankments .
clean inlet and outlet channels within the rightofway .
repair damage to adjacent structures resulting from construction operations as directed by the resident engineer at no additional cost to the department .
blade and shape completed portions of graded work to ensure a smooth surface of uniform crosssection with lines and grades in accordance with the plans .
maintain the roadway until final acceptance .
num method of measurement the resident engineer will measure machine grading along the centerline to the nearest foot meter .
num machine grading num machine grading num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit machine grading linear foot meter the department will consider the cost of water used to achieve the required moisture content to be included in the contract unit price for machine grading .
section num obliterating abandoned road num description this work consists of obliterating specified sections of abandoned road by removing and disposing of pavement surfaces structures and other items .
num material vacant num equipment vacant num construction methods after the abandoned road is no longer needed for traffic break and remove pavement surfaces and base courses in accordance with section num removal of buildings structures and obstructions neshap inspection .
remove without damaging items with salvage value and store the items as shown on the plans .
items not shown on the plans for salvage or use in the work shall become the property of the contractor .
remove concrete structures to at least num ft num m below the ground level and cover with earth .
distribute the removed portions of broken concrete to locations directed by the resident engineer and cover with at least num ft num m of material approved by the resident engineer or remove from the project .
after removing the pavement surfaces structures and other items scarify or plow the abandoned subgrade material and round and smooth by blading .
grade slope and transition the toes of fills and the tops of cuts of the abandoned subgrade except in rock .
fill ditches and grade the abandoned subgrade to drain .
num method of measurement the resident engineer will measure obliterating abandoned road along the centerline of the abandoned road to the nearest foot meter .
num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit obliterating abandoned road linear foot meter management of ero .
sedimentation and swpp and control num num the department will consider the following to be included in the contract unit price for obliterating abandoned road removing disposing and storing materials with salvage value disposing and obliterating other materials and debris and regrading and shaping the roadway .
section num management of erosion sedimentation and storm water pollution prevention and control management of ero .
sedimentation and swpp and control num description this work consists of overseeing the construction and maintenance of erosion and sediment control measures in accordance with these specifications in compliance with the details shown in the contract and as approved by the resident engineer .
the purpose of this work is to minimize or eliminate air pollution and pollution of rivers streams impoundments and private properties from the discharge of dust and or storm water associated with construction activity .
below is a listing of terms and definitions as they apply to these specifications authorization to discharge .
the document issued from odeq as a result of the noi application serving as the official notification of the site specific permit .
bmps best management practices .
a wide range of project management practices schedules activities or prohibition of practices that when used alone or in combination prevent or reduce erosion sedimentation andor pollution of adjacent properties water bodies and wetlands .
bmps include temporary or permanent structural and nonstructural devices and practices .
completion date .
see subsection num definitions or subsection num project completion and acceptance .
erosion .
the detachment and movement of soil particles from their original location by force of water wind ice and gravity .
erosion control .
erosion control reduces the potential of soil particles from being detached by the use of soil stabilizing practices .
these practices are noted in the swmp and swppp .
final stabilization .
a point in time when all earthdisturbing activities are complete and permanent erosion and sediment controls are established and functional .
the stabilized site is protected from erosive forces of raindrop impact and water flow .
typically all unpaved areas except graveled shoulders crushed aggregate base course or other areas not covered by permanent structures are protected by either a uniform blanket of perennial vegetation at least num percent of native background cover as found in the undisturbed num management of ero .
sedimentation and swpp and control num num surrounding area or equivalent stabilization measures including but not limited to riprap geotextiles gabions or paved ditches .
noi notice of intent .
the opdes general permit application form to commence earthdisturbing activities for storm water discharges on projects which have earth disturbing activities of num acre or more .
not notice of termination .
the opdes general permit application form indicating the end of earthdisturbing activities and the attainment of final stabilization .
opdes .
oklahoma pollutant discharge elimination system act .
odeq .
oklahoma department of environmental quality .
odeqopdes general permit .
the general permit for storm water discharges from construction activities issued by the odeq under the opdes regulations .
it requires an swppp before earthdisturbing activities for the project .
odeq is the regulatory enforcement and permitting authority for the environmental protection agency epa in the state of oklahoma .
sediment control .
sediment control minimizes detached particles from leaving the site or entering a water body by the use of structural practices .
these practices are noted in the swmp and swppp .
sedimentation .
sedimentation occurs when the eroded particles are deposited in a new location .
sprp spill prevention and response plan .
the contractors detailed plan for prevention of pollution that stems from the use containment cleanup and disposal of hazardous material including petroleum products generated by construction activities and the use of construction equipment .
swmp storm water management plan .
the departments general plan for control of projectrelated erosion and sedimentation .
it is developed by the department and included in the contract documents .
it serves as a resource for bid estimation and a framework from which the contractor develops the project swppp .
the swmp normally consists of the following swmp information sheet site specific erosion and sediment control plan sheets contract pay items with plan notes summary of temporary and permanent erosion and sediment controls and site specific drainage map .
swppp storm water pollution prevention plan .
the contractors plan for erosion and sediment control and storm water management under the opdes general permit .
the swppp is developed by incorporating pertinent information supplied by the department swmp with the contractors information and describing sitespecific controls and management of issues identified for the project based upon construction sequences and activities .
see specific requirements in subsection num.c contractor responsibilities for swppp .
management of ero .
sedimentation and swpp and control num num num materials provide materials for erosion and sediment control measures that conform to details shown in the contract and requirements of this specification .
these measures are subject to updates and amendments by the contractor during project progression .
the items estimated quantities and locations of the control measures will be shown on the plans however the resident engineer may increase or decrease the quantity of these items as the need arises .
the resident engineer also may allow other materials and work as the need arises and as approved in writing .
num equipment vacant num construction methods a .
general provide an swppp and a noi in accordance with the provisions of the latest version of the opdes general permit for construction activities issued by the odeq on construction projects with num acre num ha or more of earth disturbance .
projects to be constructed within the corporate limits of a municipality may require additional permits and compliance with additional local requirements or constraints .
all projects that involve earth disturbing operations require the appropriate bmps developed for that specific site with uptodate amendments by the contractor .
b .
department responsibilities for swmp the department will obtain dated photographs and video documentation of preexisting project site conditions at drainage locations and evidence of vegetation density prior to utility relocation or construction .
the department will prepare and include in the plans the swmp and swmp information .
the swmp sheets of the construction plan include nature of the activity proposed construction sequencing total site area total disturbed area runoff coefficient for prepost construction latitude and longitude of the site basic drainage receiving waters and site information required for swppp development site maps drainage patterns discharge locations approximate slopes limits of construction areas of earthdisturbance and areas of no earthdisturbance or buffer zones locations of major controls temporary and permanent structural and nonstructural practices limits of rightofway easements existing and new structures existing and proposed roadway grades num management of ero .
sedimentation and swpp and control num wetlands and other environmental conditions notes providing special conditions for endangered and threatened species or critical habitat detours details of the description and timing of final stabilization practices and pay items and estimated pay quantities based on the above information .
the department will provide a partially completed noi with the award package for completion and signature by the contractor .
require documentation from the contractor to ensure the odeq authorization to discharge has been obtained prior to allowing earthdisturbing activities to commence .
c. contractor responsibilities for swppp submit for review by the resident engineer at the preconstruction conference as required by subsection num notice to proceed and preconstruction conference swppps that address intended sequence of construction with a proposed schedule of activities .
all required erosion and sediment control measures for each construction phase .
compliance with the provisions of the latest version of the opdes general permit which include but are not limited to the following items or activities swmp and swppp copy of completed noi with contractor information and the odeq authorization to discharge .
the proposed dates and locations of planned and actual clearing and grubbing activities earthwork activities and construction of temporary and permanent erosion control features .
a description location and schedule of temporary and permanent best management practices .
a description location and schedule of control practices used to divert flows from exposed soils .
a description of construction material storage and controls used to minimize pollution from these materials .
a prepared spill prevention and response plan .
a description of the existing vegetation density within the project limits and adjacent land .
include pictures and video documented by date and location .
documentation of existing conditions of streams and water courses prior to earthdisturbing activities .
include pictures and video documented by date and location .
current opdes general permit is available on the project site .
how vehicle tracking will be prevented reduced or repaired during the project .
names titles companies and num hr contact information of people responsible for erosion and sediment control .
a signed qualification narrative provided by the contractor designating the persons responsible for the swppp identifying their familiarity with the swppp and documenting their training and experience .
a contractor certification statement for subcontractors is recommended .
this document places the responsibility of complying with and abiding by the intent and purpose of the storm water permit with the subcontractor for any and all work management of ero .
sedimentation and swpp and control num num performed under the authority and direction of the contractor .
a sample certification statement may be obtained on deqs website at www.deq.state.ok.us .
go to water quality general permits storm water okrnum storm water discharges from construction activities addendum d. develop the swppp using a combination of structural nonstructural and vegetative bmps to adequately control erosion and sedimentation and manage storm water .
modify the swppp as needed to address changes in the field that develop during construction .
submit amendments to the swppp for approval as work progresses or as the proposed phasingscheduling changes .
provide a copy of odeq noi and authorization to discharge to the resident engineer before commencement of earth disturbing activities .
failure to obtain the odeq authorization to discharge will not be a basis for delaying time charges .
identify contractor personnel responsible for onsite inspection of storm water management and documentation procedures to be used in accordance with subsection num.hnum inspection and maintenance of measures .
d. retention of records the swppp is a dynamic document .
retain and maintain all changes made to the swppp as required by the latest version of the opdes general permit .
this will be the official record .
retain and place in the swppp a copy of the permit language and all inspection and maintenance reports .
perform inspection and maintenance reports from the commencement of earth disturbing activities to the completion date of the project .
make these records available to odeq or other regulatory agencies during normal business hours .
provide copies to odot of any and all odeq inspection reports warning letters technical assistance notice of violation consent order and or administrative compliance orders .
submit the official swppp and all inspection and maintenance reports to the resident engineer at the completion of the project .
e. notice of intent noi complete the mailing information construction dates and sign the contractors noi provided with the contract award package to the odeq prior to the preconstruction conference .
provide to the resident engineer copies of the submitted noi for review at the preconstruction conference and the authorization to discharge certificate prior to earth disturbing activities .
at the preconstruction meeting indicate your understanding of the terms and conditions of the opdes general permit and that you will fully implement and maintain the swppp as proposed or modified during the progress of the project .
f. notice of termination not the not must be submitted by the contractor to the odeq .
the contractor will submit a copy of the not and odeqs final inspection report to the resident engineer .
odeqs final inspection must not have any critical exceptions for the project to be declared complete and the contractor relieved of any related construction site responsibilities in accordance with subsection num aproject completion and acceptance .
odeq will require the contractor to apply for a new permit if the project does not have num percent stabilization or any other discrepancies are found .
odeq offers a onetime inspection request form that will aid the contractor in determining whether a project will be accepted for termination before it submits the not .
num management of ero .
sedimentation and swpp and control num g. offsite pollution prevention plan prepare and submit swppp documentation complying with the latest version of the opdes general permit to odeq for all related work to take place outside the project rightofway .
submit copies of required swppps storm water permit documents for borrow pits workmaintenance yards and waste disposal yards asphalt and concrete plants dedicated to the project to the resident engineer at least num hr before related work starts .
install repair and maintain bmps outside of the project limits at no additional cost to the department .
h. contractors operations keep to a minimum project activity within the rightofway in areas other than on the paved roadway to prevent damage and destruction of existing vegetation .
keep all construction areas in an orderly condition and promptly dispose of all refuse and discarded materials .
repair or replace erosion and sediment control measures damaged due to negligence improper installation or lack of maintenance at no additional cost to the department .
num sequence of operations schedule and conduct an onsite inspection with the resident engineer to review and designate the locations and types of erosion and sediment control protection to be placed prior to beginning any work that will disturb existing vegetation .
indicate on the swppp proposed erosion and sediment control devices used to divert flows store flows limit runoff from exposed areas stabilize exposed soil and filter sediment for each phase of the scheduled work .
coordinate the placement of the temporary and permanent erosion and sediment control measures shown in the swmp with uptodate documented amendments to ensure effective and continuous erosion and sediment control throughout construction .
do not initiate earthdisturbing operations until the resident engineer has reviewed the swppp and the appropriate erosion control measures are in place .
num protection of watercourses locate and construct waste disposal areas maintenance and storage yards and haul roads within the project limits in a manner that will prevent sediment and other pollutants from entering streams and water impoundment areas or leaving the project site .
do not operate mechanized equipment in perennial streams unless otherwise allowed in the contract .
clear streambeds and watercourses as soon as practical of false work piling debris and other obstructions placed during construction which are not part of the finished work .
do not deposit concrete waste or clean haul trucks in these areas .
recover slurry from drill shaft operations and remove it from the project .
do not allow slurry to flow into streambeds .
num earthwork operations protect excavation or embankment slopes as construction progresses .
a maximum length of num mi num km may be exposed without either placement of management of ero .
sedimentation and swpp and control num num temporary eg .
seeding mulching soil retention blankets or other approved soil stability or permanent eg .
seeding sprigging or sodding erosion control measures .
obtain approval from the resident engineer in the preconstruction schedule for any increase or decrease in the amount of the area exposed by construction operations .
in addition to the maximum exposed surface area no exposed area shall remain unprotected for more than num calendar days without being stabilized .
stabilize areas within num ft num m of any streams within num hr of inactivity of construction operations .
install temporary or permanent erosion or sediment control measures on excavation or embankment slopes as work progresses in vertical increments of not more than num ft num m unless otherwise directed by the resident engineer .
maintain the top of the subgrade in all roadway sections through all construction stages so as to prevent silt from leaving the construction limits .
num inspection and maintenance of measures inspect and document all measures at least once every num calendar days and within num hr of ½ in num mm or greater rainfall event .
maintain all erosion and sediment control measures in accordance with the specifications at all times during the life of the contract for all disturbed areas material storage areas discharge locations drainage structures and vehicle entrancesexits for offsite tracking .
repair damaged measures remove trapped sediment and correct measures that are not working within num calendar days .
initiate repairs as needed or as directed by the resident engineer within num calendar day of damage occurring to erosion or sediment control measures that could result in discharge of sediment into live streams water impoundments or other nearby bodies of water .
remove accumulated silt before the control measures reach num percent capacity .
document each inspection of erosion and sediment control measures on a swppp inspection and maintenance report form approved by the engineer or a form proposed by the contractor and accepted by the engineer .
submit copies of the completed inspection forms signed by qualified personnel to the resident engineer within num hr of the inspections .
install a rain gauge at the project site and document rainfall amounts in the inspection schedule or reports .
num removal of control measures remove all temporary erosion and sediment control features from the project area when no longer required unless otherwise designated in the contract or directed by the resident engineer .
restore the areas of removal as close as possible in order to meet the previous ground lines cover and features .
obtain approval from the resident engineer to deposit sediment removed from control features within the rightofway .
if silt is disposed in stabilized areas restabilize the area at no cost as directed by the resident engineer .
i .
storm water compliance inspections the contractor shall perform periodic storm water compliance inspections and document each inspection in accordance with subsection num.h.num inspection and maintenance measures .
the resident engineer shall perform periodic inspections for compliance with opdes permit or general permit requirements and swppp documentation and control measures .
the odeq may inspect for compliance with noi requirements at any time until the not is submitted .
num management of ero .
sedimentation and swpp and control num num method of measurement swppp documentation and management will be measured on a lump sum basis .
properly install and maintain erosion and sediment control applications in accordance with the specifications within the rightofway or as approved by the resident engineer will be measured under other items of work .
erosion and sediment control applications attributed to the contractors negligence carelessness lack of maintenance or are outside the rightofway for material source or waste sites haul roads equipment storage and contractor offsite facilities will not be measured for payment .
noncompliance damages .
the department believes that the opdes program is an integral part of the project and any failure to maintain the measures in the field or lack of orderly documentation including but not limited to continuous inspection reports and revisions of the swppp may result in noncompliance citations by the odeq andor other local state and federal agencies .
the department will consider one or more of the following actions for failure to comply withhold a portion of payment for the lump sum item for swppp documentation and management withhold progressive payments for the project stop work on the project suspension of bidding for the contractor apply noncompliance assessments in accordance with subsection num.b non compliance assessment or the resident engineer will proceed to maintain the project in accordance with subsection num maintenance during construction .
num basis of payment approved documentation of noi authorization to discharge initial and updated swppps inspections inspection reports and acceptance of not by odeq will be paid at contract unit price as follows pay item pay unit swppp documentation and management lump sum such payment shall be full compensation for furnishing all materials equipment labor annual odeq permit fee and incidentals to complete the work as specified .
temporary erosion sedimentation and storm water pollution prevention and control pay items will be measured for payment under the relevant pay items in chapter num soils .
payment for this item of work shall be on the following schedule num percent for approved earth disturbing swppp documentation num percent when num percent of the contract work is completed num percent when num percent of the contract work is completed num percent when num percent of the contract work is completed num percent when num percent stabilization has been obtained all temporary erosion and sediment control devices have been removed and the storm water permit has been terminated .
noncompliance assessment .
management of ero .
sedimentation and swpp and control num num management of ero .
sedimentation and swpp and control table num noncompliance assessment schedule total disturbed area shown on the swmp sheet acre ha from to including rates per calendar day num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num no limit num if the resident engineer determines it to be appropriate noncompliance assessments will be charged in accordance with table num for failure to comply with the procedures specified in subsection num.h contractors operations failure to document inspection and maintenance activities specified in subsections num.c num.d num.e num.f and num.g or failure to document install or maintain field changes in erosion control measures in a timely and prescribed manner as directed in writing by the resident engineer .
the resident engineer will provide written notice of noncompliance to the contractor with a time line for accomplishment before assessments are applied .
the resident engineer will compile a schedule of calendar days for each and every day of noncompliance by the contractor .
the compiled schedule of calendar days will form the basis for charging the noncompliance assessments .
noncompliance assessments will continue until the resident engineer provides written notice of satisfactory compliance with these specifications to the contractor .
in addition to any noncompliance assessments indemnify and hold harmless the department officers and employees from all acts andor failure to act by the contractor hisher officers employees or agents and any other subcontractors which result in damages to the environment or to third parties or which are found to violate any rule or regulation of any regulatory agency .
reimburse the department for the actual cost of any reasonable legal fees liability damage judgment or finding fine penalty or expenses as a result of contractors negligent acts or violations of the above noted laws in its performance of the contract .
reimburse the department within num calendar days of the amount of assessment damage judgment or finding fine penalty or expense or the department may withhold this amount from the contractors next pay estimate or claim against the contractors bond if estimates are inadequate and deliver that sum to the permitting agencies issuing the assessment damage judgment or finding fine or penalty .
these assessments are not to be construed as a penalty but are actual damages to recover the costs assessed against the department due to the contractors failure to comply with the above requirements .
num temporary sediment control num section num temporary sediment control num description this work consists of constructing maintaining and removing the following items at locations shown on the storm water pollution prevention plan swppp temporary slope drains to avoid sheet flow on slopes temporary bale barriers to trap sediment at the toes of slopes or across ditches and defined waterways temporary silt fences to prevent sediment from moving off the rightofway temporary sediment filters to trap sediment and debris temporary sediment basins to collect sedimentladen runoff from disturbed areas temporary silt dikes to trap sediment at the toes of slopes or across ditches and defined waterways temporary rock filter dams to dissipate the energy of flowing water and collect sediment near the toes of slopes at upstream and downstream drainage structures and in roadway ditches or defined waterways .
num materials a .
temporary slope drain for temporary slope drains use flexible tubing plastic sheeting plastic screen burlap asphalt pipe or other materials .
for inlets use wood pipe end sections or other solid material .
construct outlets of loose rock brush straw waste concrete or pipe end sections .
b .
temporary bale barrier for temporary bale barriers use standardsized rectangular bales of straw or hay measuring num in num in num in num mm num mm num mm .
bind bales with wire or plastic twine .
anchor bales with stakes approximately num ft num m long that are capable of being driven firmly into the ground .
c. temporary silt fence provide material for temporary silt fence in accordance with subsection num filter fabric for silt fence .
for temporary silt fence use woven polypropylene polyester or polyamide material that is resistant to ultraviolet degradation mildew and rot .
seal or selvage the edges of woven fabrics to prevent unraveling .
use fabric at least num ft num m wide .
use posts with length of at least num ft num m and the ability to resist damage during installation and to support applied loads .
d. temporary sediment filter provide bales of straw or hay and stakes for type ia and ib sediment filter in accordance with subsection num.b temporary bale barrier .
provide material for type ic sediment filter in accordance with subsection num.c temporary silt fence .
provide any type of available nonerodible material for type ii sediment filters such as loose rock broken concrete or other salvageable materials .
temporary sediment control num num e. temporary sediment basin for both the inlet and outlet flows of the sediment basins use the following loose rock capable of withstanding anticipated water velocity displacement or other nonerodible materials approved by the resident engineer .
for type i sediment basins provide an outflow pipe with a diameter of at least num in num mm .
f. temporary silt dike provide materials for temporary silt dikes in accordance with subsection num temporary silt dike materials .
provide no .
num gauge wire staples at least num in num mm long .
g. temporary rock filter dam provide materials in accordance with the following subsections material subsection stone fill for gabions num wire mesh num filter fabric num provide ¾ in num mm no .
num deformed reinforcing steel bars for rock filter dam type num .
num equipment vacant num construction methods construct temporary sediment control devices so that water is prevented from entering the driving lanes .
a .
temporary slope drain at the end of each day construct diversion dikes in fill sections and construct or extend slope drains at points along the diversion dikes .
construct slope drains from the toe of the slope so that they may be extended as additional fill is completed .
provide inlets with each slope drain .
existing conditions and available materials will determine the type of outlet control .
place slope drains on back slopes as the excavation of the cut area progresses until the final grade is obtained and permanent controls are in place .
maintain slope drains and diversion dikes to ensure they are free of debris and open to the flow of water .
remove slope drains when permanent controls are complete .
b .
temporary bale barrier embed bale barriers num in num mm into the soil .
keep bale barriers in good condition by immediately replacing broken or damaged bales .
remove accumulated sediment in accordance with subsection num.h removal of sediment .
remove or leave bale barriers at the resident engineers direction .
num type i as ditch checks place the bales in staggered positions across the defined waterways and stake in place .
place the bales up the slopes of the waterway on num temporary sediment control num each side of the flow line .
to concentrate the flow of water into the center of the waterway ensure the top of the center bale is lower than the top of the adjacent bales .
num type ii as slope barriers place the bales endtoend parallel to the slope and no further than num ft num m from the toe of the slope .
stake to secure in place .
at specified locations replace bales with loose rock or other acceptable filtering material twothirds the height of a bale to act as a spillway .
c. temporary silt fence construct temporary silt fence to handle stress from hydraulic and sediment loading .
bury the bottom num in num mm of the filter fabric in a trench to prevent undercutting .
backfill the trench and compact the soil over the fabric .
splice fabric ends together with hog rings locking plastic ties or other methods approved by the resident engineer .
space the posts no more than num ft num m apart and embed at least num ft num m. use hog rings locking plastic ties or other methods approved by the resident engineer to securely fasten the geotextiles to the upstream face of the posts to withstand pressure during storms .
maintain the integrity of the silt fences during construction to contain sediment runoff .
inspect temporary silt fences immediately after each rainfall and at least daily during prolonged rainfall .
correct silt fence deficiencies immediately .
make a daily review of the location of temporary silt fences in areas where construction activities have changed the natural contour and drainage runoff to ensure that they are properly located for effectiveness .
remove accumulated sediment in accordance with subsection num.h removal of sediment and before it exceeds a depth of num in num mm .
remove the fences when the resident engineer approves .
after removing the fences grade and dress the affected area to the resident engineers satisfaction .
d. temporary sediment filter construct sediment filters as soon as the inlets are completed to receive runoff water .
place bales for types ia and ibstaked tightly togetherso that the water flow is slowed and goes over the bales before entering the inlet .
place a temporary silt fence for type ic so that the water flow slows and goes through the fence before it enters the inlet .
place nonerodible filter material for type ii sediment filters so that the water will slow and flow over and through the material before entering the inlet .
immediately repair damage to the filters .
remove accumulated sediment in accordance with subsection num.h removal of sediment .
sediment filters may be removed as directed by the resident engineer .
e. temporary sediment basin shape inlets to confine the water to the defined channel as it enters the basin .
construct outlets to slow the velocity of water so the sediment basin will retain temporary sediment control num num sediment .
either stockpile excavated material from construction of sediment basins or use it on the sediment basin dikes .
maintain sediment basins until permanent erosion control is complete .
remove accumulated sediment in accordance with subsection num.h removal of sediment .
f. temporary silt dike place silt dikes on the contour and in a row with ends tightly abutting the adjacent silt dike .
overlap the ends of the filter material num in num mm at adjacent silt dike sections and secure with wire staples .
ensure the sewn seam and front side of the silt dike section follow the approach apron .
the exiting apron will lie underneath the silt dike section and extend out beyond the discharge side as shown on the plans .
if installing silt dikes across surface drainage ditches ensure the highest point of the silt dike in the center of the ditch is lower than the lowest point of the dike at either end .
this will direct the water over the center of the silt dike and not around the ends .
place silt dikes along the contour or at a num to num percent gradient to a specified discharge point if installing them as diversion dikes .
inspect silt dikes after each rainfall and each numday period .
repair deficiencies or damages at no additional cost to the department .
remove sediment in accordance with subsection num.h removal of sediment .
g. temporary rock filter dam place rock filter dams where erosion is expected such as near the toe of slope upstream and downstream of drainage structures and in roadway channels or ditches .
construct rock filter dams with numhnumv or flatter side slopes within clear zones and numhnumv side slopes outside clear zones .
the plans show the dimensions of rock filter dams .
secure rock filter dams type num and num with wire mesh .
place rocks on the mesh to the specified heights .
fold the upstream side of the mesh over the rock and secure to the downstream side using wire ties or hog rings .
in streams secure or stake the mesh to the streambed before placing rocks .
maintain at least num in num mm between the top of the rock filter dam weir and the top of the embankment for filter dams at sediment traps .
embed rock filter dams at least num in num mm into the existing ground .
for rock filter dams type num stake sack gabions with bars in accordance with subsection num.g temporary rock filter dam .
inspect rock filter dams after each rainfall .
repair deficiencies or damages at no additional cost to the department .
remove sediment in accordance with subsection num.h removal of sediment .
when approved by the engineer rock filter dams can be left in place .
h. removal of sediment remove sediment from control measures in accordance with subsection num.hnum inspection and maintenance of measures .
after completing sediment removal leave control measures in a functioning condition .
if control measures are damaged or inadvertently moved during the sediment removal num temporary sediment control num num temporary sediment control process immediately reinstall or replace at no additional cost to the department .
before disposing of removed sediment in the rightofway obtain the resident engineers approval in accordance with subsection num removal and disposal of salvaged materials structures and obstructions .
num method of measurement the resident engineer will measure the replacement of temporary sediment control measures due to natural causes or as approved by the resident engineer .
the resident engineer will measure installed temporary slope drains on each section of cut or fill slope .
the resident engineer will measure temporary bale barriers along the length of each bale including the length of spillways .
the resident engineer will measure the length of temporary silt fence in place .
the resident engineer will measure rock filter dams by the volume of rock in place .
num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit a temporary slope drains linear foot meter b temporary bale barrier linear foot meter c temporary silt fence linear foot meter d temporary sediment filter each e temporary sediment basin each f temporary silt dike linear foot meter g temporary rock filter dam cubic yard cubic meter the department will consider the cost of construction maintenance and removal of temporary sediment control measures to be included in the contract unit price for the appropriate temporary sediment control pay item .
the department will consider the cost of the following to be included in the contract unit price for temporary slope drains inlets outlets and diversion dikes .
the department will consider the cost of spillways to be included in the contract unit price for temporary bale barrier .
the department will consider the cost of the following to be included in the contract unit price for temporary sediment basin inlets and outlets .
the department will consider the cost of other materials required to construct or stake rock filter dams to be included in the contract unit price for temporary rock filter dam .
the department will consider the cost of removing sediment trapped by the various temporary sediment control measures to be included in the contract unit price for the appropriate temporary sediment control pay item .
nylon erosion control mat num num section num nylon erosion control mat num description this work consists of providing and installing nylon erosion control mat for lining ditches and protecting slopes .
num materials provide materials in accordance with the following subsections material subsection nylon erosion control mat num.g seed num mat fasteners num.b num equipment vacant num construction methods a .
placing mat num ditch and slope preparation before installing nylon erosion control mat grade shape and finish ditch and slope surfaces so that they are stable firm and free of rocks or obstructions that would puncture the mat or prevent it from directly contacting the ditch and slope surface .
num ditches observe the planting seasons shown on the plans .
apply the sod sprig or seed shown on the plans to the ditch surfaces before installing the mat .
uniformly distribute common bermuda grass seed at a rate of num lb per acre num kg per ha on the exposed soil before installing the mat .
distribute the seed in accordance with subsection num.bnum seeding method a hydraulic seeder method or subsection num.bnum hand broadcasting method .
use three rows of mat for the standard ditch placement .
place the first row in the centerline of the ditch then place the two side rows adjacent to the first on the ditch slopes using lap joints of at least num in num mm .
at the terminal ends of the ditch dig an anchor slot transverse to the ditch centerline at least num in num mm vertically into the soil secure the mat in the anchor slot with fasteners backfill the anchor slot with soil and compact the backfilled soil to the density of the surrounding soil .
on ditches with grades exceeding num percent install a num in num mm deep check slot transverse to the ditch centerline every num ft num m and secure the mat in the check slots with fasteners .
num slopes observe the planting seasons shown on the plans .
apply the sod sprig or seed shown on the plans to the slopes before installing the permanent mat .
num nylon erosion control mat num num nylon erosion control mat dig an upper anchor slot at least num in num mm vertically into the soil at the top end and a lower anchor slot at least num in num mm at the bottom end each transverse to the mat row .
secure the mat in the anchor slots with fasteners backfill the anchor slots with soil and compact the backfilled soil to the density of the surrounding soil .
if a concrete lined ditch intersects the slope install the nylon erosion control mat as directed by the resident engineer .
overlap the mat on the concrete lined ditch at least num in num mm and fasten adjacent to the concrete edge install the mat so that the longitudinal edge will overlap the previously installed mat edge at least num in num mm .
for slopes over num ft num m long dig a transverse check slot at least num in num mm deep for every num ft num m of installed mat and secure the mat in the check slots with fasteners .
num end of roll overlap the ends of the mat roll num ft num m with the upslope end on top .
b. fastening the mat to hold the mat in place press fasteners firmly against the mat and drive them securely into the underlying soil .
install fasteners every num ft num m along each longitudinal edge lap joint and down the center of each mat width .
offset the center fasteners num in num mm longitudinally from the edge fasteners .
install fasteners across the width of mat at anchor slots check slots and end overlaps on num in num mm centers .
c. maintenance maintain the seeded and matted areas until project completion including reseeding replacing mat and refilling eroded areas .
num method of measurement the resident engineer will measure the area covered by the nylon erosion control mat installed in place not including overlaps between adjacent pieces of mat .
num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit nylon erosion control mat square yard square meter the department will consider the cost of mat fasteners and seeding to be included in the contract unit price for nylon erosion control mat .
ditch liner protection num num section num ditch liner protection num description this work consists of providing and installing excelsior mat or solid slab sod to protect ditch liners .
num materials provide materials in accordance with the following subsections material subsection excelsior mat num.c solid slab sod num mat fasteners num.b num equipment vacant num construction methods a .
placing excelsior mat place the excelsior mat so that the fibers are in contact with the soil and the netting is on top of the mat .
place one strip of mat adjacent and parallel to each side of the ditch liner .
hold the mat in place with fasteners as shown on the plans .
press them firmly against the mat and drive them into the underlying soil to secure the mat .
b .
placing solid slab sod place the type of sod as shown on the plans in accordance with subsection num.a solid slab sodding operations .
apply num gal num l of water and num lb num kg of num fertilizer per num ft num m of ditch liner .
c. repairs replace damaged ditch liner protection .
restore eroded soil beneath or surrounding the ditch liner and regrade before replacing ditch liner protection .
num method of measurement the resident engineer will measure ditch liner protection along the centerline of the ditch .
the linear measurement includes the ditch liner protection for both sides of the ditch to the width shown on the plans .
num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit ditch liner protection linear foot meter num ditch liner protection num num ditch liner protection the department will consider the cost of the following to be included in the contract unit price for ditch liner protection mat fasteners water and fertilizer .
section num sodding and sprigging num description this work consists of providing and planting bermuda grass sod or sprigs .
num materials provide materials in accordance with the following subsections material subsection bermuda grass solid slab sod num bermuda grass mulch sod num bermuda grass row sprigging num bermuda grass broadcast sprigging num water num num equipment a .
rolling equipment provide rolling equipment of a size and weight capable of firmly compacting the sod into the soil and removing air voids .
b. watering equipment provide watering equipment capable of applying water as shown on the plans from locations off the slopes and measuring the water with a calibrated meter .
c. row sprigging equipment provide equipment that performs the following in one continuous operation opens the furrows places the sprigs in the furrow and covers the sprigs and furrow with soil .
num construction methods a .
solid slab sodding operations prepare areas for solid slab sodding operations by performing the following grubbing existing vegetation filling and reshaping eroded areas cleaning ditches and refinishing slopes and medians to the typical grading section .
sodding and sprigging num num ensure the soil is moist in accordance with subsection num.f soil moisture and watering requirements .
clear the area of litter and debris .
the plans will show the location placement and seasonal requirements of solid slab sod .
place the slabs of sod in rows soil side down .
on slopes ensure the rows run parallel to the roadway .
place each slab tightly against the edge of adjoining slabs .
ensure the transverse joints do not run continuous across adjoining rows .
fill voids with additional sod .
compact the area using rollers or other equipment approved by the resident engineer .
immediately after placement thoroughly water the sodded area .
when the area stabilizes fill voids with soil approved by the resident engineer and water again .
continue watering in accordance with subsection num.f soil moisture and watering requirements .
apply fertilizer in accordance with subsection num.g fertilizer operations .
b. mulch sodding operations prepare areas for mulch sodding operations by performing the following filling and reshaping eroded areas cleaning ditches and refinishing slopes and medians to the typical grading section .
ensure the soil is moist in accordance with subsection num.f soil moisture and watering requirements .
before placing the mulch sod scarify the cut and fill slopes .
place the mulch sod on the prepared areas and spread it uniformly to a compacted thickness of num in num mm .
roll slopes along the contour lines unless the resident engineer directs otherwise .
immediately after placement thoroughly water the sodded area .
when the area stabilizes fill voids with soil approved by the resident engineer and water again .
continue watering in accordance with subsection num.f soil moisture and watering requirements .
apply fertilizer in accordance with subsection num.g fertilizer operations .
c. row sprigging operations prepare areas for row sprigging operations by tilling to a depth of at least num in num mm with an offset or tandem disk plow .
ensure the soil is moist in accordance with subsection num.f soil moisture and watering requirements .
apply fertilizer in accordance with subsection num.g fertilizer operations .
plant the sprigs with an automatic sprig planter in accordance with subsection num.c row sprigging equipment .
handplant in areas where the sprig planter can not operate .
plant the sprigs in furrows parallel to the contour lines of the slopes .
the distance between furrows shall not exceed num in num mm on centers .
place the sprigs num in num mm deep at the rate of num bushelsacre num m³ha with the ends of sprigs meeting or overlapping .
num sodding and sprigging num do not operate the sprig planter faster than num mph num kmh .
on the same day the sprigs are planted use rollers or other approved equipment to compact the entire sprigged area .
roll slopes along the contour lines .
immediately after placement thoroughly water the sprigged area .
when the area stabilizes fill voids with soil approved by the resident engineer and water again .
continue watering in accordance with subsection num.f soil moisture and watering requirements .
d. broadcast sprigging operations num broadcast sprigging method a prepare areas for broadcast sprigging method a by tilling to a depth of at least num in num mm with an offset or tandem disk plow .
if rain or other conditions pack the soil before planting is complete repeat the tillage .
plant at least num bushelsacre num m³ha of sprigs unless the contract requires otherwise .
broadcast the sprigs uniformly on the soil surface .
within num hr of planting the sprigs disk the areas to a depth of num in num mm with an offset or tandem disk plow .
num broadcast sprigging method b incorporate at least num bushels num m³ of sprigs into num yd³ num m³ of topsoil salvaged in accordance with subsection num.b type b salvaged topsoil .
use a method approved by the resident engineer to meter and distribute the sprigs into the stockpiled topsoil .
keep both the soil and sprigs moist during the mixing operation .
before placing the soilsprig mixture prepare areas for broadcast sprigging method b by scarifying parallel to the contours with equipment approved by the resident engineer .
spread the soilsprig mixture within num hr of mixing to a thickness of num in num mm .
num fertilizing rolling and watering use the following procedures for broadcast sprigging methods a and b apply fertilizer in accordance with subsection num.g fertilizer options .
compact the area using rollers or other approved equipment .
roll slopes along the contour lines .
water the sprigged areas within num hr of placement and continue watering in accordance with subsection num.f soil moisture and watering requirements .
e. planting seasons and weather restrictions perform sodding and sprigging as permanent erosion control during the planting seasons shown on the plans .
the contractor may perform permanent sodding and sprigging operations during a nonplanting season if the contractor submits and the resident engineer approves a written letter guaranteeing growth at the beginning of the next planting season .
as cut and fill sections are completed place and finish the salvaged topsoil and sod or sprig in accordance with seasonal limitations .
regardless of the dates specified the resident engineer may suspend the work during excessively wet or dry weather conditions .
sodding and sprigging num num promptly begin sodding or sprigging and proceed until completed or until the end of the planting season .
if a nonplanting season interrupts permanent sodding and sprigging operations resume work at the beginning of the next planting season .
if a nonplanting season interrupts permanent sodding or sprigging apply temporary sodding or sprigging on cuts fills and disturbed areas susceptible to erosion .
begin this work immediately after placing the topsoil or as the resident engineer directs .
f. soil moisture and watering requirements during sodding or sprigging operations ensure the soil is moist from num in num mm below to at least num in num mm below the surface .
estimate the required moisture content of the soil using the handsqueeze test .
the soil should form a tight cast when squeezed .
the cast should break into two pieces without crumbling or leaving excess water on the hand .
water sodded or sprigged areas daily for the first num days after planting .
continue watering these areas as necessary for num days after planting unless the contract requires or the resident engineer directs otherwise .
water short sections of sodded or sprigged areas until the top num in num mm of the soil is moist .
adjust the application rate and fineness of the spray to provide uniform infiltration and prevent erosion or runoff .
g. fertilizer operations apply fertilizer at the specified rates in accordance with section num fertilizing and agricultural liming .
do not place fertilizer on hard or glazed surfaces .
the contractor may disk to prepare soil remove weeds and incorporate fertilizer in one operation if approved by the resident engineer .
if the plans show fertilizer that contains phosphorous apply the fertilizer and mix into the soil before applying the sod or sprigs using an offset or tandem disk plow .
if the specified fertilizer contains only nitrogen apply the fertilizer after the sodding or sprigging operations are complete .
h. repair and maintenance repair and maintain sodded or sprigged areas until the resident engineer approves all of the project or that part of the project including the sodded or sprigged areas .
num repair recover replace and compact soil removed by erosion .
fill and reshape eroded areas clean ditches and refinish slopes and medians to the typical grading section .
reapply sod or sprigs refertilize and water the damaged areas during the planting seasons shown on the plans .
num maintenance control weeds by mowing hand cutting applying herbicides or other methods approved by the resident engineer .
remove weed growth on sodded areas as directed by the resident engineer .
if using herbicides apply them in accordance with label instructions and with the approval of the resident engineer .
mow in accordance with section num mowing .
num sodding and sprigging num sodding and sprigging num method of measurement the resident engineer will measure solid slab sodding mulch sodding row sprigging broadcast sprigging method a and broadcast sprigging method b by the area sodded or sprigged .
the resident engineer will measure watering using a contractorprovided calibrated meter .
num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit a solid slab sodding square yard square meter b mulch sodding square yard square meter c row sprigging square yard square meter d broadcast sprigging method a square yard square meter e broadcast sprigging method b square yard square meter f watering kgallon kiloliter the department will pay for fertilizer in accordance with section num fertilizer and agricultural liming .
if the resident engineer directs mowing operations the department will pay for mowing in accordance with section num mowing .
section num planting num description this work consists of providing handling planting and establishing plant materials .
num materials provide materials in accordance with the following subsections material subsection plant materials num.a organic mulch num.c water num num equipment if machineplanting trees the equipment must be capable of digging lifting carrying and placing a plant into a hole dug by the same or an identical machine without damaging the ball of soil or the plant .
obtain the resident engineers approval of the equipment before use .
planting num num num construction methods a .
general perform this work under the supervision of an experienced nurseryperson .
provide credentials to the resident engineer before starting work .
maintain and protect new plants and existing trees shrubs and turf from damage or injury before during and after planting establishment and maintenance operations .
for the purpose of section num planting br refers to barerooted and bb refers to balled and burlapped .
b .
product delivery storage and handling delivery plant material from the growing site to the planting site with special care and prevent excess drying of the roots and balls and wind damage to the foliage .
the department recommends tarps or covered vehicles .
pick up trees by the container or rootball not by the trunk .
if unable to plant br plants within num hr of delivery and bb or container plants within num hr heelin using moist soil or mulch or store in a protected area .
maintain heeledin plants and water as necessary until planted .
remove container grown plants from containers at planting time only .
the department will not accept plants that remain heeledin during the summer .
replace plants that the department determines unfit for planting at no additional cost to the department .
c. planting procedures num planting seasons and weather restrictions plant deciduous bb and br plants from november num to march num evergreen plants from october num to may num and container plants from september num to april num .
regardless of the specified planting dates suspend work when the temperature is below num f num c the wind velocity is over num mph num kmh the natural ground or topsoil is frozen or wet or the continuation of prevailing weather will damage plant materials .
complete planting operations as early in the specified season as possible .
remove plants that are not in accordance with the specifications after planting and replant immediately .
if the current planting season is over replant during the next planting season .
num plant locations the resident engineer may adjust plant locations shown on the plans to suit actual field conditions .
kill existing vegetation with an herbicide approved by the resident engineer before planting .
remove debris before planting .
num planting hole make plant holes vertical and cylindrical unless using an approved treedigging machine .
when excavating in rocky subsoil or in impervious material that would num planting num hamper proper drainage normal root development and growth loosen the soil with the resident engineers approval .
dig a large planting hole as deep as the rootball and two to three times as wide as the diameter of the top of the rootball .
ensure that the planting hole is at least three times the diameter of the container and at least num inches remains between the fully spread roots of a br plant and the sides of the planting hole .
for holes in material impervious to drainage rocky or heavy clay loosen the bottom and sides of the hole .
if planting grouped plants shrubs in a bed loosen or till the soil to a depth between num inches to num inches .
remove thick turf before tilling .
ensure the plant hole diameter is large enough to allow at least num in num mm of backfill between the fully spread roots and the sides and bottom of the hole .
make plantholes for containerized plants numtimes the diameter of the container and num in num mm deeper than the height of the container unless otherwise required by the contract .
if the plans show grouped plants in a plant bed loosen the plant bed to a depth of at least num in num mm and break up clods before excavating the plant holes .
uniformly spread excess material from planthole excavations over the surrounding area .
if the excess material is not appropriate for spreading dispose of it as approved by the resident engineer .
num planting procedures for bb container and br plants a prune prune sparingly .
examine the tree for injury to roots or branches .
cut crushed roots at a point just in front of the break .
prune only broken branches making sure to leave the branch collar intact .
bfertilizer never apply a highnitrogen fertilizer at planting time .
the department will specify the requirement for additional fertilizing in the plans .
c soil use existing native soil to backfill the hole .
dtree placement never carry trees by the trunk .
add a sufficient amount of soil to the hole to bring the tree or shrub to its original level .
for bb trees and shrubs the department will allow the burlap tie to be higher than the original soil line .
in heavy clay soils the department will allow the root ball to be slightly higher than the surrounding ground level but soil must be added to slope from the top of the root ball to the ground level .
e filling plant hole if planting bb cut the twine and remove the burlap from the top of the root ball after placing the tree in the planting hole .
cut and remove a minimum of onethird of the burlap from all sides of the root ball to prevent the burlap from exposure to direct air contact .
remove a minimum of onethird of any wire planting num num baskets from the root ball after placing the tree in the hole .
completely remove all containers peat pots and root control bags .
f br planting spreadout the roots when placing br plants in the planting holes .
backfill the hole with thin layers of friable native soil .
carefully tamp the soil around the roots to prevent damage or bruising .
use the same process of watering and adding soil as needed .
g tree well make a shallow saucerlike depression from the trunk to num in num mm outside the plant hole and construct a num in num mm high num in num mm thick ridge of compacted soil in a circle num in num mm outside of the plant hole at the edge of the depression around the tree .
hexcess soil uniformly spread excess soil from planthole excavations over the surrounding area .
if too much excess soil exists dispose of it as approved by the resident engineer .
num machine planting of trees a digging ensure each excavated tree has a ball of soil encompassing the root system .
provide a ball size in accordance with the requirements of ansi z num. btransporting transport the tree from the digging location or nursery to the new locations using the same machine that excavated the tree .
c planting place the tree in a hole dug by the same size spade used to excavate the tree .
the holes must be at least num in num mm larger in diameter than the root ball .
scarify or loosen the sides and bottom of the hole to allow water to drain before placing the tree .
place the top of the ball at a slightly higher elevation than the surrounding ground .
remove the machine backfill the hole with existing native soil or a num mix of native soil and planting mix water mulch and stake the tree .
d. staking stake container trees with calipers num in num mm or larger and bb and machine planted trees with calipers num½ in num mm or larger .
use nylon staking ties webbing or strapping to attach the stake to the trunk .
place the staking ties loosely around the trunk just above the lowest set of branches and attached to stakes placed outside the perimeter of the tree well .
leave at least num ft num m of the stake above ground .
leave the stakes for at least num year but not more than num years .
e. organicmulch establish and maintain a num in to num in num mm to num mm thick layer of approved organic mulch in a num ft num m diameter around the newly planted tree including num planting num num filling the tree well .
do not use landscape fabric or plastic .
pull the mulch away from the tree trunk to provide aeration .
do not make mulch volcanoes .
f. watering water plant material regularly until start of establishment period .
provide at least num in num mm of water per week water slowly and thoroughly .
if num in num mm or more of rainfall occurs during one week the department will not require supplemental irrigation for that week .
the department will not allow turf irrigation .
g. plant establishment period and contractors warranty .
take responsibility for the proper maintenance survival and condition of all plants for the establishment period specified in the contractors landscaping warranty bond or on the plans after final acceptance in accordance with subsection numc .
notify the engineer upon completion of installation of all plants .
mowing as part of the planting work will be identified in the contract .
continue any mowing of the planting areas specified in the contract throughout the establishment period .
the cost of mowing during the establishment period will be included in the cost of other bid items .
provide a landscaping warranty bond to the department in the amount of the total sums bid for all landscape items as evidence of warranty during the plant establishment period .
the cost of the bond will not be paid separately but will be included in the costs of other bid items .
the department will conduct interim inspections of all landscape items during the plant establishment period as well as at the end of the plant establishment period .
as part of the warranty to the department and at no cost to the department replace dead dying or unhealthy plants with plants of the same size and variety during the appropriate planting season .
healthy plants should have at least num percent of the canopy alive with leaves the appropriate size and color for the species .
at the end of the establishment period the department will release the contractor from further warranty work and responsibility provided all plants are established and all previous warranty and remedial work if any has been completed to the satisfaction of the department .
h. carryover work stop planting operations at the end of the initial planting season even if the planting activities are incomplete .
the department will not extend the initial planting season for failure to complete the work .
continue and complete the work during the next planting season .
the department will charge time from the beginning of the next planting season until remaining planting is complete .
the department will not charge time from october num to november num for deciduous plants or for replanting operations .
num method of measurement the resident engineer will measure healthy plants by each category .
seeding num num num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit a trees kind each b shrubs kind each c vines or ground covers kind each d trees machine planted kind each the department will consider the cost of water for watering plants mulch and fertilizer to be included in the unit price of the relevant trees shrubs or ground covers pay item .
section num seeding num description this work consists of preparing seedbeds providing and planting seeds and seeding for temporary and permanent erosion control .
num materials provide materials in accordance with the following subsections material subsection seed num water num num equipment a .
hydraulic seeder use a factorydesigned hydraulic seeder .
ensure the tank holds at least num gal num kl and include a mechanical agitation system with an operating capacity that can suspend and homogeneously mix the seed and water .
the distribution hoses must be large enough to prevent clogging and include spray nozzles that provide uniform distribution .
mount the equipment on a traveling unit capable of distributing the seed without operating on the area requiring seed .
b. grass seed drill use an approved native grass seed drill equipped with two planter boxes and two planting mechanisms that will simultaneously plant large chaffy seed and fine clean seed .
ensure the drill has the following characteristics a mechanism for accurately adjusting the rate of seed flow doubledisk openers for opening furrows on maximum num in num mm centers disk each with a depthregulating band num in num mm from the disk edge and num seeding num num furrow openers each with heavy press wheels to compact the soil behind the opener and leave the seed covered to a depth of from ½ in to ¾ in num mm to num mm .
c. corrugated roller seeder use a corrugated roller seeder equipped with two planter boxes and two planting mechanisms that will simultaneously plant large chaffy seed and fine clean seed .
ensure the roller wheels are corrugated mounted on tandem axles spaced on num in num mm centers and capable of placing the seed from ¼ in to ½ in num mm to num mm deep .
the seeder shall also include a mechanism for adjusting the rate of seed flow and weigh from num lb to num lb per foot num kg to num kg per meter of rolling width .
num construction methods a. seedbed preparation prepare the area by performing the following mowing existing vegetation in accordance with section num mowing filling and reshaping eroded areas cleaning ditches and refinishing slopes and medians to the typical grading section .
till the top num in num mm of soil along the soil contours .
disk the soil to incorporate thick layers of previously applied mulch or existing vegetation .
harrow and roll the soil to crush and pack dirt clods larger than num in num mm .
apply water where necessary .
when the plans specify hydraulic seeding leave or make the seedbed surface rough before seeding .
b .
seed planting methods plant the seed uniformly at the specified rate .
when several species of seed can not be combined due to different characteristicssize weight hulled or unhulledplant the seed separately .
num seeding method a hydraulic seeder distribute the seed with a hydraulic seeder in accordance with subsection num.a hydraulic seeder .
load no more than enough seed for num acre num ha of coverage into the num gal num kl spray tank of a hydraulic seeder and mix with water .
if using less than num gal num kl of water reduce the following in proportion to the water the amount of seed other specified materials inoculants fertilizer etc .
and the seeding area per load .
if required by the contract place inoculants in the spray tank with the seed .
powerspray to uniformly distribute the seed .
if distributing seed and fertilizer as a water slurry apply the mixture to the area to be seeded within num min of mixing the components .
seeding num num num seeding method b grass seed drill plant the seed with a grass seed drill in accordance with subsection num.b grass seed drill .
perform grass seed drilling on the approximate soil contours .
num seeding method c corrugated roller seeder distribute the seed with a corrugated roller seeder in accordance with subsection num.c corrugated roller seeder .
on slopes plant along the soil contours .
num hand broadcasting method use handbroadcasting in areas that are small or inaccessible to equipment .
c. planting season and weather restrictions perform seeding as erosion control in accordance with subsection num.e planting seasons and weather restrictions .
d. soil moisture and watering requirements during seed application ensure the soil is moist from num in num mm to at least num in num mm below the surface .
estimate the required moisture content of the soil using the handsqueeze test .
the soil should form a tight cast when squeezed .
the cast should break into two pieces without crumbling or leaving excess water on the hand .
e. fertilizer application apply fertilizer in accordance with section num fertilizing and agricultural liming .
f. repairs and maintenance repair and maintain seeded areas at no additional cost to the department until the resident engineer approves all of the project or that part of the project including the seeded areas .
num repair recover replace and compact soil removed by erosion .
fill and reshape eroded areas clean ditches and refinish slopes and medians to the typical grading section .
reseed refertilize and water the damaged areas during the planting seasons shown on the plans .
num maintenance control weeds by mowing handcutting applying herbicides or other methods approved by the resident engineer .
remove weed growth on seeded areas as directed by the resident engineer .
if herbicides are necessary use them in accordance with label instructions and with the approval of the resident engineer .
mow in accordance with section num mowing .
num method of measurement the resident engineer will measure seeding method a seeding method b and seeding method c by the area seeded .
num seeding num seeding num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit a seeding method a acre hectare b seeding method b acre hectare c seeding method c acre hectare the department will pay for water used to water seeded areas in accordance with section num sodding and sprigging .
the department considers the cost of water used as a carrier in hydraulic seeding operations to be included in the contract unit price for seeding method a .
the department will consider the cost of hand broadcasting seed to be included in the contract unit price for the appropriate seeding pay items .
the department will pay for fertilizer in accordance with section num fertilizing and agricultural liming and mowing in accordance with section num mowing .
section num mulching num description this work consists of providing applying and fastening mulching materials to the soil surface .
num materials provide materials in accordance with the following subsections material subsection vegetative mulch num asphalt mulch num excelsior mat num excelsior mulch num wood cellulose fiber num mulch fasteners num num equipment provide equipment in accordance with the following a .
equipment for vegetative and excelsior mulch use the following equipment methods to distribute vegetative and excelsior mulch num adhesive spray method apply and fasten vegetative and excelsior mulch using a machine that includes a blower to distribute the vegetative material and a pump to distribute the liquid adhesive .
arrange the discharge pipe of the blower and the discharge nozzles of the liquid adhesive hoses so that the liquid adhesive is evenly distributed into the mulch as it emerges from the blower discharge spout .
ensure the hoses can mulching num num distribute the liquid adhesive at the specified rate .
ensure the machine can operate the liquid adhesive pump and the mulch blower and distribute the liquid adhesive bound mulch at the specified rate over the areas shown on the plans with one pass of the machine .
do not allow the beater mechanism to shorten the stem lengths of the vegetative material .
num mulching tiller method ensure the machine for applying vegetative or excelsior mulch meets the specifications for adhesive spray method except that the department will not require a liquid adhesive pump or accessories .
use a mulching tiller that is a heavy disktype roller with flat disks about ¼ in num mm thick and spaced no more than num in num mm apart .
b .
equipment for wood cellulose fiber mulch to apply wood cellulose fiber mulch use factorydesigned hydraulic equipment with enough pump capacity to apply the specified quantities .
use a slurry tank that holds at least num gal num kl and includes a mechanical agitation system that can suspend and homogeneously mix the mulch and water .
ensure the slurry distribution hoses are large enough to prevent clogging and include spray nozzles that will evenly distribute the slurry .
mount the equipment on a traveling unit .
ensure the traveling unit can apply wood cellulose fiber mulch without tracking into the mulching area .
c. equipment for asphalt mulch ensure the distributor equipment includes the following pressure gauge volumemeasuring device or calibrated tank power unit for the pump fullcirculation adjustable spray bar and handoperated spray bar .
check the distribution rate and uniformity of application as directed by the resident engineer .
num construction methods a. mulching operation before applying the mulch material as temporary erosion control repair eroded areas and clear debris that might hinder a uniform mulch application .
if using mulch over seeding or sodding apply the mulch material within num hr after seeding or sodding .
if mulched areas become damaged reshape the area seed or sod and mulch again as originally specified .
do not perform mulching operations during conditions that will result in a non uniform application or wasted material .
b .
type of application the following are accepted methods of application num mulching num num num adhesive spray method for excelsior and vegetative mulch broadcast the vegetative or excelsior mulch into a continuous cover of uniform thickness .
apply the mulch at the rate of num tonacre num metric tonha .
during the spreading operation inject the adhesive material into the mulch at the mulch blower discharge spout to uniformly distribute it throughout the mulching material .
unless otherwise required by the contract use emulsified asphalt ssnum at the rate of num galacre num lha .
if the department requires the use of other fastener types the plans will show the type and quantity .
to prevent wind from displacing mulch place a bank of soil or a complete coverage of asphalt along the edge of the mulched area .
promptly remove clumps of excess material .
num mulching tiller method for excelsior and vegetative mulch spread the mulching materials uniformly in accordance with subsection num.bnum adhesive spray method for excelsior and vegetative mulch .
apply at a rate of num tonacre num metric tonha for vegetative mulch or num tonacre num metric tonha for excelsior mulch .
immediately after the mulchspreading operation till the mulched area to press the material num in num mm into the soil .
use a disk plow to till impermeable soil before spreading and tilling the mulch .
if mulching loose sandy soil do not exceed the mulch application rate .
if mulching slopes operate the tiller along the contour of the slope .
num asphalt mulching dilute the mulching asphalt with three parts water to one part emulsified asphalt .
apply at the rate of num galyd² num lm² .
if impermeable soil may cause appreciable mixture runoff reduce the amount of water to eliminate runoff and ensure the emulsified asphalt is applied at the rate of num galyd² num lm² .
if applying asphalt mulch over sodded areas water the sod immediately before application .
num wood cellulose fiber mulch complete seed fertilizer lime and other erosion control items before applying cellulose material .
apply wood cellulose fiber mulch at a rate of at least num lbacre num kgha of airdry material .
disperse suspend and apply the material using water at the rate of num gal to num lb num l to num kg of material .
apply the cellulose fiber to form a uniform layer over the area shown on the plans .
num excelsior mat place the mat so that the fibers are in contact with the soil and the netting is on the top .
place each strip of mat parallel to the direction of the flow of water .
num method of measurement the resident engineer will measure asphalt mulching by the volume of undiluted emulsified asphalt .
fertilizing and agricultural liming num num num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit a vegetative mulching acre hectare b excelsior mulching acre hectare c asphalt mulching gallon liter d wood cellulose fiber acre hectare e excelsior mat square yard square meter section num fertilizing and agricultural liming num description this work consists of providing and applying fertilizer or agricultural liming materials .
num materials provide materials in accordance with the following subsections material subsection fertilizer num.a agricultural limestone num.b hydrated lime num.b num equipment provide fertilizer and lime spreaders in accordance with the following a. vertical drop and broadcast type use an agriculturaltype spreader to apply dry fertilizer or lime .
ensure the machine uniformly distributes materials at the specified rates without damaging the fertilizer granules or lime .
b .
power spray provide equipment for distributing fertilizer or lime with water in accordance with subsection num.a hydraulic seeder .
num construction methods a .
general apply fertilizer and lime with vertical drop or broadcast spreader unless otherwise shown on the plans .
do not apply during weather that could result in waste or poor distribution .
apply the fertilizer or lime before or during the ground preparation for permanent seeding or sodding depending on the type of fertilizer required by the contract .
if directed by the resident engineer refertilize repair work at no additional cost to the department .
num fertilizing and agricultural liming num num fertilizing and agricultural liming b .
methods of applying fertilizer or lime num vertical drop or broadcast method apply the fertilizer or lime uniformly at the specified rate with a spreader in accordance with subsection num equipment .
ensure the equipment does not rut or damage the prepared surface .
num power spray method apply the fertilizer or lime in water at the specified rate .
ensure the maximum quantity of fertilizer placed in the spray tank with num gal num kl of water does not exceed the quantity specified for num acre num ha of seeding or sodding .
also ensure that the maximum amount of lime placed in the spray tank with num gal num kl of water does not exceed the quantity specified for num acre num ha of seeding or sodding .
if less than num gal num kl of water is loaded into the spray tank reduce the quantity of fertilizer or lime loaded and the area treated per load in proportion to the water .
num hand broadcast method apply the lime or fertilizer with handoperated equipment on areas inaccessible to large spreaders or power sprayers .
num method of measurement the resident engineer will measure materials for fertilizing agricultural limestone and agricultural hydrated lime with approved scales or use the manufacturers guaranteed weights .
if the contractor provides a substitute grade of fertilizer the resident engineer will calculate the equivalent weight of each fertilizer element provided by the substitute grade per the area as would have been applied with the specified grade .
num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit a fertilizing ton metric ton b agricultural limestone ton metric ton c agricultural hydrated lime ton metric ton mowing num num section num mowing num description this work consists of mowing or handcutting vegetation at locations directed by the resident engineer .
num materials vacant num equipment if possible use mechanical equipment for mowing operations .
num construction methods to prevent rutting mow when the ground can support mowing equipment .
repair damage to the surface at no additional cost to the department .
mow directed locations to a height of num in to num in num mm to num mm .
remove litter debris and grass clippings to prevent smothering the grass or retarding growth .
in locations inaccessible to mechanical mowers use handcutting methods to provide a uniform appearance .
num method of measurement the resident engineer will measure the area of locations directed by the resident engineer and actually mowed .
num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit mowing acre hectare num chapter num bases section page no .
num general requirements for bases num num aggregate basenum num caliche basenum num subgrade treatmentnum num subgradenum num processing existing base and surfacenum num cement treated basenum num econocrete base num num opengraded bases num num separator fabric for basesnum num geosynthetic reinforcement num general requirements for bases num num section num general requirements for bases num description this section consists of the general requirements for the construction of bases .
num materials make necessary preliminary investigations to locate the proposed source of acceptable material .
if available the contractor may inspect departmentobtained information related to subsurface investigations in accordance with subsection num examination of plans specifications special provisions and the work site .
unless otherwise required by the contract provide soils and aggregates with maximum and inplace densities in accordance with subsection num.anum compaction of fill .
num equipment a. mixing equipment num traveling plants provide single or multiplepass traveling plants approved by the resident engineer .
ensure the traveling plants are capable of pulverizing and mixing the material identified in the jobmix formula in accordance with chapter num bases and chapter num materials .
mount the plant on wheels or on treads that will not damage the subgrade .
if a singlepass machine is used ensure it is designed to pick up material from a windrow or blanket and is capable of picking up and mixing the material separated from the mixing table during at least half of the mixing cycle .
ensure the plant has equipment for metering and inserting liquids into the mixture in accordance with the specified mixture or mix design .
repair equipment leaks immediately .
num stationary plants provide stationary plants of the following types batch mixing that uses a revolving blade or rotary drum mixer or continuous mixing .
proportion all the ingredients in the jobmix formula by weight or volume and provide access to the resident engineer to verify the proportions in each batch of a batch mixer or the rate of flow of a continuous mixer .
set the charge and mixing time in a batch mixer or the rate of feed to a continuous mixer to completely mix the materials .
ensure both plant types deliver a uniform mixture .
b. compactors unless otherwise specified use the following equipment to achieve uniform density across the base or subbase in accordance with subsection num.anum compaction of fill num general requirements for bases num num general requirements for bases nonvibratory steelwheeled roller vibratory compactor pneumatic tired roller tamping type roller or any combination of the above equipment .
c. sprinklers ensure sprinklers discharge water uniformly and continuously .
d. distributors and supply tanks ensure distributors and supply tanks meet the requirements of subsection num.a distributors and supply tanks .
num construction methods a. tolerances provide the required subgrade subbase and base in accordance with the following num surface elevation and smoothness finish the subgrade subbase and base to elevations within ½ in num mm of the elevations shown on the plans .
ensure the surface smoothness is within ½ in num mm in num ft num m. test for surface smoothness by placing a num ft num m straightedge between any two contacts on the finished surface and measuring the distance from the surface to the straightedge .
num width and thickness finish subbases and bases to the minimum width shown on the plans or directed by the resident engineer .
ensure an average job thickness within ¼ in num mm of the thickness shown on the plans .
the resident engineer will determine the average job thickness by measuring the completed thickness at intervals of no more than num ft num m in each driving lane .
for individual measurements that exceed the plan thickness by more than ½ in num mm the resident engineer will use the plan thickness plus ½ in num mm .
for individual measurements of thickness that measure less than the plan thickness by more than ½ in num mm the resident engineer will require the contractor to correct the thickness and rework the material .
b. corrections correct material dimensions that exceed the specified tolerance by methods approved by the resident engineer at no additional cost to the department .
num method of measurement vacant num basis of payment the department will consider the cost of water to be included in the contract unit price for the appropriate existing base pay item .
aggregate base num num section num aggregate base num description this work consists of providing and placing one or more layers of aggregates and specified additives on a prepared subgrade or subbase .
num materials provide aggregate material for the gradation type shown on the plans type a type b or type c in accordance with subsection num aggregate for aggregate base .
during aggregate production do not change the approved gradation type or source unless the resident engineer approves another gradation type or source in writing .
num equipment vacant num construction methods a .
preparation of subgrade prepare the subgrade in accordance with subsection num.b subgrade method b for all other subbases bases pavement or surface or as required by the contract .
b .
preparation of existing base course prepare existing aggregate base course in accordance with section num processing existing base and surface or as required by the contract .
c. mixing aggregate base mix or blend materials for aggregate base using a stationary or traveling plant at outside locations approved by the resident engineer .
num stationary plant mix the aggregate and water uniformly in an approved central mixing plant pugmill rotary drum or continuous mixer .
add water during the mixing operation to achieve the proper moisture content for compaction in accordance with subsection num.e shaping and compaction .
num traveling plant perform the following steps to produce aggregate base using a traveling plant clean the specified area of vegetation and deleterious materials .
overlay the specified area with at least num in num mm of base material and compact to achieve a work table for mixing operations .
before combining the aggregates required to produce a specified mixture deliver and place the weighed and properly proportioned materials in measured windrows .
if the mixing machine requires a blanket of material spread the windrow to a uniform depth and width consistent with the machines capability .
num aggregate base num num add water during the mixing operation to achieve the proper moisture content for compaction in accordance with subsection num.e shaping and compaction .
avoid using excess water during mixing and compaction to prevent undue softening of the subgrade .
ensure the device used to pick up the material does not contaminate the mixture by cutting into the work table .
continue mixing until the aggregate and water are evenly distributed and a uniform mixture is produced meeting specification requirements .
during the mixing process adjust the mixing equipment to prevent material from moving in a longitudinal direction .
d. spreading transport the mixed aggregate base materials to the roadbed and place using an asphalt laydown machine unless otherwise approved by the resident engineer .
place aggregate base material in layers of from num in to num in num mm to num mm compacted thickness .
spread and compact the aggregate base material over the full width of the roadbed before placing a succeeding layer .
finish compacted layers to the grades elevations and thicknesses shown on the plans .
correct segregated areas at no additional cost to the department .
stagger longitudinal and transverse joints at least num ft num m in each succeeding layer .
when constructing successive layers of aggregate base minimize disturbance to the surface of the previously placed layer .
adjust placement procedures or equipment to ensure compliance with the contract requirements .
e. shaping and compaction compact each layer to the proper density no less than num percent of maximum density for type a aggregate base and num percent for types b c and d aggregate base in accordance with aashto tnum method d. apply water uniformly over the base materials during compaction to ensure a uniform texture firmly keyed aggregates and proper consolidation of layers .
prevent damage to aggregate particles during compaction .
cure the aggregate base material before applying the prime coat .
if the density required by the contract is achieved the department will not consider moisture content as an acceptance criterion .
f. tolerances finish the aggregate base in accordance with subsection num.a tolerances .
num method of measurement the resident engineer will measure the volume of the compacted inplace aggregate base type a type b and type c by multiplying the completed length of aggregate base by the area of the typical section shown on the plans .
caliche base num num num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit a aggregate base type a cubic yard cubic meter b aggregate base type b cubic yard cubic meter c aggregate base type c cubic yard cubic meter section num caliche base num description this work consists of constructing a base of approved deposits of calcareous and siliceous material constructed on the prepared subgrade .
num materials provide materials in accordance with subsection num caliche base .
num equipment vacant num construction methods a .
preparation of subgrade before placing the new subbase and base course material on the roadbed prepare the subgrade in accordance with subsection num.b subgrade method b for all other subbases bases pavement or surface or as shown on the plans .
pulverize the existing surface and base materials and place the materials to establish the new subgrade in accordance with section num processing existing base and surface or as shown on the plans .
b. mixing and placing if material is to be combined and blended on the roadbed deliver weighed material and place it in measured windrows each in the proper proportions before blending .
do not exceed the amount that can be uniformly mixed by the equipment on the project during one days operation .
before mixing is complete uniformly moisten the mixture for the length of the section being treated to ensure workability and prevent excess wet and dry spots in the finished blend .
avoid using excess water during mixing and placing to prevent undue softening of the subgrade .
c. spreading after the resident engineer tests and approves the blended windrow spread the caliche base material uniformly over the length and width of the section .
prevent segregation of the mixture .
ensure that the thickness of each layer of caliche base material does not exceed the compaction equipments capability to obtain the specified density .
num caliche base num num caliche base d. compactiondensity uniformly moisten each layer during compaction and continue rolling to produce a density of at least num percent of maximum density determined in accordance with aashto t num .
e. tolerances finish the caliche base in accordance with subsection num.a tolerances .
num method of measurement the resident engineer will measure the volume of the compacted inplace caliche base by multiplying the completed length of caliche base by the area of the typical section shown on the plans .
num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit caliche base cubic yard cubic meter section num subgrade treatment num description this work consists of providing placing and compacting one or more layers of a mixture of soil chemical additives and water to achieve a stable subgrade .
chemical additives used to stabilize or modify are defined as cementitious additives portland cement fly ash or cement kiln dust or lime additives .
a. subgrade stabilization incorporate chemical additives into the subgrade to increase the strength of the subgrade soils and to provide structural value for the pavement structure .
b. subgrade modification incorporate chemical additives into the subgrade to change the pi of the subgrade soils and improve its workability as a platform to support construction equipment .
on projects where sulfate soils may be present especially for projects in field divisions num num num and num determine soluble sulfate content of the soil in accordance with the departments materials division test method ohd lnum .
determine the applicability of subgrade treatment in accordance with ohd lnum and ohd lnum .
do not perform subgrade treatment if sulfate content exceeds the threshold value specified in ohd lnum ohd lnum and ohd lnum .
subgrade treatment num num num materials provide materials in accordance with the following subsections material subsection portland cement num water num fly ash num cement kiln dust num hydrated lime num quick lime num store all additives in a building or compartment that will protect them from dampness and allow easy access for inspection and identification of each shipment .
do not mix additives from different sources in storage .
do not mix lime from different sources in storage .
do not use additives that have been contaminated or exposed to moisture .
num equipment provide subgrade stabilization equipment in accordance with subsection num equipment .
num construction methods a .
general regulate the sequence of subgrade treatment use the prescribed amount of additive and maintain the work or rework .
complete a layer of treated material containing a uniform mixture of soil additive and water that has the following characteristics no loose or segregated material uniform density and moisture content full depth compaction and a smooth surface suitable for placing subsequent courses .
b .
weather limitations apply additives for subgrade stabilization when the air temperature is at least num f num c and rising .
apply additives for subgrade modification when the air temperature is at least num f num c and rising .
measure the air temperature at a location num ft num m above the ground in the shade and away from artificial heat .
do not apply additives if the ground is frozen .
protect the quality of the additive and treated subgrade from the weather .
c. preparation of existing roadbed before beginning any subgrade treatment shape and compact the roadbed to the dimensions and elevations shown on the plans or directed by the resident engineer .
roll the subgrade and correct soft areas revealed by this rolling as approved by the resident engineer .
d. scarifying and loosening if directed by the resident engineer scarify and loosen the subgrade material before applying the additive .
scarify and loosen a length of roadway on which the num subgrade treatment num additive application and mixing can be completed in one day .
avoid loosening the subgrade material below the depth of specified additive treatment .
the resident engineer may waive portions of the work if excessive rock is encountered .
excessive rock is defined as subgrade material consisting of at least num percent particles with a dimension greater than num½ in num mm .
perform exploratory scarifying directed by the resident engineer to make an excessive rock determination .
e. application base the additive type and final application rates on classification tests of the subgrade soil .
the department will perform the classification tests .
if approved by the resident engineer the contractor may have tests performed by a department approved laboratory at no additional cost to the department .
apply the additive at a rate prescribed by the departments materials division procedures for stabilization ohd lnum or modification ohd lnum .
if available a copy of a soils report may be obtained from the departments office engineer division before the bid opening .
the soils report consists of soil classification data and is for estimating purposes only .
refer to the departments materials division website for the most current ohd procedures .
to propose the substitution of a cementitious additive not shown on the plans submit a proposal to the resident engineer for approval .
in the proposal include the following the test results performed by a departmentapproved laboratory the recommended application rates and the cost comparison of the planned and proposed additives .
do not substitute additives before the resident engineer approves the requested substitution .
provide equipment to control the additive application rate .
if the classification of subgrade soil changes establish a new application rate in accordance with the departments division procedures for soil stabilization ohd lnum or modification ohd lnum before applying the additive .
num application of cementitious additive use dry methods of application for placing the cementitious additive on the subgrade .
use approved types of spreading equipment that can distribute the cementitious additive uniformly .
do not apply cementitious additive using the slurry method .
do not allow the additive to become wet before mixing and do not place on a wet subgrade .
do not apply cementitious additives if wind blows the additive off the subgrade work area .
replace lost additive at no additional cost to the department .
complete on the same day mixing compacting and finishing subgrade areas where additives are placed .
remove additive exposed to moisture and replace before completion of the first mixing operation at no additional cost to the department .
for subgrades requiring soil modification before applying the cementitious additive pretreat with lime at the rate prescribed in the materials division policy for soil modification in accordance with subsection num.e.num application of lime .
subgrade treatment num num num application of lime additive do not apply lime if wind blows the lime additive off the subgrade work area .
use approved types of spreading equipment that can distribute the lime additive uniformly .
place the lime on an area of subgrade where the first mixing operations can be completed on the same day .
do not expose the lime additive to open air for more than six hours .
a dry method num quick lime for quick lime use departmentapproved equipment that uniformly distributes controlled amounts .
num hydrated lime use bagged hydrated lime for drymethod application as approved by the resident engineer only under unusual circumstances or when it would be impossible or impractical to use other methods .
meet all applicable federal state and local laws .
ensure that the bagged lime indicates the manufacturers certified weight .
bslurry method do not use compressed air in any of the slurry mixing methods .
mix lime with water into a slurry using one of the following methods that will maintain the lime and water slurry in a uniform mixture until spread num central plant meet mixing requirements using integral paddles recirculating pumps or other devices .
equip the slurry distributor truck with a recirculating pump or agitator that can keep the lime and water in a uniform mixture until spread .
num transit mix using a departmentapproved method weigh or meter the lime from the storage bin into the tank transit mix truck .
equip the tank transit mix truck with a recirculating pump or agitator that can maintain a uniform mixing of lime and water while in transit .
equip the distributor truck with a pump .
apply the slurry through spray bars under pressure to assure a uniform flow and distribution .
ensure that the slurry mixture meets the following at least num ton num tonne of lime to num gal num l of water and a maximum of num percent lime .
f. mixing spread the additive and mix with the subgrade continuously .
unless otherwise approved by the resident engineer complete the mixing operation during the same day that the additive is applied .
before field mixing determine the optimum moisture content for maximum density of the compacted soiladditive mixture in accordance with aashto tnum .
to account for moisture loss during the mixing process increase the moisture content by from num percentage points to num percentage points above the optimum moisture content for the mixture .
num subgrade treatment num use a pulver mixer equipped with a spray bar in the mixing chamber and capable of producing a soiladditive mixture with a moisture content within the specified range .
use a departmentapproved mixing procedure that using traveling mixing equipment that uniformly disperses the additive and water through the soil .
num mixing for cementitious additive treatment reduce the size of the soiladditive mixture to meet the following gradation requirements table num soiladditive mixture gradation sieve size percent passing num½ in num mm num ¾ in num mm num in a single mixing achieve the gradation and moisture content requirements to the depths specified on the plans .
the department will not pay for the second use of a pulver mixer if the resident engineer determines that the gradation or moisture content do not meet requirements .
modify the work process to meet the above requirements in a single mixing if directed by the resident engineer .
the contractor shall provide but the department will not pay for additional cementitious additive and repulverization to the correct moisture content of any portion of the work area that the additive has hydrated before compaction unless waived by the resident engineer .
num mixing for lime treatment a first mixing mix the soil lime and water to achieve a uniform mixture of material with a maximum diameter of num½ in num mm .
add water in the first mixing process to ensure proper chemical reaction between the lime and soil .
allow the mixture to cure .
when using hydrated lime allow a curing time of num h at temperatures above num f num c. when using quick lime allow a curing time of num h at temperatures above num f num c. the resident engineer may extend the cure time if the temperature falls below num f num c during the curing period .
the department does not require cure time extensions for modification or lime pretreatment .
maintain the materials in a moist condition during the curing period .
seal the surface of the treated area by lightly rolling the surface to repel water and contain moisture .
if directed by the resident engineer rescarify portions of the treatment area and provide additional sprinkling to ensure proper moisture .
bquick lime mixing minimize harmful exposure of workers to the heat of hydration .
use departmentapproved means to turn under a significant portion of the quick lime within num h after spreading and before adding water .
to initiate hydration add sufficient water within num h after spreading .
caution uncovered quick lime in the presence of moisture may be hazardous to worker .
subgrade treatment num num c final mixing after the specified curing time use departmentapproved methods to mix the material uniformly .
ensure the soillime mixture meets the following requirements tested in a dry condition table num soiladditive mixture gradation sieve size percent passing num½ in num mm num no .
num num mm num minimum num mixing for lime pretreatment provide the first lime mixing in accordance with subsection num.f.numa first mixing .
num mixing for depths of at least num in num mm compacted thickness no treated layer shall exceed num in num mm in depth .
for cut sections deeper than num in num mm remove material above the bottom num in num mm to treat the bottom layer .
during normal fill construction add and mix the specified amount of treatment additive to each num in num mm layer .
complete the fill construction as shown on the plans .
the resident engineer may approve the use of special equipment or methods to vary the mixing depths .
num mixing for excessive rock areas in two separate stages pulverize and mix excessive rock areas as directed by the resident engineer .
the resident engineer may waive the particle size requirement .
g. compaction num general compact the soiladditive mixture immediately after final mixing .
complete compaction on the same day as the mixing .
sprinkle and roll the soiladditive mixture .
scarify reshape sprinkle and re compact with rolling to immediately correct all irregularities depressions or weak spots .
num moisturedensity requirements compact before an appreciable loss of mixing moisture occurs .
ensure compaction within num percentage points of optimum moisture content for the mixture .
the resident engineer may authorize changes or adjustments in the moisture requirements .
before beginning compaction conduct moisturedensity tests on roadway samples to verify the target density for the soiladditive mixture .
use the aashto tnum test method modified to provide one compacted specimen of the mixture .
num subgrade treatment num num uniformly compact the depth of the soiladditive mixture to at least num percent of target density .
determine field density in accordance with aashto t num or subsection num.anum compaction of fill .
num excessive rock the resident engineer may adjust the requirements for soiladditive mixture uniformity target density and optimum moisture in excessive rock areas .
provide substantial compliance to the specification requirements in these areas as approved by the resident engineer .
the resident engineer may waive the density and moisture content requirements and approve compaction by visual observation .
h. finishing and curing compact the final layer of the treated subgrade to the lines grades and typical sections shown on the plans .
finish the completed section with a light roller to prevent hairline cracks .
sprinkle the treated subgrade to maintain the moisture content until placing a prime coat seal or succeeding layer .
avoid placing construction loads or operating equipment until the treated subgrade has cured and can withstand the loads without damaging the subgrade .
if the subgrade deforms under the construction loads and can not return back to its original condition or if it deflects more than num in num mm allow the subgrade additional curing time before operating equipment on the subgrade .
the department will not pay for the replacement and refinishing the treated subgrade if the material loses the required stability density or finish before the next course is placed .
i .
tolerance finish the treated subgrade in accordance with subsection num.a tolerances .
after completing the final grade use a colorsensitive indicator solution such as phenolphthalein or thymol blue to measure the thickness and uniformity of the compacted soil and chemical mixture in accordance with subsection num.anum width and thickness .
apply the indicator solution along the side of a small hole excavated to the required depth of chemical treatment and note the depth and uniformity of the color change .
num method of measurement the resident engineer will measure the area of completed inplace cementitious stabilized subgrade cementitious modified subgrade lime pretreatment lime stabilized subgrade lime modified subgrade modified subgrade and stabilized subgrade .
num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit a fly ash ton metric ton b cement kiln dust ton metric ton c portland cement ton metric ton d lime ton metric ton subgrade treatment num num pay item pay unit e cementitious stabilized subgrade square yard square meter f cementitious modified subgrade square yard square meter g lime pretreatment square yard square meter h lime stabilized subgrade square yard square meter i lime modified subgrade square yard square meter j modified subgrade square yard square meter k stabilized subgrade square yard square meter subgrade treatment the department will not pay for lime exposed to open air for more than six hours or for lime lost due to excessive washing or blowing .
if selective subgrade topping is a separate pay item the department will consider the cost of cementitious or lime additives to be included in the contract unit price for the relevant subgrade modification or stabilization pay item .
the department will pay for quick lime based on a num percent available lime index using the rapid sugar method in accordance with astm cnum and will calculate payments as a percent of cao by weight .
the department will pay for hydrated lime based on a num percent available lime index using the rapid sugar method in accordance with astm cnum and will calculate payments as percent caoh² by weight .
if the available lime index for quick lime or hydrated lime falls below num percent the department will reduce the payment by num percent of the lime contract unit price for each num percent from num percent to num percent .
if the available lime index falls below num percent the department will not pay for the additional lime necessary to bring the available lime index to num percent .
the department will consider the cost of excavating layers deeper that num in to be included in the contract unit price for the relevant subgrade modification or stabilization pay item .
the department will consider the cost of water and rolling to be included in the contract unit price for the relevant subgrade treatment pay item .
the department will pay for prime coat in accordance with section num prime coat .
the department will consider the cost of chemical additives at the specified rate for the appropriate soil classification in accordance with ohd lnum to be included in the contract unit price for modified subgrade .
the department will consider the cost of chemical additives at the rate specified for the appropriate soil classification in accordance with ohd lnum to be included in the contract unit price for stabilized subgrade .
if a separate pay item for selective subgrade topping exists the department will consider the cost of cementitious and lime additives to be included in the contract unit price for cementitious stabilized subgrade cementitious modified subgrade lime stabilized subgrade or lime modified subgrade .
num subgrade num section num subgrade num description this work consists of preparing the existing materials for the immediate construction of subbase base pavement or surface .
num materials vacant num equipment vacant num construction methods a. subgrade method a for trafficbound surface course shape and crown the width of the existing roadbed with a blade grader to the grade shown on the plans .
complete the cross section to at least a num percent crown or as directed by the resident engineer .
remove unstable soil and exposed rocks larger than num in num mm and replace with acceptable material .
finish each subgrade layer to a smooth uniform surface and maintain this condition until placement of the succeeding layer .
b. subgrade method b for all other subbases bases pavement or surface scarify or process the subgrade to create uniform moisture to a depth of num in num mm .
in rock cuts that can not be scarified or otherwise processed shape the subgrade with material in accordance with subsection num.b selective subgrade topping or as directed by the resident engineer .
pulverize the loosened soil and compact the top num in num mm uniformly to a maximum density of at least num percent in accordance with subsection num.anum compaction of fill .
unless approved by the resident engineer provide subgrade material with moisture content within num percentage points of optimum in accordance with aashto t num .
use mechanical tampers to compact sections of the subgrade inaccessible to rolling equipment .
finish the subgrade in accordance with subsection num.a tolerances .
test the subgrade to ensure it meets the contract requirements and correct deficiencies before placing the succeeding course .
excavate unstable material below the top num in num mm of the subgrade and backfill with acceptable material to the subgrade elevation in accordance with subsection num construction methods and as approved by the resident engineer .
remove and replace unstable material in fill areas at no additional cost to the department .
correct or remove and aerate unstable material due to excess moisture in the top num in num mm of the subgrade at no additional cost to the department .
processing existing base and surface num num num method of measurement vacant num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit a subgrade method a square yard square meter b subgrade method b square yard square meter the department will pay for this pay item once for work performed on the subgrade as defined in subsection num definitions regardless of the work necessary to stabilize the subgrade as all subbases or base courses are placed on the subgrade .
if excavation beyond machine drifting is necessary to complete the subgrade to the elevations shown on the plans the department will pay for this work as the appropriate earthwork pay items in accordance with section num earthwork .
the department will pay for additional material needed to finish the subgrade to the elevations shown on the plans as the appropriate earthwork pay items in accordance with section num earthwork .
section num processing existing base and surface num description this work consists of removing processing reusing or disposing of existing aggregate surface course base course or asphalt surface .
num materials vacant num equipment vacant num construction methods loosen or scarify the aggregate or other material to its full depth and width .
break aggregate or asphalt into pieces that will pass a num in num mm sieve .
place the materials in windrows on the subgrade or shoulder .
avoid contamination of base or surface material due to excess soil or other foreign material .
the department will not pay for the costs of reworking damaged or contaminated material .
compact processed material used for base courses shoulders and drives in method b method c and method d to at least num percent of maximum density in accordance with aashto t num .
a .
method afor salvage and stockpiling prepare storage area by removing grass weeds and other waste before stockpiling material .
avoid the addition of excess amounts of soil or other foreign material which would render it unusable .
load and haul the processed material to storage locations shown on the plans .
num processing existing base and surface num num processing existing base and surface b .
method bfor use in subgrade place processed material in windrows on the shoulder during shaping and conditioning the subgrade .
after completing the subgrade spread the processed material uniformly over the width of the section and compact with the subgrade .
c. method cfor use as subbase spread the processed material evenly on the previously shaped conditioned and compacted subgrade and compact .
d. method dfor use in new base courses shoulders or drives place the processed material on the completed subgrade as a base course shoulder or drive or blend uniformly with new material for any course .
obtain approval by the resident engineer before using processed material .
num method of measurement the resident engineer will measure processing existing base and surface method a method b method c and method d along the centerline to the nearest foot meter .
num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit a processing existing base and surface method a linear foot meter b processing existing base and surface method b linear foot meter c processing existing base and surface method c linear foot meter d processing existing base and surface method d linear foot meter cement treated base num num section num cement treated base num description this work consists of constructing a cementtreated base ctb using a soil aggregate and cement mixture .
num materials provide material in accordance with the following subsections material subsection portland cement num water num fly ash num curing agents num.d aggregates num provide a separator fabric in accordance with section num geotextiles for bases except ensure the fabric meets the requirements of aashto mnum class num and weighs at least num ozyd² num gm² .
num equipment use equipment for producing and placing the ctb in accordance with subsection num equipment except only use stationary plants and equipment that combines placement and initial compaction .
num construction methods a .
mix design and proportioning submit the mix design in accordance with ohd lnum to the materials engineer for approval before placing the ctb .
submit to the resident engineer a singlepoint gradation for the combined aggregates ensure cementitious materials consist of at least num percent portland cement and no more than num percent fly ash .
test the compressive strength in accordance with ohd lnum .
________________________________________________________________________ with a plus and minus tolerance for each sieve .
num cement treated base num num b .
placement before spreading the ctb moisten the surface of the compacted subgrade unless the subgrade has been primed .
finish and compact the ctb to produce a smooth dense surface that is free of surface compaction planes cracks ridges or loose material .
compact the ctb within num hr of adding water to the aggregate and cement .
follow the recommendations of the mix design .
compact the ctb to at least num percent of the maximum density and test in accordance with ohd lnum .
place the ctb in a single layer .
ensure the compacted thickness is from num in to num in num mm to num mm .
after strike off and consolidation finish the ctb to meet the required elevation cross section and smooth surface finish .
use equipment that automatically controls both grade and line to trim the surface of the ctb .
keep the ctb surface moist during finishing operations and until the application of the curing agent .
apply a curing agent on the finished ctb surface at the rate of at least num gal per num ft² num l per num m² .
use butt or sawed longitudinal construction joints those between driving lanes shall match the longitudinal joint of overlying pavement .
place other longitudinal joints within num ft num m of the longitudinal joint of the overlying pavement and construct transverse joints as butt joints .
before placing the overlying pavement sweep the ctb surface .
place and secure the separator fabric onto the surface of the ctb in such a manner that the fabric remains free of wrinkles and cracks .
overlap the fabric num in num cm .
limit construction traffic on the ctb to that necessary to apply asphalt cement fabric and overlying pavement .
do not use the ctb layer as a haul road .
allow only concrete delivery trucks necessary to deposit fresh concrete directly in front of the paver .
place overlying pavement on the base after compressive strengths reach at least num psi num kpa in accordance with ohd lnum .
repair damage to the ctb at no additional cost to the department .
c. weather limitations if the aggregate or subgrade is frozen or the ambient air temperature in the shade is num f num c and rising do not mix ctb .
protect ctb from freezing for num days after placement .
d. tolerances finish the ctb in accordance with subsection num.a tolerances .
num method of measurement the resident engineer will measure the surface area of the completed cement treated base placed at the thickness shown on the plans .
econocrete base num num num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit cement treated base square yard square meter the department will consider the cost of paving fabric and asphalt cement to be included in the contract unit price for cement treated base .
section num econocrete base num description this work consists of the construction of an econocrete base .
num materials provide material in accordance with the following subsections material subsection aggregate num portland cement num water num air entraining agent num fly ash num chemical admixtures num curing agents num num equipment use equipment for producing and placing the econocrete base in accordance with subsection num equipment .
num construction methods use the absolute volume method for a cubic yard cubic meter to design the econocrete base mix proportions .
identify the following in the design the source of each material the proportion of each material the properties of the mixture and the compressive strength of the mix at num days .
submit the mix design to the resident engineer for approval at least num days before placing the econocrete base .
ensure the mix design meets the following criteria the mix requires a cement content of at least num lbyd³ num kgm³ .
the contractor may substitute up to num percent of the cement content with fly ash at a ratio of num lb num kg of fly ash per num lb num kg of cement .
do not use fly ash from november num through april num .
num econocrete base num num econocrete base the mix produces a maximum slump of num in num mm .
the mix produces an air content of from num to num percent .
the mix produces a compressive strength at num days of at least num psi num kpa determine the compressive strength by testing six cylinders in accordance with subsection num.d tests and samples .
construct the econocrete base in accordance with subsection num construction methods with the following exceptions after strike off and consolidation finish to the elevation and cross section shown on the plans and to create a smooth surface finish .
do not place longitudinal or transverse joints in the econocrete base except for butt joints used for construction joints .
apply a curing agent at a rate of at least num gal per num ft² num l per num m² of econocrete base and allow it to cure for num days .
a curing day is a period of num hr during which the ambient air temperature remains at least num f num c. begin the curing time count when the econocrete base construction is complete for the day and after the curing agent is applied .
the department will not allow construction traffic or the placement of overlying pavements on the econocrete base until the unconfined compressive strengths of test cylinders made during the base placement reach at least num psi num kpa .
limit construction traffic on the base do not use as a haul road .
repair damage to the base at no additional cost to the department .
from num hr to num hr before placing reinforcing steel for the overlying pavement sweep the econocrete base and make a second application of curing agent at a rate of at least num gal per num ft² num l per num m² .
do not allow traffic on the econocrete base after the second application of curing agent .
finish the econocrete base in accordance with subsection num.a tolerances .
num method of measurement the resident engineer will measure the surface area of completed econocrete base placed at the thickness shown on the plans .
num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit econocrete base square yard square meter opengraded bases num num section num opengraded bases num description this work consists of constructing a permeable base course which includes the following mixing aggregate and bituminous material or aggregate portland cement concrete and water in a central plant and spreading and compacting the mixture on a prepared surface .
num materials provide materials in accordance with section num plant mix bituminous bases and surfaces and the following subsections material subsection aggregate num water num fly ash num portland cement num num equipment use equipment for producing heating mixing hauling spreading compacting and finishing the opengraded bituminous base ogbb in accordance with subsection num equipment .
use equipment for producing mixing hauling spreading compacting and finishing the opengraded portland cement concrete base ogpccb in accordance with subsection num equipment and subsection num equipment .
num construction methods a .
general num prime coat if required by the contract apply a prime coat in accordance with section num prime coat .
num tolerances finish opengraded bases in accordance with subsection num.a tolerances .
num hydraulic efficiency construct and maintain a hydraulically efficient opengraded base .
perform a hydraulic efficiency test num hr before placing the overlying pavement .
do not place overlying pavement until achieving acceptable hydraulic efficiency defined as num qt num l of water absorbed into the base surface with no remaining standing water num sec after pouring .
remove and replace opengraded base that fails to achieve acceptable hydraulic efficiency as directed by the resident engineer at no additional cost to the department .
num opengraded bases num ensure that soil mud or other materials are not tracked spilled or washed onto the opengraded base .
repair damage to the opengraded base as approved by the resident engineer at no additional cost to the department .
b. opengraded bituminous base ogbb construct ogbb in accordance with subsection num construction methods with the following exceptions num weather limitations construct ogbb in accordance with subsection num.h temperature and weather limitations .
num construction traffic do not allow construction traffic on the ogbb until the ogbb has cooled overnight and do not place overlying pavement on the ogbb until the curing period is complete .
limit construction traffic on the ogbb do not use ogbb as a haul road .
repair damage as approved by the resident engineer at no additional cost to the department .
c. opengraded portland cement concrete base ogpccb ensure the following construction requirements are met the mix has a cement content of at least num lbyd³ num kgm³ .
limit fly ash substitution to no more than num percent of the required cement maintaining a substitution ratio of num lb num kg of fly ash per num lb num kg of cement .
the water to cement ratio is no greater than num calculated using the following equation f c w w c where c w water to cement ratio w weight of water measure the amount of water mixed into the batch plus the free water on wet aggregate minus the water absorbed by dry aggregate c weight of cement and f weight of fly ash .
the resident engineer will review and approve the water to cement ratio calculation .
num mixing and placing mix and place ogpccb in accordance with subsection num.c mixing concrete subsection num.e setting forms and subsection num.f placing concrete .
num weather limitations and maintenance quality do not mix ogpccb if the aggregate or subgrade is frozen .
mix and place ogpccb when the ambient air temperature is at least num f num c and rising .
protect and maintain the quality of the base after its placement and approval by the resident engineer .
ensure repairs yield a uniform and durable surface replace opengraded bases num num opengraded bases low areas and other flaws for the full depth of the base .
maintain and repair the ogpccb at no additional cost to the department .
num base ensure the subgrade is uniformly moist at the time of the ogpccb placement .
num consolidation of mixture consolidate the mixture using vibratory equipment during laydown operations to achieve at least num percent of maximum density as determined in accordance with aashto t num .
measure the consolidation of the finished ogpccb from num min to num min after placement and consolidation using a nuclear density gauge in accordance with aashto t num .
num water curing cure the completed ogpccb by directing a fine spray of water onto the surface every num hr for a period of num hr .
begin curing immediately after its initial set when water no longer removes cement paste .
num construction joint prepare construction joints in the ogpccb by cutting back the edge of the base to create a vertical face .
replace material removed to create the construction joint at no additional cost to the department .
num traffic restrictions and curing period do not allow construction traffic on the ogpccb except the paver .
ensure the numday curing period is complete before placing pavement layers on top of the ogpccb .
place material for succeeding layers using the side discharge method .
num method of measurement the resident engineer will measure the area of inplace opengraded bituminous base and opengraded portland cement concrete base completed to the thicknesses shown on the plans .
num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit a opengraded bituminous base square yard square meter b opengraded portland cement concrete base square yard square meter the department will pay for prime coat in accordance with section num prime coat .
num separator fabric for bases num section num separator fabric for bases num description this work consists of installing a separator fabric for bases .
num materials provide separator fabric in accordance with subsection num geotextiles for bases .
num equipment vacant num construction methods a .
shipping and storage provide separator fabric in wrapper that will protect the fabric from ultraviolet radiation and abrasion from shipping and handling .
label each roll to identify each product for inventory and quality control .
in the field store and protect the fabric rolls from the elements .
b .
installation before placing fabric ensure the subgrade is smooth and free of obstructions that may damage the fabric .
place the fabric smooth straight and free of wrinkles at the locations shown on the plans .
overlap each transverse joint of fabric between rolls with the end of the preceding role placed above the beginning of the succeeding role at least num in num mm .
place and cover the fabric with base material on the same day .
apply at least num in num mm of base material by end dumping .
fill and compact ruts in the base material .
repair damaged fabric in sections that meet the specified overlap requirements at no additional cost to the department .
c. weather limitations if wind disturbs the fabric secure it with large nails and washers or with base material .
num method of measurement the resident engineer will measure the area covered by separator fabric after placement not including overlaps .
num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit separator fabric square yard square meter geosynthetic reinforcement num num section num geosynthetic reinforcement num description this work consists of installing geosynthetic reinforcement material beneath the aggregate base layer in the pavement structure or beneath the roadway embankment .
this includes the use of geogrids and geotextiles .
geotextile is made of synthetic fibers manufactured in a woven or loose nonwoven manner to form a blanketlike product used to reinforce soil and rock .
geogrid is a continuous sheet of netshaped synthetic material formed by tensile elements that reinforce soil and rock by interlocking .
num materials use geosynthetic reinforcement that is an integrallyformed single layer structure .
provide geogrids in accordance with subsection num geogrid subgrade reinforcement of pavement structures .
provide geotextiles in accordance with aashto m num for class num geotextiles .
num equipment vacant num construction methods a .
general label each roll with product identification for inventory and quality control .
in the field protect geosynthetic rolls from the following site construction damage ultraviolet radiation including sunlight for more than num hr strong acids strong bases flames sparks temperatures above num f num c and other environmental conditions harmful to the geosynthetic .
if storing the geosynthetics outdoors elevate the rolls above the ground surface and protect them with an opaque waterproof cover .
on the first full day of geosynthetic installation ensure the geosynthetic manufacturer or a representative is present to observe and advise .
before placing the geosynthetic clear the site of topsoil trees stumps rocks and large debris in accordance with section num clearing and grubbing .
place the geosynthetic in the direction of the fill operation .
tension the geosynthetic by hand and secure to the ground as directed by the resident engineer .
anchor the geosynthetic to the ground so that wrinkles formed during fill or aggregate placement unfold freely as additional fill is placed .
ensure the overlapping sections of the geosynthetic do not separate during the placement of fill .
cut the geosynthetic and overlap diagonally to accommodate curves in the alignment and to prevent excessive wrinkling .
secure overlap areas with small piles num geosynthetic reinforcement num of aggregate fill pins with washers or large heavygauge staples driven securely into the subgrade .
do not operate tracked construction equipment directly on the geosynthetic .
place a layer of fill with a thickness of at least num in num mm over the geosynthetic before operating tracked vehicles on the geosynthetic .
operate rubbertired equipment over the geosynthetic at speeds no greater than num mph num kmh if the underlying subgrade can support the loads without rutting and the tires do not damage or wrinkle the geosynthetic .
avoid sudden braking or sharp turning when operating equipment on the geosynthetic .
num placement in the pavement section after clearing the site grade and smooth with a nonvibratory steelwheeled roller to achieve a firm level working surface .
place the geosynthetic at the elevation and alignment shown on the plans and parallel to the centerline of the roadway .
unroll the geosynthetic in the direction of the fill operation .
do not place geosynthetic more than num ft num m ahead of the aggregate base placement .
enddump the aggregate base material directly onto the geosynthetic or on the previously placed aggregate base .
blade the aggregate base material onto the geosynthetic so that the aggregate base rolls onto the material ahead e.g .
by gradually raising a dozer blade while moving forward .
fill ruts in the aggregate base with additional aggregate base material do not blade adjacent material to fill ruts .
place at least num in num mm of aggregate base material over the geosynthetic .
num placement under roadway embankment after clearing the site end dump fill material onto the geosynthetic or on the previously placed fill .
blade the fill material onto the geosynthetic so that the fill rolls onto the material ahead e.g .
by gradually raising a dozer blade while moving forward .
place at least num in num mm fill material over the geosynthetic .
b. geotextile place geotextile in accordance with subsection num construction methods .
if placing geotextile rolls sidebyside or endtoend overlap sew or join the edges in accordance with aashto m num appendix anum and table num .
ensure sewn seams are in accordance with aashto m num appendix anum .
c. geogrid place the geogrid at the locations shown on the plans or as directed by the resident engineer .
keep the geogrid smooth and taut while placing the cover material and ensure that stakes or anchors do not restrict the movement of the geogrid .
ensure the geogrid sections do not separate at overlaps during placement of cover material .
if placed at curves cut the geogrid and overlap diagonally to prevent buckling .
num overlap overlap geogrid rolls by placing the end of the roll to be covered first over the end of the succeeding roll .
overlap adjacent rolls of geogrid num ft num m in each geosynthetic reinforcement num num direction tie adjacent rolls with hog rings or cable ties at intervals of num ft num m. secure the geogrid corners with fill material .
num placement of fill do not operate equipment directly on geogrid placed on soft ground .
for normal soil conditions dump fill directly onto the geogrid .
for softer soil conditions dump fill on previously placed fill that will bear the weight of the fill material and push the fill over the geogrid .
when placing fill on the subgrade work from areas of stronger soil conditions to areas of weaker soil conditions .
for very soft soil conditions use a lightweight low groundpressure dozer to place fill as directed by the resident engineer .
for most soil conditions compact with a light roller and add moisture .
for very soft soil conditions use static rather than vibratory compaction .
if rutting or severe pumping occurs under equipment add fill to strengthen the section .
num method of measurement the resident engineer will measure the area of completed geotextile reinforcement and geogrid reinforcement not including overlaps .
num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit a geotextile reinforcement square yard square meter b geogrid reinforcement square yard square meter the department will consider the cost of preparing grading and rolling the site to be included in the contract unit price for geotextile reinforcement and geogrid reinforcement .
the department will pay for aggregate as aggregate base type a type b and type c in accordance with section num aggregate base .
num chapter num general requirements for surfaces section page no num general requirements for surfaces num num trafficbound surface coursenum num chip sealnum num thin surface courses num num permeable friction course num num opengraded friction surface coursenum num fog seal and tack coatnum num prime coatnum num fabric reinforcement for hot mix asphalt pavementnum num hot mix asphaltnum num coldmilling pavementnum num rumble strip num num portland cement concrete pavementnum num concrete joint sealingnum num dowel bar retrofitnum num diamond grinding concrete pavementnum num pressure grouting pavement num num rubblizing portland cement concrete pavement num general requirements for surfaces num num section num general requirements for surfaces num description this work consists of all types of surface construction .
num materials provide materials for surface construction in accordance with the relevant section or sections of chapter num materials .
num equipment a .
distributors and supply tanks provide distributors and supply tanks capable of uniformly applying bituminous material in accordance with the following at the temperatures specified in the relevant specification sections on variable widths of surface not to exceed num ft num m at rates from num galyd² to num galyd² num lm² to num lm² and with constant pressure and uniform temperature .
ensure the distributor can apply material to vertical faces of asphalt pavement at the joints between paving operations .
prevent variation that exceeds the specified application rate by more than num galyd² num lm² .
provide a distributor equipped with the following a tachometer pressure gauges volumemetering devices or a calibrated tank a thermometer for measuring temperatures of tank contents a power unit for the pump full circulation spray bars adjustable vertically and laterally a positive shutoff valve and fittings that prevent bituminous material from dripping .
frequently check and adjust the angle of the spray nozzles and the height of the spray bar to ensure uniform distribution of the bituminous material .
the department will not allow drilling clogging or streaking the bituminous material .
if any of these conditions occur stop the operation and correct the problems creating these conditions before resuming distribution .
if the resident engineer directs check the rate and uniformity of distribution .
provide supply tanks in accordance with aashto m num section num .
b. compactors provide rollers of the following types vibratory steelwheel num general requirements for surfaces num num general requirements for surfaces nonvibratory steelwheel pneumatic tire or a combination of the three types .
provide rollers in good condition capable of reversing without backlash and operating at speeds that do not displace the bituminous mixture .
equip vibratory rollers with working amplitude controls or frequency controls designed specifically for the compaction of the specified bituminous material .
use rollers of a type number and weight to complete the compaction of the bituminous material before its temperature drops below the specified minimum .
the department will not allow equipment that crushes the aggregate in the bituminous material .
num construction methods a. tolerances provide the required surface construction in accordance with the following num surface elevation and smoothness finish the surface elevations for new pavement construction and overlays within ½ in num mm of the elevations shown on the plans .
if the plans do not show the elevations for overlays provide a finished surface in accordance with the surface smoothness tolerances .
ensure the surface smoothness is within ⅛ in in num ft num mm in num m. test for surface smoothness by placing a straightedge between two contacts on the finished surface and measuring the distance from the surface to the straightedge .
num width finish surfaces to the minimum width shown on the plans .
b. corrections correct material dimensions that exceed the specified surface tolerance using methods approved by the resident engineer only at no additional cost to the department .
c. surface protection before starting paving operations submit to the resident engineer a plan to protect the pavement from damage by the paving operations .
if paving operations spall crack chip rut or deface the pavement repair the pavement at no additional cost to the department .
num method of measurement vacant num basis of payment vacant trafficbound surface course num num section num trafficbound surface course num description this work consists of constructing a surface course of hard and durable particles of sand gravel crushed stone or disintegrated granite and placing the surface material on a prepared subgrade .
num materials provide aggregate materials in accordance with subsection num aggregates for traffic bound surface course .
num equipment vacant num construction methods a .
preparation of subgrade before placing surface course material on the subgrade complete the subgrade in accordance with subsection num.a subgrade method a for trafficbound surface course or section num earthwork as applicable .
b .
shaping and maintenance if placing material adjacent to the roadway shape and compact as directed by the resident engineer .
correct irregularities such as holes ruts waves and undulations with material from the working windrow on the subgrade .
continue shaping the surface material until it is compacted and free of irregularities .
place the surface course material to the elevations shown on the plans .
remove excess material and stockpile at a location approved by the resident engineer .
c. traffic control unless otherwise specified avoid closing the road to traffic .
minimize interference with traffic .
maintain warning signs and lights to safeguard against traffic accidents .
place windrows or piles of surface course material on the shoulders and off the traveled roadway at the end of the workday .
num method of measurement for each material quantity of the relevant trafficbound surface course pay item the resident engineer will deduct the weight of moisture that is in excess of num percent of the ovendry weight .
num trafficbound surface course num trafficbound surface course num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit a traffic bound surface course type a ton metric ton b traffic bound surface course type b ton metric ton c traffic bound surface course type c ton metric ton d traffic bound surface course type d ton metric ton e traffic bound surface course type e ton metric ton f traffic bound surface course type f ton metric ton section num chip seal num description this work consists of constructing a single or double surface treatment of aggregates and bituminous materials .
num materials provide materials in accordance with the following sections material section cover aggregates num bituminous prime num bituminous binder num unless otherwise specified use the following aggregates for surface treatments .
for single bituminous surface treatments use cover aggregate no .
num cover aggregate no .
num cover aggregate no .
numc precoated aggregates or light weight cover aggregates lwca .
for double bituminous surface treatments use cover aggregate no .
num and cover aggregate no .
num .
num equipment provide distributors supply tanks and compactors in accordance with subsection num equipment .
provide selfpropelled mechanical spreaders mounted on pneumatic tired traction wheels capable of the following operating independently of supply trucks chip seal num num receiving the aggregate from the supply truck directly into the hopper and then into the spreader box controlling the spreading of aggregate to a rate of num lbyd² to num lbyd² num kgm² to num kgm² spreading the aggregate from num ft to num ft num m to num m wide and spreading the aggregate up to num ft num m wide if required by the contract .
num construction methods a .
weather and seasonal limitations limit the construction of bituminous surface treatment to the following weather and seasonal limitations num general comply with weather and seasonal conditions for constructing bituminous surface treatment in accordance with subsection num opening sections of project to traffic and subsection num project completion and acceptance for acceptance of the work .
num seasonal limitations apply bituminous surface treatment during the construction periods provided in table num construction seasonal limitations or on dates requested in writing and approved by the resident engineer .
table num construction seasonal limitations asphalt type construction period cutback asphalt april num through nov. num asphalt cement may num through sept. num emulsified asphalt may num through sept. num num temperature and weather limitations apply bituminous surface treatment in accordance with the temperature and weather limitations provided in table num temperature and weather limitations .
measure the ambient temperatures in the shade num ft num m above the ground and away from artificial heat .
ensure the temperature and weather conditions allow completion of the work .
before starting bituminous surface treatment verify that the minimum temperatures specified in table num also occurred on the previous calendar day .
suspend work if the ambient temperature is forecast to fall below the specified minimum temperature within num hr .
suspend work during adverse weather conditions such as wind chill rain fog or abnormally high relative humidity as determined by the resident engineer .
num chip seal num table num temperature and weather limitations minimum temperature f c asphalt type ambient surface aggregate base or pavement surface condition due to weather cutback asphalt num num num num num num dry emulsified asphalt num num num num num num no visible free moisture present asphalt cement num num num num num num dry num detours and shooflys the resident engineer may waive the minimum temperature requirements for construction of temporary bituminous surface treatment for detours shooflys or other incidental construction .
b .
traffic provide traffic control that ensures the following no vehicles travel on the surface treatment before the application and stabilization of cover material construction operations pose no risk to the health safety or property of the traveling public and no unnecessary delay to the traveling public .
c. preparation of base prepare the base as required by the contract before applying bituminous surface treatment .
clean the base of foreign material before placing the prime coat .
if reconstructing a base previously sealed or patched with bituminous materials remove areas with excess bituminous materials from the base course surface before applying the bituminous binder .
d. protection of structures protect surfaces of structures from discoloration while applying bituminous surface treatments .
e. heating bituminous material heat bituminous material uniformly and consistently using an effective and positive control method .
heat bituminous material in accordance with subsection num asphalt materials .
ensure the fluidity of the heated bituminous material and prevent damage due to overheating .
do not heat bituminous material with steam .
protect the bituminous material or its container from coming into contact with flames .
the department will reject overheated or damaged bituminous material .
f. application of prime coat if required by the contract apply a prime coat in accordance with section num prime coat .
chip seal num num g. application of tack coat if required by the contract apply a tack coat in accordance with section num fog seal and tack coat .
h. application of bituminous binder and cover aggregate before placing the first application of bituminous binder allow the prime coat to penetrate and harden .
clean the primed base of dirt and loose material .
ensure the aggregate is immediately available for spreading before starting the application of bituminous binder .
num bituminous binder uniformly apply the bituminous binder .
delineate one edge of the bituminous surfacing before the first application of bituminous binder .
at transverse joints to prevent double or no bituminous binder application created by operation starts and stops spread building paper over the treated surface before the joint to ensure the specified distribution of bituminous binder at the nozzles when they reach the untreated surface .
remove and dispose of the paper after starting or restarting the bituminous material application .
if the roadway is closed to traffic and the surface width does not exceed num ft num m bituminous material may be applied to the full width in one pass for each application .
if the roadway is not closed to traffic and traffic is maintained on onehalf of the width apply prime and bituminous material on the closed half of the roadway width .
during the bituminous material application on the second half of the roadway ensure that the distributor nozzle nearest the center of the roadway overlaps the previous bituminous application from half to the full width of the nozzle spray .
num cover aggregate immediately after applying the bituminous binder apply cover aggregates in accordance with table num approximate single treatment application rates and table num approximate double treatment application rates .
uniformly spread the cover material at the specified rates .
the department will allow handspreading in areas inaccessible to mechanical spreaders .
num general application requirements prevent overlaps streaks or gaps in the application of bituminous binder and cover aggregate .
correct overlaps streaks and gaps as approved by the resident engineer at no additional cost to the department .
ensure the finished surface is free of the following bleeding loose chips and loss of imbedded aggregates .
apply the bituminous material and cover aggregate at the distribution and coverage rate shown on the plans .
use table num approximate single treatment application rates and table num approximate double treatment application rates to estimate num chip seal num quantities of aggregate and bituminous binder .
rates are based on midpoint requirements of bituminous binder and aggregate .
table num approximate single treatment application rates aggregate type material lwca no .
num no .
num no .
numc aggregate num yd²yd³ num m²m³ num lbyd² num kgm² num lbyd² num kgm² num lbyd² num kgm² bituminous binder residual asphalt num galyd² num lm² num galyd² num lm² num galyd² num lm² num galyd² num lm² table num approximate double treatment application rates aggregate type and increment no .
num material no .
num first second aggregate num lbyd² num kgm² num lbyd² num kgm² num lbyd² num kgm² bituminous binder residual asphalt num galyd² num lm² num galyd² num lm² num galyd² num lm² apply bituminous binder at temperatures in accordance with section num plant mix bituminous bases and surfaces .
apply bituminous binder and cover aggregate in the following sequences a single treatment apply bituminous binder and spread no .
num no .
num no .
numc precoated aggregates or lwca cover aggregate at the rates shown on the plans .
bdouble treatment for the first application apply bituminous binder and spread no .
num cover aggregate over the surface at the rates shown on the plans .
for the second application apply bituminous binder on the surface of the no .
num cover material and spread the first application of no .
num cover aggregate first increment over the surface at the rates shown on the plans .
for the third application apply bituminous binder on the surface of the no .
num cover material first increment and spread the second application of no .
num cover aggregate second increment over the surface at the rates shown on the plans .
i .
rolling roll the entire surface after each application of cover aggregate and ensure it is firmly imbedded into the bituminous binder .
to prevent tracking bituminous binder during rolling hand spread additional aggregate to fill irregularities and cover bare spots .
chip seal num num chip seal perform final rolling of the surface with at least four passes over the entire surface with a pneumatictype roller in accordance with subsection num.b compactors .
operate the roller at a speed of num mph num kmh or less .
j .
maintenance remove unsatisfactory material .
make repairs with bituminous binder and aggregate to establish a uniformly dense treatment with maximum retention of the cover aggregate .
maintain until project completion is accomplished in accordance with subsection num project completion and acceptance .
correct irregularities with additional bituminous binder and aggregate at no additional cost to the department .
for excessive bleeding apply blotting material free of clay silt loam or other foreign matter as directed by the resident engineer .
num method of measurement the resident engineer will measure the finished surface area of the chip seal single treatment or chip seal double treatment completeinplace .
the resident engineer will measure the preparation of base to the nearest foot meter along the centerline when specified on the plans .
num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit a chip seal single treatment square yard square meter b chip seal double treatment square yard square meter c preparation of base linear foot meter the department will consider the cost of bituminous binder cover aggregate and sand or other approved aggregate for blotting to be included in the contract unit price for the appropriate chip seal pay item .
the department will consider the cost of applying every layer of a double treatment as required by the contract to be included in the contract unit price for chip seal double treatment .
the department will pay for tack coat in accordance with section num fog seal and tack coat and prime coat in accordance with section num prime coat .
num thin surface courses num section num thin surface courses num description this work consists of applying microsurfacing or ultrathin bonded wearing course to an existing pavement surface in layers not greater than num in num mm thick .
microsurfacing .
a mixture of wellgraded aggregate polymerized asphalt emulsion fillers additives and water that is mixed on the project .
ultrathin bonded wearing course utbwc .
a mixture of wellgraded aggregate polymerized performance grade binder and mineral fillers that is mixed at an asphalt plant and delivered to the project .
num materials provide materials in accordance with section num thin surface courses .
if storing or stockpiling the mineral aggregates prevent segregation mixing of the materials or sizes and contamination .
supply a uniform gradation of aggregates to the mixing plant .
screen and weigh the mineral aggregate at the stockpile site before delivery to the jobsite .
use screens and scales approved by the resident engineer .
num equipment a .
general use equipment capable of maintaining the quantities of material in the stockpiles and preventing segregation of aggregates .
keep equipment used to store and handle the bituminous material clean .
b .
equipment for microsurfacing provide a selfpropelled compartmented continuousflow machine capable of the following mixing discharging and placing the microsurfacing material delivering and proportioning the aggregate emulsified asphalt mineral filler and water to a revolving multiblade mixer storing enough materials to supply the proportioning devices and simultaneously loading materials and laying microsurfacing .
provide individual volume or weight controls to proportion materials added to the mix .
calibrate and mark the material control devices .
equip the mixing machine with the following a feeder that provides a uniform positive metered predetermined amount of the specified mineral filler to the aggregate feed devices on the aggregate feeder and the emulsion pump that measure the aggregate and emulsion used by the mixer and a water pressure system and nozzletype spray bar to spray water immediately ahead and outside of the spreader box .
thin surface courses num num c. equipment for ultrathin bonded wearing course use a material transfer vehicle to transfer the utbwc material to the paver in accordance with subsection num.f material transfer vehicle mtv .
provide a paver approved by the resident engineer .
ensure the paver has the following a receiving hopper for hot mix asphalt a feed conveyor an asphalt emulsion storage tank a system for measuring the polymer modified asphalt emulsion membrane volume a spray bar and a heated variable width vibratory or combination vibratorytamping bar screed .
ensure the paver is capable of the following spraying the polymer modified asphalt emulsion membrane applying the hot mix asphalt overlay leveling the surface of the mat in one pass placing the hot mix asphalt within num seconds after the application of the polymer modified asphalt emulsion membrane and paving at a controlled speed from num ftmin to num ftmin num mmin to num mmin .
prevent wheels and other parts of the paving machine from contacting the polymer modified emulsion membrane before applying the hot mix asphalt .
provide a machine with a screed that is capable of crowning the pavement at the center and adjusting the extensions vertically to accommodate the pavement profile .
num construction methods if constructing under traffic place equipment loading vehicles and supply trucks in the lane being paved .
operate equipment for microsurfacing to allow traffic to move safely and quickly around the work area .
a .
weather limitations place material when the roadway surface temperature is at least num f num c with no fog or rain .
the resident engineer may allow paving on a damp pavement surface with aggregate voids free of standing water and a good weather forecast .
b .
surface preparation clear vegetation loose aggregate and soil from the roadway surface .
if required for microsurfacing dampen the surface prevent freestanding water ahead of the spreader box .
c. microsurfacing num test panel before applying the mixture place a test panel to demonstrate the following at a location directed by the resident engineer the modified emulsion and the mineral aggregate are compatible under field conditions num thin surface courses num the mix is uniform the mix meets the requirements for proportioning the asphalt mineral filler and mineral aggregate the mix meets the performance requirements for set cure and stability and the thickness of the microsurfacing conforms to the typical section .
the resident engineer will determine the acceptability of the mix based on the test panel results .
num leveling course if required by the contract or directed by the resident engineer apply leveling courses not exceeding num in num mm thick to correct surface irregularities .
before placing the final surface course cure the leveling course as approved by the resident engineer .
if directed by the resident engineer fill ruts utility cuts and depressions with microsurfacing material before placing the final surface course .
if directed by the resident engineer fill ruts individually using a spreader box from num ft to num ft num m to num m wide or fill multiple ruts with a fullwidth scratch coat pass using the spreader box .
num spreading spread the microsurfacing mixture uniformly using a mechanical spreader box with augers for internal mixing .
ensure the flexible seals maintain contact with the roadway surface to prevent the loss of mixture .
provide an adjustable rear flexible seal to act as a strikeoff .
prevent loss of mixture during spreading operations on superelevated curves .
spread the mixture to fill cracks and minor surface irregularities .
leave a uniform application of fine aggregate and asphalt on the roadway surface .
make microsurfacing joints neat and uniform .
if the resident engineer determines that a rough joint may affect the steering of an automobile remove the joint and apply a new microsurfacing patch at no additional cost to the department .
apply patches full width using a spreader box .
num curing and maintaining traffic protect the microsurfacing from traffic damage until the mixture cures and does not adhere to tires .
repair damage from traffic at no additional cost to the department .
complete microsurfacing application early enough each day to allow the micro surfacing to cure and traffic to safely travel over the completed work before dark .
d. ultrathin bonded wearing course num application using a metered mechanical pressure spray bar uniformly spray the polymer modified emulsion membrane at a temperature from num f to num f num c to num c or as recommended by the material supplier .
ensure the sprayer accurately and continuously monitors the spray rate and applies the membrane uniformly across the width of the overlay .
the resident engineer may adjust the spray rate based on the pavement surface conditions and the recommendations of the material supplier .
thin surface courses num num apply the utbwc at a temperature from num f to num f num c to num c over the full width of polymer modified emulsion membrane immediately after applying the polymer modified emulsion membrane .
place the utbwc with a heated vibratory or combination vibratorytamping bar screed .
pave continuously to reduce surface imperfections .
apply utbwc at the target rate shown on the plans or as determined by the resident engineer to minimize fractures in the top size aggregate in the finished pavement surface and at the paving edges for tapering .
num compaction immediately after placing the utbwc compact in two to three passes with approved steel doubledrum asphalt rollers in nonvibratory mode of at least num ton num metric ton .
use enough roller units to finish compacting before the material temperature falls below num f num c. do not stop the rollers on the freshly placed utbwc .
equip rollers with a water system and scrapers to prevent the fresh mix from adhering to the roller drums .
if a water system is not sufficient add a release agent approved by the resident engineer .
to prevent aggregate degradation avoid excessively rolling utbwc in the driving lanes .
the resident engineer will determine the acceptable extent of fracturing at the edge of the pavement due to rolling operations .
do not allow traffic on the new pavement until the rolling operation is complete and the material temperature is below num f num c. ensure the compacted thickness of the finished utbwc is at least ½ in num mm for type a ⅝ in num mm for type b and ¾ in num mm for type c. num acceptance a lot consists of one days run or a maximum of num ton num metric ton .
the resident engineer will perform the following tasks take the first sample after the hot mix plant startup from the third fourth or fifth production truck loads sample the mixture at the hot mix plant from the transport truck randomly select the sample locations within each lot verify the daily application rate of the polymer modified emulsion membrane by dividing the volume used by the area paved each day test asphalt content in accordance with ohd lnum and test aggregate gradation in accordance with aashto t num .
stop production if the running average of three consecutive gradation and asphalt content test results varies from the jobmix formula jmf by more than the quality control tolerances specified in subsection num tolerances as directed by the resident engineer .
identify the cause of the discrepancies adjust the jmf and document the corrective actions .
if the adjusted jmf meets the mixture requirements of the contract and the resident engineer approves replace the current jmf with the adjusted jmf and continue production .
if directed by the resident engineer remove defective areas and replace with acceptable material at no additional cost to the department .
num thin surface courses num thin surface courses num method of measurement the resident engineer will measure completed microsurfacing as the relevant mineral aggregate pay item by the dry weight including mineral filler and as polymer modified emulsified asphalt by the volume or weight of residual asphalt cement .
the resident engineer will include the aggregate polymerized performance grade binder mineral fillers and other ingredients as specified in the jmf in the measurement for the relevant utbwc pay items .
the resident engineer will not include the weight of polymer modified emulsified membrane in the measurement of the relevant utbwc pay items .
num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit a polymermodified emulsified asphalt gallon liter or ton metric ton b type i mineral aggregate ton metric ton c type ii mineral aggregate ton metric ton d type iii mineral aggregate ton metric ton e ultrathin bonded wearing course type a ton metric ton f ultrathin bonded wearing course type b ton metric ton g ultrathin bonded wearing course type c ton metric ton the department will consider the cost of polymer modified emulsified membrane to be included in the contract unit price for the relevant utbwc pay items .
permeable friction course num num section num permeable friction course num description this work consists of mixing aggregate bituminous material and fibers in a central plant and spreading and compacting the mixed material on a prepared roadbed .
num materials provide materials in accordance with section num plant mix bituminous bases and surfaces .
num equipment provide equipment in accordance with subsection num equipment .
use a material transfer vehicle mtv to place permeable friction course pfc .
provide a fiber supply system to uniformly distribute the specified proportions of fiber into the pfc .
ensure the fiber supply system has the following characteristics low level and noflow indicators a printout or data file that records the feed rate and a section of transparent pipe that allows observation of flow and feed consistency .
the resident engineer will review and approve mineral filler feeder systems .
num construction methods a. stockpiling materials stockpile aggregates in accordance with subsection num storage and handling of materials .
b .
preparation of materials ensure the discharge temperature of the pfc does not exceed num f num c. dispose of dust collected from this operation or return it to the mixture as required to meet the jobmix formula .
maintain the aggregate stockpiles in a reasonably dry condition so that drum mixing will drive out all remaining moisture .
c. mixing mix the aggregate and bituminous material in accordance with subsection num.e mixing .
d. loading and hauling coordinate loading and hauling of the pfc with laydown operations to ensure pfc placement within the temperature range in accordance with subsection num.g .
spreading and finishing and prevent separation of the bituminous material and aggregate in the pfc .
num permeable friction course num e. tack coat apply a tack coat in accordance with section num fog seal and tack coat .
apply the tack coat at a rate of num galyd² num lm² of diluted emulsion ssnum diluted with water at a ratio of num unless otherwise required by the contract .
f. weather limitations place pfc on a dry surface .
ensure the prepared roadbed surface is at least num f num c measured away from artificial heat sources .
ensure weather conditions allow proper leveling and consolidation of the pfc .
g. spreading and finishing before placing pfc remove foreign material from the prepared roadbed .
ensure that the temperature of the pfc at the time of placement is num f num f num c num c. do not windrow the pfc before spreading and finishing .
place the pfc using a mtv .
the resident engineer may exempt isolated areas of the project from use of an mtv .
continuously remix the material using one of the following methods internally in the transfer device in a paver hopper insert or in the pavers hopper .
use remixing augers or paddles capable of continuously blending the pfc .
ensure the mtv the haul units and the pavers provide a continuous uniform segregationfree flow of material .
to avoid stopping and restarting operations coordinate the following the number of haul units the speed of the paver the plant production rate and the speed of the mtv .
do not raise dump the wings of the pavers receiving hopper during the paving operation .
if an mtv unit malfunctions stop laydown operations until the equipment is repaired or replaced .
ensure the placed material is free of segregation inconsistent texture bleeding fat spots and cracking .
for mtv units that exceed num lb num kg per axle adhere to the following guidelines when crossing bridges .
if the bridge is in good condition empty the mtv hopper travel at a crawl speed and ensure the mtv wheels are positioned over the underlying bridge beam lines .
if the bridge is in poor condition or posted for load limits additional limitations may be necessary .
the resident engineer will consult the odot bridge division .
permeable friction course num num permeable friction course h. joints place the longitudinal pfc joint at the lane lines and offset this joint from the underlying joint by at least num in num mm .
ensure the joints are tight smooth butt type joints .
i. compaction immediately after placing pfc material roll the surface with two or three passes with a nonvibratory steelwheeled selfpropelled roller .
the department will not allow pneumatic rollers .
construct a smooth finished surface in accordance with subsection num.anum surface elevation and smoothness and subsection num.anum width .
ensure the finished pfc is at least as thick as the thickness shown on the plans but no thicker than the thickness shown on the plans plus ¼ in num mm .
remove and replace defective areas immediately at no additional cost to the department .
restrict traffic from the finished pfc pavement until the surface temperature is within num f num c of the ambient temperature or num hr after the final rolling .
num method of measurement the resident engineer will measure the weight of permeable friction course not exceeding the calculated weight obtained by multiplying the unit weight from the job mix formula by the completed length of pfc and the area of the typical cross section shown on the plans .
num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit permeable friction course ton metric ton the department will pay for tack coat in accordance with section num fog seal and tack coat .
num opengraded friction surface course num section num opengraded friction surface course num description this work consists of mixing aggregate and bituminous material in a central plant and spreading and compacting the mixed material on a prepared roadbed .
num materials provide materials in accordance with section num plant mix bituminous bases and surfaces .
num equipment provide equipment in accordance with subsection num equipment .
num construction methods a. stockpiling materials stockpile aggregate in accordance with subsection num storage and handling of materials .
b .
preparation of materials dry and heat the aggregate to a temperature no greater than num f num c. collect resulting dust and remove or return it to the mixture required to meet the jobmix formula jmf .
ensure the aggregate used in the opengraded friction surface course ogfsc is free of oily or carbonaceous coatings .
ensure the temperature of bituminous material does not exceed num f num c before and during mixing .
c. mixing mix the aggregate and bituminous material in accordance with subsection num.e mixing .
d. loading and hauling coordinate loading and hauling the ogfsc with laydown operations to ensure ogfsc placement within the temperature range in accordance with subsection num.g .
spreading and finishing and prevent separation of the asphalt and aggregate in the ogfsc .
e. tack coat apply a tack coat in accordance with section num fog seal and tack coat .
apply the tack coat at a rate of num galyd² num lm² of diluted emulsion ssnum diluted with water at a ratio of num unless otherwise required by the contract .
f. weather and seasonal limitations place ogfsc on a dry surface .
ensure the prepared roadbed surface is at least num f num c measured away from artificial heat sources .
ensure the weather conditions allow proper leveling and consolidation of the ogfsc .
fog seal and tack coat num num place ogfsc between april num and october num unless otherwise approved by the resident engineer .
g. spreading and finishing before placing ogfsc remove foreign material from the prepared roadbed .
ensure the temperature of the ogfsc at the time of placement is in accordance with the temperature required by the jmf num f num c. during paving ensure the paver moves continuously .
if paving stops remove all material from the paver and restart the paving operation .
h. joints place the longitudinal ogfsc joint at the lane lines and offset this joint from the underlying joint by at least num in num mm .
ensure that the joints are tight smooth butttype joints .
i. compaction immediately after placing ogfsc roll the surface with two or three passes with a nonvibratory steelwheeled selfpropelled roller .
construct a smooth finished surface in accordance with subsection num.anum surface elevation and smoothness and subsection num.anum width .
restrict traffic from the finished ogfsc pavement until the surface temperature is within num f num c of the ambient temperature or num hr after the final rolling .
j .
tolerance ensure the finished ogfsc is at least as thick as the thickness shown on the plans but no thicker than the thickness shown on the plans plus ¼ in num mm .
remove and replace defective areas immediately at no additional cost to the department .
num method of measurement the resident engineer will measure the weight of opengraded friction surface course not exceeding the calculated weight obtained by multiplying the unit weight from the job mix formula by the completed length of ogfsc and the area of the typical cross section shown on the plans .
num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit opengraded friction surface course ton metric ton the department will pay for tack coat in accordance with section numfog seal and tack coat .
num fog seal and tack coat num section num fog seal and tack coat num description this work consists of preparing and treating an existing bituminous or concrete surface with bituminous material .
original emulsion .
a mixture of asphalt water and a small amount of emulsifying agent to maintain uniformly blend .
an ssnum emulsion the product typically used for fog seal and tack coat contains up to num percent water .
unless otherwise approved by the resident engineer use ssnum original emulsion .
diluted emulsion .
an original emulsion diluted with additional water to reduce the viscosity and to allow easier spraying .
residual asphalt content .
the amount of asphalt remaining on the pavement surface after all of the water both in the original emulsion and any additional water has evaporated .
num materials provide materials in accordance with subsection num asphalt materials .
num equipment provide distributors heating equipment and supply tanks in accordance with subsection num equipment .
num construction methods a .
general clean the existing roadbed surface before placing tack coat .
paint a thin uniform tack coat on all surfaces of curbs and gutters manholes and other structures that will come in contact with hot mix asphalt .
ensure the tack coat applications minimize damage and inconvenience to traffic and allow oneway traffic without pickup or tracking the bituminous material .
do not apply tack coat during wet or cold weather or in windy conditions that would cause the tack coat emulsion to drift .
do not apply tack coat to wet surfaces with free standing water .
the department will allow tack coat application to damp surfaces .
before application the resident engineer must approve of the following quantity rate of application temperature and areas to be treated .
b. fog seal apply the fog seal at a rate of num galyd² num lm² of diluted emulsion ssnum diluted at num water to original emulsion .
alter the application rate as directed by the resident engineer based on the pavement surface texture .
fog seal and tack coat num num fog seal and tack coat c. tack coat apply the tack coat at a rate of num galyd² num lm² of diluted emulsion ssnum diluted with water at a ratio of num unless otherwise required by the contract .
alter the application rate as directed by the resident engineer based on the pavement surface texture .
ensure the tack coat breaks before the application of the next surfacing layer .
if the tack coat loses its adhesive properties or is exposed to traffic before being covered by the next surfacing layer reapply the tack coat at a rate that ensures proper adhesion as directed by the resident engineer at no additional cost to the department .
num method of measurement the resident engineer will measure the volume of ssnum emulsion for fog seal and tack coat as delivered before dilution .
num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit a fog seal gallon liter b tack coat gallon liter the department considers the cost of water for dilution to be included in the contract unit price for fog seal and tack coat .
num prime coat num section num prime coat num description this work consists of preparing and treating a surface with bituminous and blotter material .
cutback .
a mixture of asphalt and petroleum solvent .
residual asphalt content .
the amount of asphalt remaining on the pavement surface after the petroleum solvent evaporates .
mcnum and mcnum .
cutbacks with residual asphalt contents of at least num percent and num percent respectively .
num materials provide materials in accordance with subsection num asphalt materials for mcnum and mcnum .
num equipment provide distributors heating equipment and supply tanks in accordance with subsection num equipment .
num construction methods a .
weather limitations apply the prime coat when the ambient temperature is above num f num c as weather allows .
measure ambient temperature in the shade num ft num m above the ground and away from artificial sources of heat .
b .
preparation of surface before applying the prime coat remove loose material from the roadbed subgrade or base to ensure maximum penetration of the prime coat .
c. priming subgrades or bases that are noncohesive subject to the approval by the resident engineer when friable or noncohesive materials are encountered in the surface to be primed the bituminous material shown on the plans may be changed to an asphalt emulsion .
the bituminous materials shown on the plans may also be changed to an asphalt emulsion in those areas of the state in which the use of cutback asphalt is prohibited .
sprinkling water with asphalt emulsion added may be used in the final operations of sprinkling manipulation shaping and rolling of the subgrade or base .
additional applications may be made if necessary to form a firm bonded working table .
d. application of bituminous material uniformly spread the asdelivered mcnum or mcnum bituminous material on the roadbed surface as shown on the plans using a pressure distributor at a rate from num galyd² to num galyd² num lm² to num lm² as directed by the resident engineer .
if maintaining traffic on the roadway surface apply prime coat to no more than half the roadway width at one time .
blot excess prime coat with sand or screened material .
prime coat num num prime coat maintain oneway traffic on the untreated portion of the roadbed surface .
as soon as the surface and blotter sand absorb the bituminous material transfer traffic to the treated portion and apply prime coat to the remaining section of roadbed surface .
correct deficiencies in prime coat application at no additional cost to the department .
do not apply successive applications of bituminous materials or other layers until the prime coat penetrates the roadway surface and hardens .
e. application of blotter material if the bituminous material fails to penetrate within the specified time and traffic must use the roadway surface spread blotter material on the roadway surface to absorb excess bituminous material in accordance with subsection num.j maintenance .
num method of measurement the resident engineer will measure the volume of prime coat as delivered to the project .
num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit prime coat gallon liter the department will consider the cost of blotter material to be included in the contract unit price for prime coat .
num fabric reinforcement for hot mix asphalt pavement num section num fabric reinforcement for hot mix asphalt pavement num description this work consists of applying reinforcement fabric for hot mix asphalt hma pavement .
num materials provide materials in accordance with the following subsections material subsection reinforcement fabric num asphalt cement num num equipment a .
distributors provide distributors in accordance with subsection num equipment .
ensure the distributors have hand sprayers .
b .
fabric laydown equipment provide mechanical fabric laydown equipment capable of handling and placing full or partial rolls of fabric smoothly .
c. miscellaneous equipment provide miscellaneous equipment including stiff bristle brooms to smooth the fabric scissors or blades to cut the fabric and brushes to apply bituminous binder to fabric overlap at spliced joints .
d. pneumatictired rollers provide pneumatictired rollers in accordance with subsection num equipment .
num construction methods a .
surface preparation remove foreign material such as dirt dust water or oil from the prepared surface .
b .
application of bituminous binder heat the bituminous binder material .
use an asphalt distributor to uniformly spray the area to be covered with fabric .
handspray areas inaccessible to the distributor .
use paper or roofing felt to provide neat cutoff lines at locations where the distributor application of bituminous binder starts or stops .
during application keep the bituminous binder at a temperature of at least num f num c. if fabric is oversprayed ensure that the application temperature does not exceed num f num c to avoid damaging the fabric .
estimate the quantity of fabric reinforcement for hot mix asphalt pavement num num bituminous binder using an approximate rate of num galyd² to num galyd² num lm² to num lm² .
apply the bituminous binder in accordance with the minimum recommended rate as specified by the fabric manufacturer and as directed by the resident engineer .
apply the binder from num in to num in num mm to num mm wider than the fabric .
during binder application avoid spills or excessive application causing flushing of the bituminous material .
c. placement of reinforcement fabric mechanically place the fabric before the bituminous binder cools and loses tackiness .
the department will not allow manual placement .
unroll and place the fabric on the binder with the unfused fuzzy side down .
lay the fabric as smoothly as possible .
broom the fabric to remove air bubbles and to maximize contact with the pavement .
cut wrinkles and lay fabric flat .
if the fabric becomes misaligned cut realign and joint the fabric as directed by the resident engineer .
overlap fabric at joints from num in to num in num mm to num mm .
to prevent the paver from disturbing the fabric overlap transverse joints in the direction of paving ending edge of the old fabric roll over leading edge of new fabric roll .
apply additional binder to joints as directed by the resident engineer .
mop brush or handspray transverse joints .
spray longitudinal joints with the distributor .
use selfpropelled pneumatictired rollers to embed reinforcement fabric into the bituminous binder and bond it to the pavement .
before placing traffic directly on the fabric blot the fabric with clean dry sand .
if excess binder bleeds through the fabric before placing pavement overlay blot the excess binder by spreading sand on the affected area as directed by the resident engineer .
d. weather limitations for fabric installation apply bituminous binder when the ambient air temperature is at least num f num c unless otherwise approved by the resident engineer .
do not place bituminous binder application if it is raining or rain is imminent .
e. tack coat if required by the contract apply a tack coat in accordance with section num fog seal and tack coat .
the resident engineer will approve the bituminous material type grade rate of application and temperature .
do not use cutback asphalt or emulsified asphalt that contain petroleum distillate .
f. pavement overlay place the pavement overlay immediately after placing the fabric unless directed otherwise by the resident engineer .
ensure the pavement overlay temperature does not exceed num f num c to prevent damage to the fabric .
to avoid damaging the fabric minimize turning movements .
if necessary turn pavers and vehicles gradually and broadcast clean dry sand ahead of trucks and pavers to prevent fabric damage .
remove excess sand ahead of paving operations .
num fabric reinforcement for hot mix asphalt pavement num num fabric reinforcement for hot mix asphalt pavement repair damage to or debonding of the fabric reinforcement caused by traffic wet weather conditions improper installation or equipment at no additional cost to the department .
num method of measurement the resident engineer will measure the area covered by fabric reinforcement after placement not including overlaps .
num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit a fabric reinforcement square yard square meter b bituminous binder gallon liter the department will consider the cost of the tack coat and sand used for blotting to be included in the contract unit price for fabric reinforcement .
section num hot mix asphalt num description this work consists of constructing one or more courses of bituminous mixture on the prepared foundation roadbed or base .
hot mix asphalt hma includes superpave stone matrix asphalt sma and rich bottom layer .
num materials provide materials in accordance with section num plant mix bituminous bases and surfaces .
num equipment a. mixing plants provide hot mix asphalt hma preparation plants in accordance with aashto m num and the departments certification requirements .
avoid exposing reclaimed asphalt paving material to the burner flame or high temperature combustion gases .
ensure plants modified for this purpose meet the manufacturers requirements for the specific modifications .
allow the resident engineer access to the mineral filler feeder systems for approval before use .
for mixtures with mineral fillers provide a closed system for storing and feeding that maintains a constant material supply with minimal loss throughout the mix production system .
ensure the mineral filler measuring device provides a consistent percentage of filler .
provide a system that includes flow indicators or sensing devices to automatically stop mix production if mineral filler introduction ceases .
hot mix asphalt num num for mixtures with cellulose fibers provide a separate system to feed fibers into the mixture to obtain a uniform distribution .
ensure the fiber supply system includes low level noflow indicators and a file or printout that tracks the feed rate .
include a section of transparent pipe in the fiber supply for observing consistency of flow or feed .
the department will inspect plants every six months or after every move .
b. scales provide digital scales to weigh the bituminous mixture .
for approved automatic printer systems with an automatic batching and mixing control system use the printed batch weights or truck scales .
provide a weigh ticket for each load to record the weights .
provide certification of scales every six months or after every move unless otherwise directed by the engineer .
c. pavers provide selfcontained selfpropelled hma pavers equipped with an activated heated screed and an automatic control device for placing the mixture to the slopes and grades shown on the plans .
ensure the pavers can spread and finish hma courses on lanes shoulders and similar construction to the widths and thicknesses shown on the plans .
equip the paver with a receiving hopper and a distribution system to uniformly place and spread the hma in front of the screed without causing hma segregation .
the department will not allow equipment designed to pick up hma from windrows .
ensure the paver can operate at forward speeds to consistently place the mixture .
use a heated strikeoff assembly to produce a finished surface that meets the specified evenness and uniform texture without tearing shoving or gouging the mixture or causing hma segregation .
d. trucks and transports ensure trucks hauling hma comply with legal load limits and have tight clean smooth metal beds thinly coated with a minimum amount of soap solution lime solution or other material that prevents the mixture from adhering to the beds as approved by the resident engineer .
prevent ponds of these antiadhesive solutions from forming in truck beds .
refrain from using solutions that contain diesel fuel or other contaminating solvents during material delivery .
provide trucks with a canvas cover or other material large enough to protect the hma from the weather .
if necessary insulate the truck beds and fasten the covers so that the mixture remains at the specified temperature until delivery .
provide transports to haul liquid asphalt materials in accordance with subsection num asphalt materials .
keep a record of the following delivery date asphalt grade source quantity invoice number and material hauled in the previous load .
num hot mix asphalt num provide these records to the resident engineer upon request .
e. sampling device provide an aggregate sampling device that can obtain a representative sample from a belt or bin discharge in accordance with aashto t num .
allow the engineer access to the device for approval before use .
ensure the device obtains the sample before the aggregate enters the dryer drum or drum mixer without stopping plant production .
f. material transfer vehicle the department defines a material transfer vehicle mtv as equipment that transfers hma from the hauling units directly to the spreading and finishing machine .
provide an mtv to place the top two lifts of hma for pavements designed minimum of num million esals unless otherwise specified in the contract .
equip the mtv with remixing augers or paddles to continuously remix asphalt in the transfer device the paver hopper insert or the pavers hopper .
the department will only allow mtvs that exceed num lb num kg per axle to cross bridges if the units hopper is empty the vehicle travels at crawl speed and the wheels are placed over the underlying beam lines .
for bridges in poor condition or posted for load limits the resident engineer will consult the bridge division to determine additional limitations .
ensure the mtv the haul units and the paver provide a continuous uniform nonsegregated flow of material .
coordinate the number of haul units the pavers speed the plant production rate and the mtvs speed to avoid stopandgo operations .
do not raise the wings of the paverreceiving hopper while paving .
if an mtv malfunctions continue asphalt mix laydown operations to place quantities in transit or in silos and to safely maintain traffic .
stop operations after that until the equipment is repaired .
place a num ton num metric ton test strip .
the resident engineer will evaluate the mtvs performance by measuring the temperature profile of the mat immediately behind the paver screed using a noncontact thermometer at intervals of num ft num m. each temperature profile consists of three surface temperature measurements taken transversely across the mat from num ft to num ft num m to num m from the screed during the paving operations .
each profile will include three temperature measurements one in the middle of the mat and two at the edges num ft num m inside each edge .
stop producing asphalt mix if two of the temperature measurements in any profile differ by more than num ºf num ºc .
adjust operations before restarting the paving operation .
the resident engineer may take additional surface temperature profiles g. compactor use self propelled steel wheel and pneumatic tired compactors .
ensure the steel wheeled compactors weigh at least num ton num metric ton .
ensure the pneumatic tired compactors have at least seven pneumatic tires of equal size and diameter .
ensure the total weight of the tires produces an operating weight of at least num lb num kg per tire .
inflate the tires to at least num percent of the maximum pressure recommended by the tire manufacturer .
maintain the tire pressure for at least num hr after the start of shoulders are excluded from these requirements .
hot mix asphalt num num operations and ensure the range in pressure among the tires does not exceed num psi num kpa .
num construction methods a. stockpiling materials deliver and stockpile aggregates in accordance with subsection num storage and handling of materials .
ensure sufficient material is onsite for each days operation .
provide the resident engineer with daily quality control results .
b .
preparation of materials num bituminous material and aggregate heat bituminous material and aggregate to temperatures in accordance with subsection num asphalt materials .
provide a continuous supply of bituminous material to the mixer .
avoid localized overheating .
num dried and heated aggregate adjust heater unit flames to avoid damaging or depositing soot on the aggregate .
num hot dry aggregates for plants that control the gradation of hot dry aggregates screen the aggregate and store for use as follows at least two bins for type snum and type snum mixtures and at least three bins for all other mixtures .
c. plant startup requirements for new construction and overlays before placing the hma use the mix design created for mainline construction to produce enough hma to calibrate the plant testing equipment and testing procedures .
the resident engineer will sample and test the hma for asphalt cement content aggregate gradation air voids and voids in mineral aggregate vma .
compare contractor test results with the resident engineers make adjustments if necessary .
use hma from the plant startup operation to meet control strip requirements on temporary construction only do not place hma from the startup operations on the mainline .
make adjustments until all requirements are met .
if no temporary locations are available the plant startup mixture becomes the contractors property at no additional cost to the department .
the resident engineer may waive plant startup requirements if the same plant and location have successfully produced the same hma mix design before .
d. control strip requirements if the contract requires less than num ton num metric ton of an hma type the department will not require a control strip for that type of hma unless otherwise shown on the plans .
after meeting the plant startup requirements construct at least one control strip on a detour to verify the required production mix characteristics and establish rolling patterns .
if a detour is unavailable construct on the shoulder if a shoulder is unavailable construct on the mainline .
place an initial hma control strip not exceeding num ton num metric ton .
with the resident engineer sample and test this num hot mix asphalt num mixture for asphalt cement content aggregate gradation air voids vma and roadway density .
place additional hma after evaluating the results and adjusting production and placement procedures as necessary .
if the resident engineer determines the initial placement of the hma control strip to be acceptable in accordance with subsection num.nnuma basis of acceptance and payment the department will pay for the control strip quantities in accordance with subsection num.nnuma basis of acceptance and payment and allow the contractor to proceed with production paving operations .
the department will not allow unacceptable hma to remain in the mainline or the shoulder .
remove and replace unacceptable hma at no additional cost to the department .
if the placement of the initial hma control strip produces failing results make adjustments to production and placement procedures and repeat the test process for a second control strip .
the department will make pay adjustments for deviations on the second hma control strip at the pay factor rate in accordance with subsection num.nnuma basis of acceptance and payment .
if required create additional hma control strips on the shoulder until an acceptable mixture is produced within the num percent pay factor range .
the department will make pay adjustments for hma control strips after the second hma control strip placement in accordance with subsection num.nnuma basis of acceptance and payment .
e. mixing combine aggregates in the mixer in accordance with the mix design .
measure or gauge the bituminous material in accordance with the mix design and load into the mixer .
ensure the moisture content of the hma is no more than num percent at the point of mixture discharge .
the department will not accept uncoated or nonuniform mixtures .
during daily startup or shutdown of plant operations ensure deliveries to the storage silo or roadway are in accordance with the mix design .
empty the plant and fill the cold feed bins with the proper aggregates before changing mixtures .
f. mat irregularities ensure the mat is free of segregation nonuniform texture bleeding fat spots and cracking .
g. tack coat if required by the contract provide a tack coat in accordance with section num fog seal and tack coat .
h. temperature and weather limitations ensure the minimum surface temperature of the foundation is in accordance with the following table table num compacted lift thickness and surface temperature lift thickness in mm surface temperature f c num num num num num num num num num num num num num num hot mix asphalt num num do not place hma if frost exists in or on the foundation .
stop operations if the material becomes too cold to be leveled and consolidated .
if it starts raining stop plant production immediately .
during adverse weather conditions the contractor may place material already in transit however the contractor shall assume the risk of weather related impacts .
do not place sma if the surface temperature is below num ºf num ºc .
i .
spreading and finishing before placing hma remove foreign material from the surface of the foundation .
place the hma on a dry surface with a paver in accordance with subsection num.c pavers .
establish the alignment along one pavement edge with a string or wire line .
do not windrow hma .
deliver the hma to the paver at the optimum temperature shown on the mix design num f num c. in areas inaccessible to mechanical spreading and finishing equipment use hand tools to dump spread rake and compact the hma to the compacted thickness shown on the plans .
to ensure a continuous operation operate the spreading and finishing machine at a uniform forward speed consistent with the plant production rate hauling capacities and roller train capability .
maintain a paver speed that will minimize stopping and starting between trucks .
if the resident engineer determines that sporadic material delivery is adversely affecting the mat quality the resident engineer may direct paving operations to suspend until the contractor makes adjustments .
spread the hma mixture uniformly adjacent to curbs gutters manholes and other structures so that the compacted surface is ¼ in num mm above the edges of the structures .
before placing the mixture against these structures clean and coat them with a thin uniform tack coat in accordance with section num fog seal and tack coat .
immediately correct unsatisfactory hma mat .
the resident engineer may suspend paving operation until the contractor produces a satisfactory result .
remove and replace unsatisfactory hma as directed by the resident engineer at no additional cost to the department .
j .
joints stagger longitudinal and transverse joints on succeeding layers by num in num mm .
construct longitudinal joints within num ft num m of the lane lines and ensure the longitudinal joints in the top hma layer or in the layer upon which an opengraded friction course will be placed are at the lane lines .
bond and seal longitudinal and transverse joints .
if making joints between old and new pavements or between successive days work create a continuous bond between the surfaces .
cut back the transverse edge of the previous course to its full depth to expose a fresh surface .
paint the edge with a tack coat and place the hma mixture directly against it .
rake the mixture to the depth and grade shown on the plans .
k. compaction num general operate compactors rollers in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
num hot mix asphalt num for each placed layer of hma mixtures perform the initial compaction using steelwheel rollers and follow with selfpropelled pneumatictired rollers .
finish with a steelwheel roller .
the department requires at least two coverages with the pneumatictired roller on each layer .
if mat displacement occurs during rolling use rakes and additional fresh material to correct the surface .
avoid displacing the line and grade of the edges of hma .
ensure the mixture does not adhere to the compactors .
for areas inaccessible to compaction equipment compact the mixture using hot hand tampers smoothing irons or mechanical tampers .
if approved by the resident engineer use a trench compactor to transmit compression to depressed areas .
remove mixture that is defective loose broken or mixed with dirt and replace with new hma at no additional cost to the department .
compact to conform to the surrounding area .
ensure the hma immediately behind the paver is at least num f num c. before the temperature of the hma drops below num f num c compact thicker layers to the target density and thinner layers to the optimum density in accordance with subsection num.knuma layers at least num½ in num mm thick and subsection num.knumb layers less than num½ in num mm thick .
num acceptance the resident engineer will accept layers at least num½ in num mm in nominal thickness on the basis of density in accordance with subsection num.knuma layers at least num½ in num mm thick .
the resident engineer will accept layers less than num½ inch num mm in nominal thickness on the basis of compactive effort in accordance with subsection num.knumb layers less than num½ in num mm thick .
the resident engineer will accept layers of all thicknesses on a lotbylot basis .
the department considers a lot to be num ton num metric ton of hma .
the resident engineer may terminate a lot and designate a new one if the contractor makes adjustments to the material or production and placement procedures .
a layers at least num½ in num mm thick ensure the target density of each lot is num percent of the maximum theoretical density at the job mix formula jmf asphalt content determined by using the most recent specific gravity of the hma in accordance with aashto t num .
the hma density for each lot is the average of three random samples from the lot .
at times and locations directed by the resident engineer saw or core samples from the pavement of at least num in num mm on the cut side or diameter .
the department will perform tests on the samples or on the mat using a nuclear or nonnuclear density gauge that has been correlated with roadway cores in accordance with ohd lnum .
the department will base acceptance and pay adjustments on departmentapproved tests in accordance with the following schedule hot mix asphalt num num table num pay adjustments for lot density pay adjustment factor paf a of maximum theoretical density calculated at the jmf ac content average lot density ald num unacceptable b num num num num num num num ald num num num num ald num unacceptable b a use paf for roadway density in the combined pay factor equation in accordance with subsection num.nnuma basis of acceptance and payment .
b unless otherwise directed by the resident engineer remove and replace unacceptable lots at no additional cost to the department .
blayers less than num½ in num mm thick use test strips and monitor asphalt placement daily to obtain approval for rolling patterns generating optimum compaction .
while the department considers the target to be num percent of maximum theoretical density the resident engineer will base acceptance on the contractors performance as approved by the resident engineer to obtain optimum compaction .
compaction test strips consist of num yd² num m² of hma pavement .
to obtain the acceptable density construct enough strips to determine the number size and weight of compactors and the number of coverages made by the compactors .
use an approved a nuclear or nonnuclear density gauge to determine the density of the test strip .
construct a new compaction test strip if directed by the resident engineer or at least one of the following conditions exists there is a change in the material or mix design there is reason to believe a compaction test strip density is not representative of the material being placed or the foundation material has changed significantly .
compact the hma in accordance with the approved rolling pattern .
ensure the rolling sequence the type of compactor and the maximum roller speed are in accordance with table num .
table num rolling for compaction rolling sequence type of compactor maximum roller speed fts ms initial steelwheel or pneumatictired num num intermediate pneumatictired num num finish static steel num num lower the production rate or add rollers to the paving operation to avoid exceeding the maximum roller speeds .
num hot mix asphalt num num documentation if required by the contract document hma pavement work in accordance with subsection num.knumb layers less than num½ in num mm thick .
include records of the resident engineers directions and the resulting corrective actions .
ensure the records include a detailed description of the equipment including weight tire pressure speed and the number of coverages .
ensure the roller operators and superintendent or other contractor representative sign the records at the end of each days operation .
immediately after signing submit the records to the resident engineer for inspection .
submit the records to the resident engineer at the conclusion of work on each day in accordance with subsection num.knumb layers less than num½ in num mm thick .
l. tolerances num surface construct a finished pavement surface as shown on the plans and in accordance with subsection num.anum surface elevation and smoothness .
num width and thickness construct a finished pavement structure in conformance to the widths and thicknesses of individual layers and the total thicknesses of hma shown on the plans or directed by the resident engineer .
m.opening to traffic do not allow traffic on the pavement until after final rolling and the pavement has cooled sufficiently to ensure traffic will not damage the pavement surface .
use water or other artificial means to assist in cooling as approved by the resident engineer .
n. mix properties num general provide quality control personnel to ensure the production of acceptable products .
ensure the quality control personnel oversee the process control of hma materials during handling mixing and placing operations .
at no time will the resident engineer provide instructions to the contractor or producer as to the setting of dials gauges scales or meters however the resident engineer may advise the contractor or producer against continuing any operations or sequences of operations that will result in noncompliance with the contract requirements .
num acceptance the resident engineer will accept and pay for or reject each lot of hma pavement as defined in accordance with the following a basis of acceptance and payment the resident engineer will consider asphalt cement content air voids and roadway density to determine acceptance and payment for hma pavement .
the resident engineer may use several test methods to determine acceptability of asphalt cement content air voids and roadway density in accordance with subsection num.k compaction .
the resident engineer will only use one test method but may perform several tests using that method hot mix asphalt num num to measure each characteristic .
the resident engineer will calculate the average deviation for each characteristic in accordance with table num acceptance schedule and use the average to determine acceptance and calculate pay factors .
for the characteristics of asphalt cement content and air voids the resident engineer will disregard algebraic signs of the deviations to calculate averages .
the resident engineer will address deviations above or below the target for these characteristics .
perform sieve analyses in accordance with subsection num composition of mixtures or as modified by the special provisions .
if a sieve analysis result does not fall within the tolerances specified in the jmf provide test results that demonstrate that the hma mixture meets the following requirements in accordance with subsection num composition of mixtures the gradation falls within the broad band and the air voids at ndes and vma fall within the ranges .
the department will require a new mix design if the broad band gradation air voids at ndes or vma requirements are not met .
the resident engineer will apply calculated pay factors for asphalt cement content air voids and roadway density to all acceptable hma pavement .
the resident engineer may consider additional pay factors for other characteristics including but not limited to smoothness .
the resident engineer will base the total pay adjustments for deficiencies on the following all pay adjustments will be based on the individual pay factors shown in table num pay adjustments for lot density and table num acceptance schedule .
except for smoothness pay factors will be applied on a lot by lot basis .
for smoothness pay factors will be applied on an extent by extent basis .
pay adjustments on lots all characteristics except smoothness as each num ton num metric ton lot is complete will be made for deficiencies in asphalt cement content roadway density and air voids using the following formulas .
if test results are incomplete at that time an interim adjustment will be made assuming pay factors of num for the then unknown characteristics and corrected later when testing is completed .
the resident engineer will determine the total pay adjustment combined pay factor for hma pavement with deviations using the following equation cpf rd ac av num num num num where cpf combined pay factor rd pay factor for roadway density ac pay factor for asphalt cement content and av pay factor for air voids .
for layers less than num½ in num mm thick the resident engineer will use a pay factor of one for roadway density .
for permeable friction course opengraded friction surface course and opengraded bituminous base mixes num hot mix asphalt num that do not have a target roadway density or target for air voids the resident engineer will use pay factors of one for both roadway density and air voids .
bresident engineers acceptance procedures once a lot has been defined maintain its identity throughout the mixing and placement process .
the resident engineer may perform varying amounts of the following sampling and testing per lot .
asphalt cement content one sample randomly selected for each characteristic .
roadway density three samples randomly selected averaged and considered as one test in accordance with table num .
air voids labmolded two samples randomly selected averaged and considered as one test in accordance with table num .
the resident engineer will use table num for determining acceptance and calculating pay factors table num acceptance schedule characteristics num test pay factor deviation from jmf without regard to sign num num num num num num deviation from jmf asphalt cement content extraction nuclear or ignition oven target jmf percent num unacceptable b num num num num num num num x deviation from jmf asphalt cement content digital printout from hot mix plant target jmf percent num unacceptable b average of deviations from target without regard to sign num num num num num numx num numx num air void lab molded samples a target superpave sma num target rbl num num unacceptable b a x is the average of deviations .
b unless otherwise directed by the resident engineer remove and replace unacceptable lots at no additional cost to the department .
o. patching patch existing asphalt pavement as shown on the plans or as directed by the resident engineer .
num method of measurement the resident engineer will measure hma pavement as a combined mixture including the aggregate liquid asphalt and other materials required in accordance with the mix design .
num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows hot mix asphalt num num pay item pay unit a superpave type snum ton metric ton b superpave type snum ton metric ton c superpave type snum ton metric ton d superpave type snum ton metric ton e superpave type snum ton metric ton f stone matrix asphalt ton metric ton g rich bottom layer ton metric ton h superpave type snum patching ton metric ton i superpave type snum patching ton metric ton the department will pay for hma by the lot in accordance with subsection num.nnum acceptance on the basis of acceptance test results .
the department will pay for hma used for control strip requirements in accordance with subsection num.d control strip requirements and subsection num conformity with plans and specifications .
the department will consider the cost of startup operations to be included in the contract unit price for the relevant asphalt pavement pay item .
the department will consider the cost of cutting samples and replacing sample materials to be included in the contract unit price for the relevant hma pay item .
the department will pay for tack coat in accordance with section num fog seal and tack coat .
hot mix asphalt num coldmilling pavement num section num coldmilling pavement num description this work consists of coldmilling and removing pavement surfaces to the specified depth and removing ridges ruts and imperfections .
num materials vacant num equipment provide a milling machine that can plane at least num½ in num mm deep in a single pass is selfpropelled has the power traction and stability to maintain accurate depth of cut and slope automatically establishes profile grades along each side of the milling machine by referring to the existing pavement with a ski or matching shoe or by an independent grade control automatically controls cross slope and has an integral loading mechanism to remove the material cut from the pavement surface and discharge it into a truck in one operation .
num construction methods mill the existing pavement to the line grade and cross section shown on the plans and provide a milled surface that has a uniform texture and a smooth riding surface for traffic .
ensure no deviations are greater than num in in a num ft num mm in a num m section .
make corrections as approved by the construction engineer .
make passes to remove irregularities and to profile the surface to the depth and cross slope shown on the plans .
prevent traffic hazards .
at the end of the daily milling operation ensure that milled surface is smooth .
immediately apply fog seal to the milled areas in accordance with section num fog seal and tack coat unless overlaying the milled area with bituminous material on the same day .
dispose of removed materials in accordance with subsection num removal and disposal of salvaged materials structures and obstructions .
num method of measurement vacant num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit cold milling pavement square yard square meter the department will pay for fog seal in accordance with section num fog seal and tack coat .
rumble strip num num section num rumble strip num description this work consists of constructing noisegenerating rumble strips in the hot mix asphalt hma or portland cement concrete pcc pavement on driving lanes or the roadway shoulders .
rumble strips categories are defined as follows method hmacon .
continuous rumble strips cut in hma shoulders .
method hmacyc .
group a cyclic pattern of rumble strips cut in hma pavement for intersection safety improvements .
method pcccon .
continuous rumble strips cut in pcc shoulders .
method pcccyc .
group a cyclic pattern of rumble strips cut in pcc num materials vacant num equipment provide a machine that produces incised grooves to the specified pattern and dimensional tolerances shown on the plans .
num construction methods after completing the pavement surface machinecut or rout the rumble strips .
produce rumble strips with the spacing length depth and rumble section shown on the plans .
use a single pass of a multicutter machine or multiple passes of a singlecutter machine to construct the grooves .
remove millings and debris before opening the roadway surface to traffic .
apply fog seal to the rumble strips cut in hma pavement in accordance with section num fog seal and tack coat .
num method of measurement vacant num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit a rumble stripmethod hmacon linear foot meter b rumble stripmethod hmacyc group each group c rumble stripmethod pcccon linear foot meter d rumble stripmethod pccc group each group the department will consider the cost of the fog seal on rumble strips in hot mix asphalt pavement to be included in the contract unit price for rumble strip method hmacon or rumble strip method hmacyc group .
pavement for intersection safety improvements .
num portland cement concrete pavement num section num portland cement concrete pavement num description this work consists of constructing the following types of portland cement concrete pcc pavement on a prepared base plain jointed doweled or undoweled continuously reinforced bonded overlay over existing pcc or hot mix asphalt hma pavements and unbonded overlay over existing pcc or hma pavements .
num materials provide materials in accordance with the following sections and subsections materials section or subsection portland cement concrete num fly ash num ground granulated blast furnace slag num steel reinforcement dowel bars tie bars num provide bent tie bars in accordance with aashto m num deformed billetsteel bars for concrete reinforcement grade num .
obtain written approval from the department if using reclaimed pcc materials .
the department will allow the use of reclaimed pcc materials only on temporary pavement .
provide the materials in accordance with section num portland cement concrete .
num equipment ensure the equipment is at the job site before construction begins .
a .
plants and equipment ensure the batching plant includes bins weighing hoppers and scales for each size of fine and coarse aggregate .
if using cement in bulk include a bin hopper and separate scale for cement .
seal and vent the weighing hoppers to prevent dusting .
ensure gauges and dials function properly .
give the department documented evidence that the batching plant produces quality concrete .
ensure the mixing plant is in accordance with aashto m num concrete uniformity requirements .
regularly clean the mixers .
repair or replace the pickup and throwover blades that are worn onesixth or more of the original blade width .
provide the manufacturers design or permanent marks on the blades to show the blades dimensions and configurations in reference to original height and depth .
the department recommends drilling holes with a diameter of ¼ in num mm near the ends and midpoint of each blade as reference points .
portland cement concrete pavement num num portland cement concrete pavement vent storage silos for cementitious materials during filling or use .
if using a pressurized air system for discharge ensure that it has moisture traps to reduce caking of materials during storage .
the department will inspect the plants every six months or after every move .
provide certification of scales every six months or after every move unless otherwise directed by the resident engineer .
b .
placing and finishing equipment provide a slip form paver or fixed form method to spread strikeoff and finish concrete unless otherwise approved by the resident engineer .
num slip form paver provide a slip form paver to spread consolidate screed and floatfinish the concrete in one pass of the machine to minimize handfinishing .
provide a machine that uses vibrating tubes or arms working in the concrete or with a vibrating screed or pan operating on the surface .
ensure the machine vibrates for the full width and depth of the pavement .
provide vibrating machines with following frequency ratings table num vibrator frequencies vibrator type minimum frequency rating impulsesmin surface vibrators num internal type tube vibrators num spud vibrators num spud type internal vibrators num ensure the spud vibrators do not come into contact with the joint load transfer devices subgrade or side forms .
prevent sliding forms from spreading using a rigid lateral connection .
num fixed form method a finishing machine provide a finishing machine equipped with at least two oscillatingtype transverse screeds for finishing the surface to the tolerances required by the contract .
provide surface pantype vibrators for pavement thicknesses no greater than num in num mm or internaltype vibrators with immersed tubes or multiple spuds to consolidate the full width and depth of the pavement .
attach vibrators to the spreader or the finishing machine or mount them on a separate carriage .
ensure the frequency ratings are in accordance with table num vibrator frequencies .
ensure the vibrators do not come into contact with the joint load transfer devices subgrade or side forms .
bvibrating or rotary strikeoff screeds provide forms and vibrating or rotary strikeoff screeds to construct radii inlet basins gore areas lane tapers intersection quadrants and areas inaccessible to mainline paving equipment .
the resident engineer will not num portland cement concrete pavement num allow segregation or grout buildup .
to achieve thorough consolidation and uniformity of the pavement ensure the spudtype hand operated vibrators have a frequency rating of at least num impulses per minute .
num texturing equipment provide fabric texturing equipment that consists of a drag of seamless strips of burlap or cotton that produces a uniform gritty texture .
ensure a strip of fabric with a width of at least num ft num m is in contact with the full width of the pavement during texturing .
ensure the drag consists of at least two layers of fabric .
ensure the bottom layer of fabric is num in num mm wider than the top .
provide a texturing machine that is a vibrating roller or a comb equipped with steel tines .
ensure the machine is selfpropelled and automatically lifts the roller or tine comb bar near the edge of the pavement .
the resident engineer will allow handtexturing in areas inaccessible to mechanical equipment .
c. concrete saw provide a concrete saw that is conventional wet cut type or early entry dry cut type .
provide at least one standby saw .
maintain an ample supply of saw blades at the work site during sawing operations .
provide artificial lighting for night sawing .
d. forms provide metal straightside forms with thicknesses of at least num in num mm and lengths of at least num ft num m. construct forms to a depth equal to the concrete thickness shown on the plans and capable of supporting equipment operating on the forms .
for curves with a radius of num ft num m or less use flexible or curved forms with devices for secure settings capable of withstanding equipment impact and vibration .
ensure the flange braces extend out on the base at least twothirds of the form height .
remove damaged forms and use repaired forms that the resident engineer has inspected and approved .
ensure the top face of the form varies no more than ⅛ in in num ft num mm in num m from a true plane and alignment varies no more than ¼ in in num ft num mm in num m. clean the forms of concrete grout and other materials .
before use cover the forms with a formrelease agent .
e. header boards if stopping paving operations and header boards are used set header boards cut to the cross section of the paving slab parallel to the transverse joint .
design the boards to ensure accurate installation of dowels or tie bars as shown on the plans .
f. floats provide mechanical or hand operated floats to smooth the concrete after strikeoff and consolidation .
ensure the trowel blade of handoperated floats are rigid straightedge from num ft to num ft num m to num m long and num in to num in num mm to num mm wide .
ensure the float is capable of working longitudinally or transversely .
the department will allow a finishing machine with the float pan type finisher in place of a mechanical or handoperated float if this method obtains the surface tolerances required by the contract .
portland cement concrete pavement num num g. hand tools provide work bridges num ft num m straightedges and other hand tools to complete the pavement as required by the contract .
replace warped floats or straightedges and defective finishing tools .
h. spraying equipment provide fully atomizing equipment to apply the whitepigmented curing membrane .
ensure it is equipped with a tank agitator that will keep the compound mixed .
ensure the resident engineer can verify the application rate based on tank capacity .
use pressure tank hand sprayers to apply the curing membrane to vertical surfaces irregular areas or edges after form removal .
i .
joint sealing equipment provide joint sealing equipment in accordance with subsection num equipment .
j .
milling machine provide a milling machine in accordance with subsection num equipment .
k. shot blasting equipment provide shot blasting equipment capable of collecting used shot and waste material .
the department will allow the use of recycled shot .
dispose of materials removed in the cleaning operation in accordance with subsection num removal and disposal of salvaged materials structures and obstructions .
num construction methods a .
preparation of existing surface or grade num general after grading and compacting the roadbed trim the grade to the elevation shown on the plans extending the work at least num ft num m beyond the edges of the concrete pavement .
ensure that subgrades and bases are in accordance with subsection num.a tolerances .
ensure that hma base bond breaker and leveling course are in accordance with subsection num.a tolerances .
ensure the milled surfaces are in accordance with section num coldmilling pavement .
correct the alignment and grade elevations of the forms and string lines immediately before placing the concrete .
reset and check disturbed forms or string lines .
fill low areas with concrete during paving operations not with material trimmed from bases or subgrades .
keep the grade smooth and compacted until pavement placement .
unless waterproof subgrade or base course cover material is required by the contract ensure the subgrade or base is uniformly moist when placing the concrete .
num unbonded concrete overlays construct specified hma base bond breaker or leveling course in accordance with section num hot mix asphalt .
clean the pavement surface before placing the hma .
if required by the contract mill the surface before concrete placement num portland cement concrete pavement num in accordance with section num coldmilling pavement .
after milling tight blade the surface to remove ridges and loose material .
the department considers fine particles beneficial to the bondbreaking process evenly distribute them .
notify the resident engineer if milling operations expose underlying concrete pavement .
spray exposed concrete with tack coat and cover with separator fabric .
identify the location of transverse joints on both sides of existing concrete pavements before cold milling or placing asphalt bond breakers .
place new transverse contraction joints at least num ft num m upstream and at least num ft num m downstream of an existing joint .
ensure the slab is from num ft to num ft num m to num m long .
place a transverse contraction joint at the interface of overlaying and new pavement sections .
num bonded concrete overlays a bonded overlays on concrete pavement before surface preparation and placement of the pcc overlay remove medium and high severity pavement cracking and replace as shown on the plans .
high severity pavement cracks are defined as shattered slabs dcracks into the wheel paths broken slab corners into wheel paths and cracks wider than ½ in num mm that are faulting spalled or scaled .
determine pavementpatching limits as approved by the resident engineer .
num surface preparation prepare the entire surface to be overlayed by thoroughly cleaning the surface by milling and then shotblasting or just shotblasting .
the department will not allow the use of water to clean the coldmilled debris from the surface as a slurry may develop and weaken the bond between the overlay and the surface .
remove all dirt oil laitance or loose material from the surface and edges .
remove excess joint sealant on the surface leave joint sealant in the joint slot .
remove pavement markings raised pavement markers and adhesives .
dispose of materials removed in the cleaning operation in accordance with subsection num removal and disposal of salvaged materials structures and obstructions .
num surface cleaning before applying the overlay to the surface clean the entire surface with an oilfree compressed air blast .
the department will allow the use of water for final cleaning only after the shotblasing operation as approved by the resident engineer .
remove all freestanding water before placing concrete .
after cleaning the department will only allow the paving machine and the concrete delivery trucks to use the cleaned surface .
ensure the concrete trucks drive on the prepared surface directly in front of the paving machine .
prevent contamination of the cleaned pavement surface before placing the overlay .
if the concrete becomes contaminated during concrete placement stop production until the contamination is removed .
if a concrete truck contaminates the cleaned surface with oil grease water mud or other foreign objects remove the truck from the cleaned surface remove the contaminants and ensure the truck is clean and repaired before returning to the project .
portland cement concrete pavement num num num joint identification identify the exact location of both sides of contraction expansion and longitudinal joints in the existing pavement for sawing locations .
bbonded overlays on asphalt pavement prepare the surface to be overlaid by cleaning and milling .
remove dirt oil laitance and loose material from the surface and edges .
remove pavement markings raised pavement markers and adhesives .
dispose of materials removed in the cleaning operation in accordance with subsection num removal and disposal of salvaged materials structures and obstructions .
b .
handling measuring and batching materials ensure the batch plant and hauling equipment continuously supply material to the work site .
deliver fine and coarse aggregate to the plant in advance to allow time for sampling and testing .
ensure the concrete plant contains enough material for a full day of paving operations .
deliver and stockpile materials in accordance with subsection num storage and handling of materials .
measure and batch materials for concrete in accordance with aashto m num unless otherwise required by the contract .
weigh different aggregate sizes in separate hoppers .
measure cementitious material by weight .
use separate scales and hoppers with devices that indicate the complete discharge of the batch .
use an electronicallycontrolled automatic batch weight and printer system that indicates the net batch weight of material delivered to the transporting truck .
ensure the weights are printed on a ticket that includes the quantities of admixtures and the volume of water incorporated into the load .
ensure the system is calibrated inspected and certified in accordance with subsection num.a measurement of quantities general .
ensure the combined weights of the materials when converted to a volume are within num percent of the volume on the ticket minus the target air content .
c. mixing concrete mix and deliver concrete in accordance with aashto m num unless otherwise required by the contract .
mix the concrete at the work site in a centralmix plant or in truck mixers .
obtain the resident engineers approval for the type of truck mixer .
do not exceed the manufacturer recommended capacity .
place the mixed concrete no more than num hr after the water cement and aggregate are combined .
mix the concrete from num seconds to num seconds if at the work site or a central mixing plant .
mixing time ends when the discharge chute opens .
for multiple drum mixers include the transfer time as part of the mixing time .
remove the contents of the mixer drum before starting the next batch .
control the mixers drum speed in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
the resident engineer may allow num percent overload of the mixer if the concrete does not spill and the concrete test data are satisfactory .
ensure that a portion of the mixing water enters the drum before the cement and aggregates .
keep a uniform flow of water and ensure that all water is in the drum within the first num seconds of the mixing .
keep the throat of the drum free from accumulations that restrict the flow of materials .
num portland cement concrete pavement num adjust water to improve workability if transit mixers or agitators deliver the pcc .
increase mixing by num revolutions when adding water and maintain the water to cementitious material ratio .
d. light and weather limitations mix place and finish concrete when there is enough natural light unless using artificial lighting approved by the resident engineer .
num concrete temperature ensure the temperature of the mixed concrete is from num f to num f num c to num c during mixing delivery and placement .
protect the concrete quality through all weather conditions .
num base surface or foundation course temperature when placing an unbonded overlay place the concrete when the base temperature is below num f num c. reduce the temperature by spraying a fine water fog on the base .
ensure water does not pond in front of the plastic concrete .
for waterproof bases the department will also allow the following temperature control measures apply white curing compound or apply lime slurry .
do not place concrete if frost exists in the base .
if using bonded overlays place the concrete when the base temperature is below num f num c. cease paving operations if the base temperature exceeds num f num c do not attempt to reduce the base temperature because water and other agents prevent proper concrete bonding .
e. setting forms if using formed paving equipment set the forms to line and grade by shimming or other methods approved by the resident engineer .
correct variations in the foundation course that prevent placing forms to the line or grade shown on the plans .
stake forms in place with at least three pins per num ft num m section .
place a pin at each side of the joints .
tightly lock form sections and ensure that there is no movement .
ensure the forms do not deviate from true line by more than ¼ in num mm .
the resident engineer will not approve forms that move under the finishing machine .
clean and oil forms before placing the concrete .
f. placing concrete num general when placing concrete on the grade minimize rehandling .
discharge concrete into a spreading device and mechanically spread onto the grade to prevent segregation .
use truck mixers truck agitators or nonagitating hauling equipment capable of discharging concrete without segregation .
between transverse joints place the concrete continuously without using intermediate bulkheads .
hand spread concrete with appropriate tools do not use handheld vibrators to spread concrete .
ensure soil or foreign materials are not tracked onto the recently placed concrete .
portland cement concrete pavement num num ensure concrete cures for at least num days before allowing finishing equipment on it for placement of adjacent lanes .
before allowing other equipment onto the pavement ensure that the concrete attains a strength in accordance with subsection num.n opening to traffic .
if using a slipform paver ensure continuous forward movement .
coordinate mixing delivering and spreading operations to provide uniform progress minimizing stopping and starting .
stop vibratory and tamping elements if the forward movement of the paver stops .
consolidate concrete against the grade face of the forms and joint assemblies .
minimize the operation of vibrators in a single location to that required for consolidation .
deposit concrete near expansion and contraction joints without displacing the joint assemblies .
remove foreign materials that fall onto the completed slab as approved by the resident engineer .
do not place concrete without an inspector present unless otherwise approved by the resident engineer .
num continuously reinforced concrete pavement crcp to disrupt the bond between the hma and the crcp use a standard white waxbased curing compound on the hma at the rate of num gal per num ft² num l per num m² .
allow the bond breaker to dry before placing the reinforcing steel bars .
a preparation of steel reinforcement remove dirt oil paint grease mill scale and loose or thick rust from the reinforcing steel .
the department does not consider minor thin powdery rust that does not reduce the effective cross section to be detrimental .
bplacement of reinforcement for continuously reinforced concrete pavement place reinforcement on chairs or high chair bars .
ensure the horizontal position is within ½ in num mm of the longitudinal dimensions and within num in num mm of the transverse dimensions shown on the plans .
place the quantity of longitudinal and transverse members as shown on the plans .
ensure the vertical position is within ½ in num mm of the longitudinal and transverse dimensions shown on the plans .
handle the reinforcement so that the bars remain flat and undistorted during concrete placement .
ensure the bars are free from kinks or bends that prevent assembly or installation .
if using forms oil before placing reinforcement .
install the chairs or high chair bars to support reinforcement as shown on the plans .
arrange the chairs to ensure the reinforcement is not permanently displaced during placement and consolidation .
ensure the base supports the chairs and prevents overturning and penetration into the base .
space high chair bars adjacent to other transverse members to allow for proper concrete placement especially important at reinforcement laps .
the department will allow welding of the chairs to transverse bars in a manner approved by the resident engineer .
num portland cement concrete pavement num if requested provide the resident engineer with a sample of the chair or high chair bar .
show the chairs and layout on the working drawings .
if the chairs do not support the reinforcement during concrete placement and finishing take corrective action to ensure the final position of the steel as required by the contract .
if the reinforcement consists of loose bars constructed on the grade secure the longitudinal bars to the transverse bars using wire ties or clips to maintain the horizontal and vertical positions shown on the plans .
c lap splices in reinforcing steel to ensure continuous reinforcement lap the longitudinal reinforcing bars in a staggered pattern as shown on the plans .
secure laps in the longitudinal reinforcement by tying fastening with clips or otherwise securely fastening .
num unbonded concrete overlays place concrete on the grade to the minimum thickness shown on the plans .
the department will only allow deviations for profile adjustments crosssection adjustments or both to be above the nominal thickness .
when adjustments are necessary for grade or yield improvement the thickness shall not in any case be less than the minimum thickness shown on the plans .
g. test specimens provide concrete necessary for acceptance testing .
h. joints construct joints perpendicular to the surface of the slab of the type dimensions and locations shown on the plans .
align the joints using guidelines or devices approved by the resident engineer .
ensure the sawed joints are straight and true to line repair joints that are not .
seal the sawed joints in accordance with subsection num construction methods .
num longitudinal joints only saw and seal longitudinal contraction joints .
place deformed steel tie bars of a length size spacing and material shown on the plans perpendicular to the longitudinal joint .
place tie bars using mechanical equipment after concrete placement or secure tie bars using supports to prevent displacement during concrete placement .
repair or replace loose bars at no additional cost to the department .
the department will not allow bars to be painted coated or enclosed in tubes or sleeves .
saw the longitudinal contraction joint to the depth shown on the plans without damaging the pavement or joint .
clean the sawed areas of dust chalk and contaminants and fill with an approved jointsealing material .
allow the joint sealant to cure before allowing construction equipment and other vehicles on the pavement .
adjacent surfaces should not vary by more than ⅛ in num mm using a num ft num m straightedge .
portland cement concrete pavement num num num transverse joints a expansion or isolation joint make the expansion joint filler continuous from form to form .
shape it along the form from the base to the keyway .
provide lengths of joint filler equal to the width of the pavement or the width of one lane .
use joint filler that is not damaged or repaired .
punch premolded joint filler to the diameter of the dowels .
unless otherwise directed by the resident engineer use lengths equal to the width of the pavement .
if placing two or more traffic lanes of pavement use premolded filler in sections equal to the width of one lane .
clip or lace joint filler sections together if there is more than one section per joint .
extend the bottom edge of the filler to below the bottom of the slab .
unless otherwise required b the contract ensure the top edge is num in num mm below the surface of the pavement .
while the concrete is being placed protect the top of the filler using a metal channel cap of at least numgauge material with flanges at least num½ in num mm deep .
after striking off and placing the concrete on both sides of the joint withdraw the installing bar and leave the premolded filler in place .
before removing the installing bar and channel cap vibrate the concrete and incorporate additional freshly mixed concrete into depressions left by the installing bar .
expose the filler for the full width of the slab .
clean and reoil the installing bar before installing the next joint .
after removing the side forms open the ends of the transverse joints at the edges of the pavement for the depth of the slab .
before opening the pavement to traffic seal or top out premolded joints with jointsealing filler required by the contract .
leave a uniform strip of jointsealing filler slightly below the surface of the pavement .
for concrete curbing that can not be sawed use steel templates or other jointforming dividers to construct joints and install them at the location shown on the plans during concrete placement .
bcontraction joints form transverse contraction joints by sawing to the depth shown on the plans without damaging the pavement or joint .
saw succeeding joints consecutively from the beginning to the end of the days run and saw all transverse joints soon enough to prevent uncontrolled transverse cracking .
clean and dry the sawed area .
keep it free from dust chalk contaminants and spalling .
fill the sawed area with joint sealing material .
ensure the curing period for joints is complete before allowing construction equipment and vehicles on the pavement .
c transverse construction joints for jointed pavement unless otherwise directed by the resident engineer construct transverse construction joints when concrete operations are interrupted for more than num min or as field conditions require during concrete operations .
ensure transverse construction joints are not constructed within num ft num m of expansion or contraction joints .
if at the time of interruption not enough concrete has been placed to form a slab at least num ft num m long remove the concrete to the num portland cement concrete pavement num preceding joint and dispose of in accordance with subsection num removal and disposal of salvaged materials structures and obstructions .
provide a rigid header with holes or slots for dowel bars with the same spacing and dimensions of an expansion joint .
submit alternative header construction methods to the resident engineer for approval .
dtransverse construction joints for continuously reinforced concrete pavement install a transverse construction joint at the end of each work day or when paving operations are interrupted for more than num min or as field conditions require during concrete operations .
form the joint by placing the concrete against a header board .
extend the longitudinal reinforcing steel through the header board and support from the base to prevent deflections .
cover the reinforcement that extends beyond the header board with sheets of plywood or other material so that workers can walk on the steel without displacing it and concrete does not spill on the base during screeding operations .
make construction joints and lap splices as shown on the plans .
use hand vibrators to consolidate pavement areas adjacent to the sides of transverse construction joints and refinish the surface .
extend these areas at least num ft num m from the joint .
ensure the adjacent surfaces do not vary by more than ⅛ in num mm using a num ft num m straightedge .
num lightweight earlyentry saw joints the department will allow the construction of transverse joints using a lightweight earlyentry saw .
ensure the blade is ⅛ in num mm thick and the sawed joint is at least num½ in num mm deep .
saw joints in accordance with the manufacturers recommendation .
begin sawing the joint when the concrete is hard enough to cut without raveling chipping spalling or tearing .
the resident engineer will inspect the sawed faces to ensure that early cutting does not cause joint undercutting .
delay sawing if undercutting is deep enough to cause structural weakness or excessive joint roughness .
saw the joints consecutively at the spacing required by the contract .
immediately after sawing clean the cut and adjacent concrete surface .
respray damaged membranecured surfaces .
inspect the lightweight earlyentry saw joints the next day .
if a crack is not evident within num hr resaw the joint to a depth of tnum .
clean and seal joints in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations unless otherwise required by the contract .
for bonded concrete overlays saw joints directly over existing transverse and longitudinal joints and using the following methods overlay sections equal to or less than num in num mm thick saw the joints ½ in num mm deeper than the overlay concrete and overlay sections thicker than num in num mm saw joints to a depth of tnum .
saw the joints without causing excessive raveling chipping spalling or tearing .
clean and seal joints in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations unless otherwise required by the contract .
portland cement concrete pavement num num num load transfer devices the placement method of load transfer devices is optional .
hold or mechanically place load transfer devices as shown on the plans .
place dowels parallel to the surface and centerline of the slab and vary no more than ⅜ in num mm from the position shown on the plans .
cap expansion joint dowels as shown on the plans .
check the placement of mechanically injected dowel bars using a soiltest model ctnuma microcovermeter or an equivalent .
i .
final strike off consolidation and finishing num general perform strike off consolidation and finishing in the following sequence strike off and consolidate float and remove laitance straightedge and finish the final surface .
the department will not allow the application of water to the concrete surface to assist in finishing operations unless the resident engineer approves otherwise .
if the application of water is approved apply as a fog spray using approved spray equipment .
num finishing at joints using mechanical vibrators compact the concrete adjacent to the joints to prevent voids between the concrete and the joint material load transfer devices and joint assembly units .
num slipform paving use the slipform paver to strikeoff consolidate and initially finish the concrete .
at the beginning of the days paving operation straightedge the construction joint and the initial slab longitudinally and transversely until the machine produces slab smoothness in accordance with subsection num.a tolerances .
to ensure the edge of the pavement slab meets the elevations shown on the plans test using a num ft num m straightedge perpendicular to the centerline of the roadway .
ensure the outer num in num mm of the pavement does not deviate more than ¼ in num mm from the bottom of the straightedge .
test for compliance throughout the paving operation .
correct valleys or depressions that do not drain at no additional cost to the department .
limit handfinishing to correction of surface defects .
num fixedform paving a machine finishing strikeoff and screed freshly placed concrete using a finishing machine .
ensure the machine consolidates the pavement and creates a uniform texture .
keep the tops of the forms clean .
to prevent an irregular finish ensure the machine travels on the forms without lifting wobbling or moving unnecessarily .
num portland cement concrete pavement num during the first pass of the finishing machine maintain a uniform ridge of concrete in front of the screed .
use a vibrator in accordance with subsection num.b placing and finishing equipment to vibrate the full width of concrete paving slabs .
bhand finishing the resident engineer will allow handfinishing methods under the following conditions if the paving equipment breaks down the concrete deposited on grade and in transit and in narrow or irregular areas .
hand finish in accordance with subsection num.a tolerances .
strikeoff and screed the freshly placed concrete using a portable screed .
use a screed at least num ft num m longer than the maximum width of the slab .
use a vibrator or other equipment to consolidate the pavement .
move the screed on the forms in the same direction as the paving operation with combination of longitudinal and transverse shearing motions .
ensure the ends of the screed do not rise from the side forms during strikeoff .
repeat this process to produce a uniform surface and texture free of porous areas .
c floating after consolidating and strikingoff the concrete use a float to smooth true and consolidate .
use longhandled floats to smooth and fillin porous areas .
maintain the crown in the pavement .
after floating remove excess water and laitance with a straightedge .
lap successive passes onehalf the length of the float blade .
num straightedge testing and surface correction after floating and removing excess water and while the concrete is still plastic use a num ft num m straightedge to test the smoothness of the concrete surface .
hold the straightedge against the surface parallel to the road centerline .
advance the straightedge in successive stages of no more than onehalf the length of the straightedge .
fill depressions with freshly mixed concrete then strikeoff consolidate and refinish .
cut and refinish high areas .
ensure that the adjacent surfaces across joints are smooth .
continue straightedge testing and surface corrections until the entire surface conforms to the grade and typical section shown on the plans .
num texturing use a texture drag before the pavement final finish to produce a uniform surface of gritty texture on the entire pavement surface .
for pavement at least num ft num m wide mount the drag on a bridge .
clean the drag of encrusted mortar .
replace permanently encrusted drags with new ones .
a final groove finish when dragging is complete mechanically groove and texture the driving lanes and ramps in a transverse direction as approved by the resident engineer .
portland cement concrete pavement num num unless otherwise required by the contract the department will not require transverse grooves on shoulders .
on any roads or streets with a posted speed limit of num mph or less tine the surface as specified here or obtain written approval from the appropriate local official to provide an alternate finish .
at least num days before beginning paving submit the proposal with documentation of local support to the resident engineer .
written approval from the resident engineer replaces the need for a change order price adjustment or both .
num transverse finish construct transverse grooves perpendicular to the centerline of the pavement .
transverse grooving consists of creating transverse grooves from ⅛ in to num in num mm to num mm wide from ⅛ in to num in num mm to num mm deep and spaced on a rake as shown on the plans .
repeat the grooving pattern across the pavement .
form the grooves in the plastic concrete without tearing or bringing the coarse aggregate to the surface .
ensure the machine automatically lifts the roller or tines near the edge of pavement .
ensure the overlap between grooving passes is less than num in num mm .
use handgroove methods in areas inaccessible to mechanical grooving equipment .
before tining transverse grooves identify the location of transverse contraction joints and ensure the nearest grooves are from num in to num in num mm to num mm from the contraction joints .
bedging at forms and joints after the final finish but before the concrete sets round the edges of the pavement along the sides of the slab to the radius shown on the plans .
produce a welldefined and continuous radius and obtain a smooth dense mortar finish .
at the joints broom the surface to eliminate tool marks adjacent to the joints without damaging joint edges .
test the joint smoothness before the concrete has set and make corrections in accordance with subsection num.h joints .
num portland cement concrete pavement num j. curing immediately after completing the texturing operations and as soon as marring of the concrete will not occur cover and cure the entire surface of the newly placed concrete in accordance with one of the following methods cotton or burlap mats impervious membrane method white polyethylene sheeting or curing for cold weather .
failure to provide sufficient cover material or lack of water to adequately take care of both curing and other requirements shall be cause for immediate suspension of concrete operations .
the department will not allow the concrete to be left exposed for more than num min between stages of curing or during the curing period .
num cotton or burlap mats cover the pavement surface with mats .
use mats long enough or wide enough to extend beyond the edges of the slab by at least twice the thickness of the pavement .
saturate the mats with water .
secure the mats to keep in contact with the surface .
ensure the mats are moist for num hr after concrete placement unless otherwise required by the contract or directed by the resident engineer .
num impervious membrane immediately after texturing operations and before the concrete sets uniformly spray the pavement with whitepigmented curing compound in accordance with subsection num.c liquid membrane curing compounds .
if the pavement is initially cured with cotton or burlap mats apply the curing compound after removing the mats .
avoid applying the curing compound during rain .
using a mechanical sprayer in accordance with subsection num.h spraying equipment apply the curing compound at a minimum rate of num gal per num ft² num l per num m² .
if the temperature on the roadway is more than num f num c apply the curing compound at a minimum rate of num gal per num ft² num l per num m² .
ensure the compound is thoroughly mixed and the pigment is uniformly dispersed .
the resident engineer will allow hand spraying irregular widths shapes and surfaces exposed by removed forms .
ensure the curing compound is not applied to the inside faces of joints .
ensure the curing compound creates a film that will harden within num hr of application .
use additional compound to repair damage to the membrane that occurs during the curing period .
upon removing the side forms apply curing compound to the sides of the slabs .
for bonded overlays apply the curing compound immediately after texturing operations at a minimum rate of num gal per num ft² num l per num m² or as recommended by the manufacturer to prevent moisture loss .
num white polyethylene sheeting cover the surface and sides of the pavement with polyethylene sheeting .
use sheeting long enough or wide enough to extend beyond the edges of the slab by at least twice the thickness of the pavement .
overlap adjacent sheeting units at least num in num mm .
secure the sheeting to keep it in contact with the surface .
ensure portland cement concrete pavement num num the sheeting remains in place for num hr after concrete placement unless otherwise required by the contract or directed by the resident engineer .
num curing for cold weather maintain the quality and strength of the concrete during cold weather .
replace frostdamaged concrete at no additional cost to the department .
k. removing forms avoid damaging the pavement while removing forms .
cure the sides of the slab in accordance with subsection num.jnum impervious membrane .
repair honeycombed areas .
l. sawing and sealing joints saw and seal joints in accordance with subsection num construction methods .
provide joints as shown on the plans .
m.protection of pavement protect the pavement from damage due to any traffic .
if damage occurs to the pavement before the area is open to traffic repair or replace the damaged sections at no additional cost to the department .
n. opening to traffic do not allow traffic on the pavement for at least num days after concrete placement unless otherwise approved by the resident engineer .
the resident engineer may approve opening the pavement to traffic when it reaches the strength requirement in accordance with subsection num mix design and proportioning .
with the approval of the resident engineer the contractor may use maturity meters for the basis of form removal or opening roadways to traffic at no additional cost to the department .
submit a plan for the use of maturity meters .
o. highearlystrength concrete pavement use high earlystrength concrete pavement in accordance with section num portland cement concrete .
do not allow traffic on the pavement until it reaches the strength requirement in accordance with subsection num mix design and proportioning .
p. protection against rain protect the surface from rain .
repair or replace damage due to rain at no additional cost to the department .
q. tolerances num surface construct a finished pavement surface as shown on the plans and in accordance with subsection num.anum surface elevation and smoothness .
num width construct a finished pavement width as shown on the plans and in accordance with subsection num.anum width .
num portland cement concrete pavement num num thickness after grinding operations determine the thickness of the pavement using the average of three caliper measurements of cores tested in accordance with aashto t num .
thickness will be in accordance with subsection num.r acceptance of pavement .
r. acceptance of pavement while the contractor shall be fully and exclusively responsible for producing an acceptable product acceptance responsibility rests with the engineer .
determination of acceptability and pay factors for gradation air content strength and thickness will be made in accordance with table num acceptance schedule .
the pay adjustments for the characteristics will be based on the following equations num num ac g t s cpf num p p c c cup q cup q cpf pa where cpf combined pay factor s pay factor for strength t pay factor for thickness g pay factor for gradation ac pay factor for air content pa pay adjustment c q cubic yards cubic meters of concrete in a num yd² num m² lot partial lots prorated c cup contract unit price of concrete only yd³ m³ p q square yards square meters of concrete in a num yd² num m² lot partial lots prorated and p cup contract unit price of concrete placement yd² m² .
note c cup and c q include only the concrete material .
p cup and p q include all other labor and materials required in the concrete pavement reinforcing steel dowels curing compound etc ..
the resident engineer will base pay adjustments on the individual pay factors shown in table num on a lot to lot basis .
a lot will normally be defined as num yd² .
to ensure the overall quality of the material and workmanship the resident engineer may reduce the size of a lot when multiple concrete placements occur .
if test results are incomplete at that time the resident engineer will make an interim adjustment assuming pay factors of num for the then unknown characteristics and will correct later when testing is complete .
the total adjustment in pay for the four characteristics in the table numgradation air content strength and thicknesswill be the sum of the pay adjustments on individual lots .
the department will use random samples to test concrete and will test for all control test characteristics except smoothness on a lot to lot basis in accordance with portland cement concrete pavement num num the following requirements .
determination of acceptability and pay adjustments for smoothness when applicable will be covered by separate specifications .
however the resident engineer will reject any load of mixture that is visually unacceptable for reasons of being too wet excessively segregated or otherwise obviously deficient .
furthermore the department will extensively test sections of completed pavement that appear to be seriously inadequate based on visual observation or knowledge of other deficiencies .
the department will not use the results of such tests for pay adjustment purposes but will use them to determine whether the section is totally unacceptable and must be removed .
the resident engineer may reject pavement slabs with unsound concrete uncontrolled cracking malfunctioning sawed joints spalling honeycombing surface irregularities insufficient thickness or other deficiencies associated with poor quality pavements .
a engineers acceptance procedures once a lot has been defined maintain its identity throughout the mixing and placement process .
the department will use pay factors determined from random sampling and testing of a lot at the appropriate locations in computing its pay adjustment .
in general the engineer will use table num for acceptance purposes however depending on the available time and the engineers confidence in the contractors process control the engineer may elect to perform more or less sampling and testing .
table num acceptance schedule characteristics num test pay factor a gradation c deviation from the target without regard to signs num num num numx num numx coarse or fine aggregates passing no .
num sieve target spec .
range num unacceptable b air content c deviation from the target without regard to signs num num num numx²numxnum target num num unacceptable b strength d deviation from minimum strength of target considering signs num psi pay factoractual strengthspecified strength target num psi num psi unacceptable b thickness e deviation from minimum considering signs english num num num numpd num numpd num numpd deficient num unacceptable b num portland cement concrete pavement num table num acceptance schedule characteristics num test pay factor a a where x is the average of deviations and pd is percent deficient .
b unless otherwise directed by the engineer products testing in this range are unacceptable and shall be removed and replaced at no additional cost to the department .
c gradation and air content num specimen and num test for each characteristic per sublot .
d strength num cylinders per lot averaged and considered as num test in table num. e thickness after grinding operations determine the thickness of the pavement using the average of num cores at times and locations directed by the engineer .
num to determine the average thickness for a lot the department will only consider the minimum thickness plus num percent for core thicknesses greater than num percent thicker than the minimum thickness e.g .
if the minimum thickness shown on the plans equals num in num mm the department will only consider num in num mm for the average thickness determination for a core thickness of num in num mm .
the department will not include in its average thickness determination measurements that are more than num percent thinner than the minimum thickness shown on the plans or the measurements from exploratory cores .
if the measurement of any core is thinner than the minimum thickness shown on the plans by num percent or more take exploratory cores at intervals of at least num ft num m parallel to the centerline until the department finds a core that is less than num percent thinner than the minimum thickness .
fill core holes with concrete as required by the contract .
bunacceptable or rejected work replace rejected slabs with new pavement at no additional cost to the department .
when replacing rejected slabs remove a width of at least one lane and a length of at least num ft num m. if the removal is within num ft num m of any transverse joint remove the slab to the joint .
if a deficient unit does not warrant removal as directed by the resident engineer the department will not pay for the deficient unit .
num method of measurement the resident engineer will measure pcc placement of the type shown on the plans by the area of accepted and completeinplace pavement .
the resident engineer will measure the volume of pcc used for new pavement construction except for detours and crossovers without regard to thickness type of cement or type of pavement based on the on the actual length paved multiplied by the theoretical cross section show on the plans .
the resident engineer will measure the volume of pcc used for overlaying existing pavement bonded or unbonded using the ticket count or other documentation approved by the resident engineer .
the resident engineer will measure detours and crossovers as shown on the plans .
portland cement concrete pavement num num portland cement concrete pavement num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit a p.c .
concrete pavement placement square yard square meter b dowel jointed p.c.c .
pavt .
placement square yard square meter c cont .
reinf .
p.c.c .
pavt .
placement square yard square meter d bonded p.c.c .
overlay placement square yard square meter e full depth p.c.c .
patch placement square yard square meter f partl .
depth p.c.c .
patch placement square yard square meter g p.c .
concrete for pavement cubic yard cubic meter h p.c .
railroad approach slabs square yard square meter i terminal joint each j terminal joint sleeper slab square yard square meter the department will consider the cost of placing concrete pavements including relevant labor and material except the pcc and the cost of reinforcing steel load transfer devices joint fillers and joint sealants to be included in the contract unit price for the relevant placement pay items .
the department will not pay for substitutions of high earlystrength concrete for standard pcc .
the department will consider steel concrete and materials needed for approach slab construction to be included in the contract unit price for p.c .
railroad approach slabs .
the department will consider steel concrete and other materials needed for joint construction to be included in the contract unit price for terminal joints .
the department will consider steel concrete and other materials needed for slab construction to be included in the contract unit price for terminal joint sleeper slabs .
the department considers the cost of filling core holes to be included in the contract unit price for the relevant portland cement concrete pavement pay items .
the department will pay adjusted prices for deficient units of pavement in accordance with subsection num.qnumd payment adjustment .
num concrete joint sealing num section num concrete joint sealing num description this work consists of sawing cleaning and sealing joints in existing portland cement concrete pavement .
num materials provide materials in accordance with subsection num joint fillers and sealer .
num equipment provide the following equipment a .
concrete saw provide concrete saws capable of sawing concrete joints to the dimensions shown on the plans .
b. highpressure water pumping system provide highpressure water pumping systems capable of flushing concrete slurry from sawed joints .
c. sand blasting unit provide compressed air sand blasting units capable of cleaning joint surfaces as specified .
ensure the units include traps to remove free water and oil from the compressed air .
d. air compressor provide air compressors capable of delivering compressed air with a pressure of at least num psi num kpa .
ensure the compressors include traps to remove free water and oil from the compressed air .
e. extrusion pump provide airpowered extrusion pumps to apply joint sealer .
ensure the pump output is capable of delivering the volume of the joint sealer to the joint as specified .
f. injection tool provide a mechanical injection device to insert the sealer into the joint .
g. joint sealer kettle if the joint sealant requires heating provide a doublebottom oilbath indirectflame type kettle .
ensure the kettle is capable of mixing heating delivering and maintaining the specified temperature .
num construction methods a. sawing joints saw the joints to the dimensions shown on the plans .
produce a joint of uniform width with cut faces on both sides along its full length .
concrete joint sealing num num b. flushing joints after sawing remove the slurry from the joint area by flushing it with a highpressure water system and other necessary equipment .
c. cleaning joint faces num general before installing the joint sealer or filler clean the sawed faces of the joints of foreign material do not blow dry the joints with compressed air or use portable hand saws to clean joint faces .
num sandblasting sandblast joint faces after they dry .
attach the sandblaster nozzle to a mechanical aiming device to direct the sandblast at a num angle and maintain sandblasting at less than num in num mm from the joint faces .
after sandblasting blow out the joints using filtered oil and moisture free compressed air at least num psi num kpa and num ft³min num m³min .
use a blow tube that fits into the joint .
repeat the sandblasting and blowing until no residual dust or coating remains in the joint .
num joint contamination before sealing joints clean the joints of any contaminates due to traffic or weather .
d. backer rod if shown on the plans or recommended by the sealant manufacturer install a backer rod before applying the joint sealant .
use a backer rod of the type recommended by the sealant material manufacturer .
install backer rod to the dimensions shown on the plans .
e. sealing joints clean or reclean and seal joints on the same day .
num approval of joints for sealing the departments inspectors will examine joints prepared for sealing .
the resident engineer will not approve joints for sealing if the joints are contaminated or wet .
num installation of joint sealers and fillers the resident engineer may require that a representative of the joint filler manufacturer joint sealer manufacturer or both be on the job site at the beginning of the jointsealing .
the representative shall demonstrate the manufacturers installation standards .
num application of joint sealers apply the joint sealer using a resident engineer approved mechanical injection tool .
apply the joint sealer when the joint temperature is above num f num c and joints are clean and dry .
num concrete joint sealing num num concrete joint sealing inject sealers into the joint .
ensure that the sealers bond to the joint face surfaces .
for surfaces of joint sealers that require tooling use an approved mechanical device to make a concave surface from ¼ in to ½ in num mm to num mm below the pavement surface .
complete the tooling before a skin forms on the surface of the sealer .
do not use soap or oil as a tooling aid .
for selfleveling joint sealers tooling is not required .
num bonding failures repair sealants that fail to bond to sawed concrete joint surfaces at no additional cost to the department .
f. traffic ensure the freshly applied joint sealant is no longer sticky before allowing traffic on it .
num method of measurement the resident engineer will measure the length of concrete joint sealing after the joint sealant is in place .
num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit concrete joint sealing linear foot meter dowel bar retrofit num num section num dowel bar retrofit num description this work consists of restoring load transfer in existing portland cement concrete pcc pavement by installing epoxy coated dowel bars across transverse joints or cracks .
num materials a. dowel bars provide epoxycoated dowel bars in accordance with subsection num epoxy coated reinforcement bars of the dimensions shown on the plans .
provide tightfitting nonmetallic end caps that allow the bar to move ¼ in num mm at each end .
b .
foam core board provide foam core board ¼ in num mm thick constructed of closed cell foam and faced with poster board material on each side .
c. dowel bar chairs provide nonmetallic dowel bar chairs to keep the dowel bars from moving during concrete placement .
place dowel bar chairs at the locations shown on the plans within the vertical and horizontal tolerances .
d. portland cement concrete patching material provide pcc patching material to backfill retrofit slots in accordance with section num .
mix place and cure pcc patching material in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
the pcc patching material may be extended by using aggregate in accordance with subsection num fine aggregate and subsection num coarse aggregate excluding the gradation requirements .
provide and use a pcc mix design for the patching material including additives that develops a compressive strength of at least num psi num mpa in num hr .
provide curing compound in accordance with subsection num curing agents .
num equipment vacant num construction methods a. slot sawing use a gang saw capable of sawing at least three slots in the pavement at one time .
center the slots over the cracks and transverse joints and align the slots so that the longitudinal axis of each dowel bar is parallel to the pavement centerline and the surface of the lower of the two panels .
ensure the vertical and horizontal alignment does not exceed ¼ in num mm .
b .
concrete removal remove concrete from the slot area with a jackhammer no larger than the num lb num kg class .
if this jackhammer damages the pavement discontinue its use and replace with a lighter jackhammer .
before installing the dowel sandblast exposed surfaces and cracks in the slots and clean slots of saw slurry and loose material .
num dowel bar retrofit num dispose of loose material in accordance with subsection num removal and disposal of salvaged materials structures and obstructions .
c. foam core board place the foam core board to maintain the continuity of the existing transverse joint or crack .
size the foam core board to fit tightly around the dowel bar and to the bottom and sides of the slots .
caulk existing transverse joints or cracks with approved sealant at the bottom and sides of the slots as specified to prevent patch mix from entering the joint or crack .
remove excess caulking to create a smooth level joint or crack surface .
install the foam core board so that it remains in position and tight to all edges during patch material placement .
the contractor may use tabs to hold the foam core board in place and may cut or remove existing joint sealant to accommodate the tabs .
if the foam core board shifts during the placement of concrete patching material remove and replace at no additional cost to the department .
d. dowel bars before beginning the placement of concrete patching material over the dowel bars cover the dowel bars with a thin coat of form release oil .
the department will not allow oil to contaminate concrete surfaces to be overlaid or the surfaces of the slots .
place the dowel bar assembly with chairs and foam core board attached across the transverse joint or crack as specified .
ensure that chairs hold the dowel bars in place and provide at least ½ in num mm clearance between the bottom of the dowel and the bottom of the slot .
remove and replace dowel bars that shift during the placement of concrete patching material at no additional cost to the department .
e. existing concrete surfaces ensure existing concrete surfaces in the slots are clean and dry or prepared in accordance with the manufacturer recommendations .
remove excess water from the slots before placing the concrete patching material .
f. concrete placement place concrete patching material into the slot and vibrate to completely encase the dowel bar .
the vibrator heads diameter shall not exceed num¼ in num mm .
obtain the resident engineers approval before placing concrete in ambient temperatures below num f num c. g. damage repair damage to the existing pavement caused by contractor operations at no additional cost to the department .
h. slot surface trowelfinish the top surface of the filled slot flush with the existing concrete surface and allow the surface to cure .
if the contract requires diamond grinding leave the top surface of the fill slot not more than ¼ in num mm higher than the existing concrete surface .
do not under fill the slots .
apply curing compound before the final set of the mortar in the concrete patching material .
saw the new joint within num hr or as directed by the resident engineer .
diamond grinding concrete pavement num num i .
testing concrete patching material test the concrete patching material once for each num hr of production or at least once a day .
ensure the concrete patching material has a compressive strength of at least num psi num mpa in num hr .
the contractor may test for compressive strength up to num hr after making the cylinders .
if the compressive strengths are not met cease production and resubmit a concrete mix design that corrects the problems .
do not open lanes to traffic until the patch material achieves a compressive strength of at least num psi num mpa .
num method of measurement vacant num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit dowel bar retrofit each section num diamond grinding concrete pavement num description this work consists of grinding portland cement concrete pcc pavement to restore drainage and riding characteristics to the pavement surface .
num materials vacant num equipment provide powerdriven selfpropelled grinding equipment designed to smooth and texture pcc pavement with diamond blades .
provide a machine with an effective wheel base of at least num ft num m. ensure the front of the machine has a set of pivoting tandem bogey wheels and the rear wheels travel in the track of the cut pavement .
place the center of the grinding head no more than num ft num m ahead of the center of the back wheels .
provide equipment that can cut or plane at least num ft num m wide to avoid a seam in the wheel path of a travel lane .
ensure the machines shape and dimension do not encroach on traffic movement outside the work area .
do not use equipment that causes excessive ravels aggregate fractures spalls or cracks or disturbs transverse and longitudinal joints .
num construction methods a. grinding pavement grind the surface of pavement areas shown on the plans .
grind longitudinally beginning and ending at lines transverse to the pavement centerline .
ensure the ground pavement surfaces of adjacent sides of transverse joints and cracks are on the same plane .
the department will allow less than num percent grinding within specified areas if minor depressions occur in the pavement .
num diamond grinding concrete pavement num make multiple passes as necessary to achieve acceptable results .
ensure the pavement surface grinding produces a uniform finished surface .
eliminate joint and crack faults .
maintain a constant crossslope between the edges of grinding operations to provide positive lateral drainage .
transition the grinding of auxiliary or ramp lanes from the mainline edge to provide positive drainage and a smooth riding surface .
for pavement grinding deeper than ¼ in num mm feathergrind adjacent lanes or paved shoulders to maintain motorist safety and proper drainage .
num surface texture and grooving grind the pavement surface until it has a uniform appearance with a texture composed of longitudinal ridges and grooves .
create surface grooves from num in to num in num mm to num mm wide spaced up to ⅛ in num mm apart .
ensure the ridge peaks are at least num in num mm higher than the bottom of the grooves .
num slurry removal remove and collect grinding slurry or residue by vacuum or other continuous methods .
dispose of the grinding slurry and residue in accordance with applicable laws rules and regulations .
do not distribute the slurry evenly on the sideslopes unless the resident engineer approves of the disposal method .
ensure that slurry does not enter drainage inlets and water courses .
prevent the slurry from flowing across lanes used by traffic or into gutters or other drainage facilities .
conduct a final sweeping before opening the pavement to traffic .
num pavement smoothness a profiling pavement surface profile ground surfaces in accordance with astm e num .
provide a profilograph with wheels variably spaced .
ensure a pavement with a profile index of num in num mm or less per mile using a num in num mm blanking width .
profile ground surfaces in two passes one at num ft num m and one at num ft num m from the edge of each driving lane .
average the profilograph readings from the two passes to obtain the profile index for each lane .
if the profile index exceeds num in num mm per mile grind individual high points in excess of num in num mm across the entire lane width .
after grinding individual high points perform additional grinding along lines parallel to the pavement edge to reduce the profile index to the specified values .
grind in neat rectangular sections with uniform surfaces .
bstraight edge tolerance as directed by the resident engineer use a num ft num m straightedge to measure surface smoothness .
ensure the maximum distance from the bottom edge of the straightedge does not exceed ⅛ in in num ft num mm in num m. perform additional grinding at locations in excess of ⅛ in in num ft num mm in num m. ensure that the elevation difference between passes does not exceed ⅛ in num m. b .
concrete joints after completing diamond grinding saw and seal joints in accordance with section num concrete joint sealing .
pressure grouting pavement num num num method of measurement the resident engineer will measure the diamond grinding of pcc pavement by the final approved textured surface area regardless of the number of passes necessary to achieve acceptable results including minor areas of untextured pavement within this area .
if the resident engineer determines the need for feathering is not caused by the contractor the resident engineer may measure the area of feathering as diamond grinding concrete pavement .
num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit diamond grinding concrete pavement square yard square meter the department will pay for sawing and sealing joints in accordance with section num concrete joint sealing .
the department will consider the cost of feathering to be included in the contract unit price for diamond grinding concrete pavement .
the department will not separately measure diamond grinding concrete pavement for pavement unless otherwise specified .
section num pressure grouting pavement num description this work consists of pumping a fly ash cement grout under portland cement concrete pcc pavement or hot mix asphalt hma pavement to fill the voids beneath the pavement and form a hard insoluble mass .
num materials provide materials in accordance with subsection num slurry grout .
num equipment a. grouting equipment num measuring and proportioning equipment provide equipment capable of measuring and proportioning grout components by weight .
use prepackaged materials as approved by the resident engineer .
num pressure grouting pavement num num num batch mixing tank provide a watertight batch mixing tank with a high speed mixer to blend the materials into a homogenous mixture .
ensure the mixer includes a rotor operating in close proximity to a stator creating a high shearing action with a mixing speed from num rpm to num rpm .
ensure the mixing pump continuously circulates the materials through the mixer and the mixing tank .
num holding tank provide a holding tank with a paddletype agitator placed between the batch mixing tank and the grout pump for continuous operation .
ensure the agitator maintains complete circulation of the grout to keep it in suspension and remove air bubbles from the mix .
num grout pump provide a grout pump with a single action plunger pump with a high speed backstroke .
provide a pump with precise pressure and capacity control valves to independently preset maximum pressure and flow .
ensure a pump capacity range from num galmin to num galmin num lmin to num lmin and a pressure range from num psi to num psi num kpa to num kpa .
num discharge line provide a discharge line with a positive cutoff valve at the nozzle end .
ensure the nozzle remains securely sealed in the cored holes to prevent leaks .
num pavement monitoring device provide pavementmonitoring equipment that determines movement to prevent lifting pavement or overfilling cracks .
use a standard benkelman beam or other equipment approved by the resident engineer .
b. coring equipment provide coring equipment capable of cutting num in num mm diameter holes through the pavement .
prevent damage to the pavement from excessive down pressure on the core .
use an air compressor and rock drills or other devices capable of drilling the injection holes through the pavement .
the department will not allow airdriven or hydraulic impact drills .
num construction methods a .
general protect the pavement from breaking and cracking .
replace concrete slabs and pavement damaged during pressure grouting operations at no additional cost to the department .
b .
weather limitations begin pressure grouting when the ambient temperature is at least num f num c and rising .
ensure a pavement temperature of at least num f num c during pressure grouting .
pressure grouting pavement num num c. coring holes for pcc pavements drill num in num mm diameter core holes through the pavement as shown on the plans .
the resident engineer may modify the pattern and spacing of the holes .
for hot mix asphalt pavements drill core holes at an angle of num towards the bottom of the crack deep enough to penetrate the cavity .
drill at least two core holes for each num ft num m wide travel lane and one hole for every num ft numm of shoulder width .
drill the core holes from num in to num in num mm to num mm from the crack .
place the holes along one side of the crack or alternate along both sides of the crack .
the resident engineer may modify the hole pattern and spacing .
the resident engineer will approve the location of the core holes and determine if additional holes are necessary to fill the cracks .
temporarily plug irregular or unsatisfactory holes or fill them with grout at no additional cost to the department .
drill core holes and grout in the same day unless otherwise approved by the resident engineer .
d. clearing holes after drilling the core holes to the specified depths and within num min before injecting the grout clean the holes of debris to provide a passage for the grout .
e. grouting while injecting grout ensure the flow rate at the pump head does not exceed num galmin num lmin .
secure the nozzle of the grout discharge hose in the core hole to provide a seal and maintain the grout pressure .
for pcc pavement prevent the nozzle end from extending below the bottom of the concrete .
continue injecting grout into each core hole until the slab corner lifts from num in to num in num mm to num mm or until the pressure at the discharge nozzle exceeds num psi num kpa .
if no slab lift or no pressure buildup occurs continue injecting grout until the amount of clear grout flowing up through joints or cracks equals the amount of grout injected .
repeat this procedure in other holes to fill voids .
if necessary temporarily plug adjacent core holes during grout injection operation .
for hot mix asphalt pavement continue injecting grout into the core holes until the cracks are filled .
continue pumping until the amount of clear grout flowing up through joints or cracks equals the amount of grout injected .
repeat this procedure in other holes to fill voids .
if necessary temporarily plug adjacent core holes during grout injection operations .
during pumping watch the pavement monitoring device to prevent excessive lifting of the pavement or rising of the adjacent shoulders .
correct lifted joints as directed by the resident engineer .
if lifted pavement joints create unsafe conditions for the traveling public close lanes and make repairs .
complete repairs and joint corrections at no additional cost to the department .
f. permanently sealing holes in concrete pavement remove grout from the core holes and fill the holes with a stiff sandcement mortar made of one part portland cement to three parts fine aggregate by volume or a commercial premixed rapid set mixture as approved by the resident engineer .
num pressure grouting pavement num num pressure grouting pavement repair filled holes that ravel or become damaged at no additional cost to the department .
g. regrouting drill new core holes and regrout slabs as directed by the resident engineer .
for hot mix asphalt pavement drill new core holes and regrout cracks that may require additional filling as directed by the resident engineer .
provide excess grout to handfinish into cracks to fill the voids as directed by the resident engineer .
h. clean up remove deposits of grout on the pavement or shoulder .
clean the pavement surface before allowing traffic on the completed sections .
remove other debris bags and spillage from the rightofway each day .
i .
opening to traffic restrict traffic from the grouted areas for num calendar days or as directed by the resident engineer .
num method of measurement the resident engineer will not include the weight of water or sand in the measurements of portland cement or fly ash .
num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit a cored holes each b portland cement ton metric ton c fly ash ton metric ton the department will consider the cost of water and sand to be included in the contract unit price for portland cement or fly ash .
rubblizing portland cement concrete pavement num num section num rubblizing portland cement concrete pavement num description this work consists of rubblizing and seating existing portland cement concrete pavement pccp .
num materials vacant num equipment a. pavement breaker use a selfcontained selfpropelled resonant frequency pavement rubblizing unit capable of fracturing the pavement .
ensure the unit produces low amplitude blows of num lb num kn at a rate of at least num cycles per second .
equip the unit with a water mist system to suppress dust .
provide a screen to protect vehicles in adjacent lanes from flying chips as approved by the resident engineer .
b. roller use a vibratory steel wheel roller weighing at least num ton num metric ton to compact the rubblized pavement .
provide a selfpropelled unit capable of varying the vibration amplitude and frequency .
num construction methods a .
general remove asphalt pavement overlay to the pccp .
rubblize and seat pccp across the panel width and to the full depth of the pavement .
where rubblizing abuts pccp specified to remain on ramps or mainline cut joints or load transfer devices at an existing joint .
except at restricted crossovers and ramp crossings ensure the overlay is complete before opening the pavement to traffic .
to protect underground utilities and drainage facilities while operating the resonant breaker do not exceed a maximum amplitude of num in num mm .
remove asphalt pavement patches with a surface area of at least num yd² num m² and replace with trafficbound surface course type e in accordance with subsection num aggregates for traffic bound surface course materials shown on the plans or both .
b. rubblizing of portland cement concrete pavement in breaking the existing pccp ensure no more than num percent of the material is larger than num in num mm and individual fragments do not exceed num in num mm .
the resident engineer will determine the extent of the breakage based on a visual inspection of the cracks on a dry pavement surface .
the resident engineer will not allow the use of water to detect additional cracks .
num rubblizing portland cement concrete pavement num num begin rubblizing at the edge of pavement and work toward the centerline of the roadway .
if overlaying one lane at a time extend rubblizing of each lane at least num in num mm beyond the width of the lane .
if the pavement can not be rubblized remove the pavement subexcavate the base material to num ft num mm and replace the base material with compacted aggregate base type a in accordance with section num aggregate base .
debond steel reinforcement from the pavement and leave it in place .
cut exposed steel below the surface .
adjust the striking pattern striking energy number of passes or other factors to achieve acceptable fracturing .
c. test section before rubblizing operations begin the resident engineer will designate a test section .
rubblize the test section using a variety of energy and striking patterns and repeat passes until the test section is fractured in accordance with subsection num.b rubblizing of portland cement concrete pavement .
use the test section breakage results as a guide for breaking the pavement on the remainder of the project .
if the rubblized fragments exceed the size requirements during the rubblizing operation the resident engineer may direct additional test sections .
d. seating of rubblized portland cement concrete pavement after rubblizing seat the broken concrete with at least three passes of a steelwheel roller in the vibratory mode at a maximum speed of num mph num kmh as approved by the resident engineer .
e. leveling course place a hot mix asphalt leveling or base course as shown on the plans immediately following the pavement rubblizing and seating operations .
num method of measurement the resident engineer will measure rubblizing pavement by the width of the existing pccp and the horizontal length along the centerline of each roadway or ramp .
num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit rubblizing pavement square yard square meter the department will pay for asphalt pavement patch removal and replacement with a trafficbound surface course type e in accordance with section num trafficbound surface course .
if the pavement can not be rubbilized the department will pay for removal of pavement and replacement with aggregate base type a in accordance with section num aggregate base type a .
num chapter num structures section page no .
num excavation and backfill for structuresnum num forms falsework and temporary works num num prestressed concrete bridge membersnum num bridge decks approaches rails and parapets num num overlays for concrete bridge decks num num structural steelnum num bearing assembliesnum num concrete culverts num num structural concrete num num earth retaining systems num num reinforcing steel for structures num num paintingnum num repair of concrete bridge decks num num driven foundation pilesnum num penetrating water repellent treatmentnum num drilled shaft foundations num num posttensioningnum num structural concrete repair by sealing and injection num num pneumatically applied mortarnum num concrete surface repair by sealingnum excavation and backfill for structures num num section num excavation and backfill for structures num description a .
general this work consists of excavating material for the construction of major structures and backfilling stockpiling or disposing of excess excavated material .
if not otherwise provided for in the contract provide equipment and construct and remove necessary cofferdams shoring and water control systems for the excavation work .
if the contract does not include a separate pay item for such work excavation work will include all necessary clearing and grubbing and the removal of existing structures within the area to be excavated .
when backfilling place necessary backfill material stockpile excavated material that will be used in the backfill and dispose of excess excavated material that will not be used in the project unless otherwise specified in the contract .
excavate and backfill in reasonably close conformity with the lines grades and typical cross sections shown on the contract or as directed by the engineer .
comply with applicable environmental regulations including the united states army corp of engineers num permit and section num management of erosion sedimentation and storm water pollution prevention and control .
b .
classification the department classifies excavation and backfill as follows unclassified excavation material of whatever nature removed to construct box culverts channels ditches at culvert inlets and outlets and other ditches shown in the plans in accordance with section num earthwork .
structural excavation unclassified material of whatever nature removed below the level of unclassified excavation to construct box culverts .
substructure excavation common material removed to construct substructures piers and abutments except material classified as substructure excavation rock .
substructure excavation rock solid rock redbed shale slate or hard material that requires loosening or breaking by blasting sledging or drilling for the construction of substructures piers and abutments .
the department will classify rock ledges above the foundation material and boulders or pieces of concrete with a volume of at least ½ yd³ ½ m³ as substructure excavation rock .
unclassified backfill select backfill and granular backfill supplying placing and compacting unclassified borrow select borrow and granular backfill material in accordance with section num earthwork .
controlled lowstrength material clsm backfill supplying and placing clsm in excavations or confined or formed spaces .
num excavation and backfill for structures num num excavation and backfill for structures c. obstructions the department will consider the removal and disposal of obstructions buried natural or manmade objects to be additional work and will pay the contractor in accordance with subsection num basis of payment .
the department defines obstructions as objects meeting the following conditions requiring the introduction of methods or equipment not already used on the project not shown on the plans not ascertainable by investigation including contact with identified utilities and the contractor notifies the engineer in writing within num hr of discovering the obstruction and before its removal .
num materials provide backfill materials with no frozen lumps or degradable or hazardous matter and a gradation that can be consistently compacted .
provide materials in accordance with the following sections and subsections material section or subsection unclassified excavation num select borrow num granular backfill not for mechanically stabilized mse walls num granular backfill for mse walls num.d standard bedding material num controlled lowstrength material clsm num num equipment vacant num construction methods a. excavation num depth of footings the bottom of footing elevations shown on the plans are approximate .
the engineer may issue written orders to change the footing dimensions or elevations .
boring logs shown on the plans were made for designing the foundation .
interpret and confirm the boring information for construction as needed .
num foundation preparation and control of water a general construct substructures in open excavations .
ensure safe excavations by using cofferdams shoring or bracing in accordance with subsection num.d temporary retaining structures .
if cofferdams are unnecessary the department will allow omission of footing backforms and filling of the excavation with concrete as approved by the engineer .
construct temporary water control systems in accordance with subsection num.e temporary water control systems .
excavation and backfill for structures num num vertically cut or step excavations adjacent to abutments wings and retaining walls before backfilling .
remove existing structures in accordance with subsection num.b removal of bridges culverts and other existing structures .
bexcavation in channels clear the rightofway in accordance with section num clearing and grubbing for the full length of the bridge unless otherwise required by the contract .
avoid encroaching into creeks and riverbanks and maintain the existing natural condition .
the department will not allow excavating or cutting of banks unless required by the contract .
submit proposed work road locations for engineers approval and construct only in the approved location .
restore bank cuts and work roads to the original shape density and condition unless otherwise required by the contract .
obtain approval from the engineer before excavating or dredging outside caissons cribs cofferdams steel piling or sheeting and before disturbing the natural streambed .
backfill and compact excavation outside these structures in accordance with subsection num.b backfilling at no additional cost to the department .
remove excess excavated material within the stream area and restore the stream to the existing condition .
c foundations on rock excavate solid rock or other hard foundation material to the depth shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
remove loose and disintegrated material from the excavation .
level the final surface or make level steps as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
do not disturb solid rock outside the neat lines of the footing .
clean seams and fill with concrete or clsm before placing the footing .
where blasting is necessary to reach footing elevation remove and replace loose fractured rock caused by overbreak below the bearing level with concrete at no additional cost to the department .
dfoundations not on rock if placing a foundation on an excavated surface other than rock do not disturb the bottom of the excavation .
remove foundation material to grade just before placing the footing reinforcing steel and concrete .
remove disturbed material at the bottom of footings not supported by piles .
fill the area with concrete or clsm at no additional cost to the department .
replace and compact disturbed material at the bottom of footings supported by piles as directed by the engineer .
for box culvert excavation remove unsuitable foundation material below the footing bottom slab and aprons and replace with approved bedding material .
replace material removed below designed elevation with approved bedding material .
open outlets for the effective width of the structure before constructing slab and aprons of box culverts to allow for drainage .
num excavation and backfill for structures num e approval of foundation notify the engineer when the excavation is ready for inspection .
place the footing concrete after the engineer approves the excavation and foundation material .
unless otherwise approved by the engineer do not place concrete under water .
b. backfilling num general place and compact backfill to the existing ground line and embankments in accordance with section num earthwork unless modified by subsection num.bnum .
if excavation does not yield enough suitable material for backfill provide additional backfill material in accordance with subsection num materials .
unless otherwise required by the contract backfill excavated spaces unoccupied by permanent structures up to the surface of the surrounding ground and allow for settlement .
uniformly backfill around the sides of the structure to ensure equal density of the surrounding ground and neatly grade its top surface .
do not place rocks larger than num in num mm against concrete surfaces .
place and compact fill for retaining walls abutments wingwalls and bridge bents in layers no greater than num in num mm thick .
uniformly backfill around the sides of the structure to ensure equal loading .
compact backfill within or beneath embankments within roadways in excavated areas or in front of abutments and retaining walls or wingwalls to the same density required for the embankments .
unless otherwise required by the contract compact fill in embankments to at least num percent of standard density in accordance with aashto t num .
place backfill against structure concrete only when the concrete reaches the required compressive strength in accordance with subsection num.inum earth loads .
to prevent horizontal movement of abutments and wingwalls place backfill on the outside faces before backfilling the inside faces .
the department will not allow jetting the backfill behind abutments or wingwalls .
operate rollers vibrators or other compactors parallel to the outside lines of box culverts and crossdrain wingwalls .
compact areas inaccessible to rolling equipment with mechanical tampers .
num placing clsm fill the excavation with approved clsm uniformly around the structure to the elevation shown on the plans .
place clsm in lifts no deeper than num ft num m. subsequent lifts of clsm may be placed when the preceding lift supports foot traffic .
begin placing specified fill material over the clsm when the water is gone from the surface of the clsm or as directed by the engineer .
num disposal of surplus clean construction areas in accordance with subsection num final cleanup .
do not place excess material in the streambed .
remove obstructions that may collect drift induce scour or endanger the work as approved by the engineer .
dispose of excess excavated and removed materials .
excavation and backfill for structures num num num method of measurement a .
general the engineer will measure the volume of excavation for structures based on the following quantities shown on the plans a calculation of the actual quantities removed or quantities directed by the engineer .
the engineer will not measure additional volumes of excavation resulting from slips slides caveins silting or filling due to the action of the elements or carelessness that is the responsibility of the contractor .
the department will not classify water as excavated material .
the department will not measure and separately pay for the disposal of excess material .
the department considers the disposal of excess material as incidental to the various classes of excavation and removal .
the department will not measure or separately pay for the disposal of excess material .
the department will consider the disposal of excess material as incidental to the various classes of excavation and removal .
the department will not measure for payment any additional concrete necessary to fill excavation outside the neat lines shown on the plans .
the engineer will measure the volume of backfill for structures in accordance with subsection num.e backfilling .
b. excavation for box culverts num unclassified excavation for box culverts the engineer will calculate the theoretical volume of the trapezoidal prism of unclassified excavation in accordance with the following the depth using the difference between the elevation of the existing ground line and the elevation of the flow line shown on the plans the base width of the excavation num ft num m wider than the outside dimensions of each side of the barrel of the box culvert as shown on the plans the top width using numhnumv side slopes from the limits of the design flow line to the existing ground line and the length along the centerline of the box culvert between a point on a line connecting the wingwall ends on each side of the culvert plus num ft num m on each end of the structure .
num structural excavation unclassified the engineer will calculate the volume of structural excavation unclassified based on the volume of the box culvert base slab the volume of box culvert slab below the flow line shown on the plans using the width and thickness shown on the plans and the length along the centerline of the box culvert between a point on a line connecting the wingwall outer ends on each side of the culvert .
the engineer will not measure additional volumes of excavation for curtain walls wingwall footings aprons sheeting shoring or contractor convenience beyond the theoretical dimensions defined above .
if the contractor encounters and removes soft and yielding material at the bottom of the footing and replaces it with suitable bedding material at the direction num excavation and backfill for structures num num of the engineer the engineer will measure the volume of unsuitable material removed and pay for it in accordance with subsection num basis of payment .
c. excavation for substructures supported on piling the engineer will measure excavation for substructures piers and abutments supported on piling as substructure excavation common .
the engineer will calculate the excavation volume in accordance with the following the depth from the existing ground line to the bottom of the substructure footing the width num ft num m wider than the width of the substructure shown on the plans and the length num ft num m longer than the length of the substructure shown on the plans .
if the contract requires channel excavation the department will consider the existing ground line to be the bottom of the excavated channel .
d. excavation for substructures supported on natural foundation materials the engineer will measure excavation for substructures piers and abutments supported on natural foundation materials as substructure excavation common or substructure excavation rock .
the engineer will calculate volumes of excavation for substructures and piers in accordance with subsection num.c excavation for substructures supported on piling except the engineer will calculate the volume of excavation below the top of the approved foundation material based on the neat lines of footings shown on the plans or directed by the engineer .
the engineer will calculate the volume of excavation for abutments based on the abutment dimensions shown on the plans .
e. backfilling the engineer will calculate the volumes of each type of backfill required by the contract above the existing ground line based on the neat lines shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
f. obstructions the engineer will measure the volumes of removed obstructions in accordance with subsection num.c obstructions .
num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit a structural excavation unclassified cubic yard cubic meter b substructure excavation common cubic yard cubic meter c substructure excavation rock cubic yard cubic meter d unclassified backfill cubic yard cubic meter e select backfill cubic yard cubic meter excavation and backfill for structures num num pay item pay unit f granular backfill cubic yard cubic meter g clsm backfill cubic yard cubic meter excavation and backfill for structures the department will pay for the volumes of unclassified excavation calculated in accordance with subsection num.bnum unclassified excavation in accordance with section num earthwork .
the department will consider the cost of removal and disposal of obstructions as defined in subsection num.c obstructions to be included in the contract unit price for the relevant excavation pay item unless specifically included in other pay items .
the department will pay for volumes of removed obstructions at twice the contract unit price for the relevant excavation pay item for which the obstruction was encountered .
the department will consider the cost of removing volumes of water disposing of excess material and excavation for placing sway bracing sash bracing and bulkheads on timber substructures to be included in the contract unit price for the relevant excavation pay item .
the department will pay for the volume of soft and yielding material removed and a like volume for replacement material from the bottom of box footings as structural excavation unclassified at the contract unit price .
the department will consider backfilling around structures below the existing ground line to included in the contract unit price for the relevant excavation pay item .
the department will not pay for excess concrete when the contractor omits footing backforms and fills the excavation with concrete in accordance with subsection num.anuma general .
num forms falsework and temporary works num section num forms falsework and temporary works num description this work consists of designing constructing and removing temporary structures used for highway bridge structures .
the department defines formwork falsework and temporary structures as follows temporary structures .
falsework formwork temporary retaining structures temporary water control systems and detour bridges .
falsework .
temporary construction used to support a permanent structure until it becomes selfsupporting .
formwork .
temporary structure or mold used to contain plastic or fluid concrete in the shape shown on the plans until the concrete reaches the compressive strength required by the contract .
temporary retaining structure .
a temporary structure that holds the surrounding earth and water out of an excavation and protects adjacent property during construction of the permanent work .
temporary water control system .
a system to divert water from and prevent it from entering an excavation .
detour bridge .
a conveyance for traffic during construction of permanent work .
num materials a. falsework num general the department will allow the use of new or used manufactured components or both in falsework construction .
provide materials in accordance with the following sections material section structural steel num structural concrete class a num reinforcing steel for structures num if the contract requires provide certification for new materials .
perform concrete tests in accordance with section num portland cement concrete .
num salvaged steel for salvaged steel in good condition with an identifiable grade provide steel meeting astm a num criteria for surface imperfections at the allowable working stresses for new steel of the same grade .
for salvaged steel with an unidentifiable grade provide steel in accordance with section num structural steel .
forms falsework and temporary works num num num timber all wood species assigned allowable stresses in the national design specification for wood construction nds supplement as published by the national forest products association are acceptable for use in falsework construction .
num used lumber for used lumber in good condition with an identifiable grade provide lumber with stresses that do not exceed those for new lumber of the same grade .
for used lumber with an unidentifiable grade provide lumber with the lowest nds allowable stresses for the species with appropriate reductions for condition .
num manufactured components the department will allow manufactured components of the following classes vertical shoring systems including tubular welded frame shoring tube and coupler shoring and related components and assemblies manufactured for commercial use including singlepost shores brackets jacks joists clamps and similar devices .
b .
forms num general provide mortartight concrete forms with sufficient strength to resist deflection during concrete placement .
num sheathing for exposed concrete surfaces provide u.s .
product standard ps num for exterior bb concrete form class i plywood or another material that produces a smooth uniform concrete surface as approved by the engineer .
provide form panels in good condition with no surface defects .
if using a form panel material other than plywood ensure the properties are equal to or exceed the properties for the type of plywood required by the contract .
num structural support provide materials for structural form support in accordance with subsection num.a falsework .
the department considers vertical side forms wall forms column forms and related studs walers and other form features to be formwork or structural support for formwork .
num prefabricated formwork if providing prefabricated formwork submit the following to the engineer shop drawings in accordance with subsection num plans and working drawings and technical data substantiating the loadcarrying capacity detailing the application instructions and describing the limitations of use .
provide prefabricated formwork in accordance with the manufacturer recommendations .
num stayinplace steel deck forms provide stayinplace steel deck forms only if allowed by the contract or approved by the engineer .
num forms falsework and temporary works num num ensure stayinplace steel deck forms meet the requirements for prefabricated formwork in accordance with subsection num.bnum prefabricated formwork .
submit shop drawings to the engineer including related deck design calculations .
fabricate stayinplace steel deck forms and supports using steel in accordance with astm anum grade num and grade num with a coating class of g num in accordance with astm a num .
num stayinplace prestressed concrete deck forms provide stayinplace prestressed concrete deck forms only if allowed by the contract or approved by the engineer .
ensure stayinplace prestressed concrete deck forms meets the requirements for prefabricated formwork in accordance with subsection num.bnum prefabricated formwork .
submit shop drawings to the engineer including related deck design calculations .
fabricate stayinplace deck forms in accordance with section num prestressed concrete bridge members .
num equipment vacant num construction methods a. falsework if the falsework is taller than num ft num m or traffic will travel under the falsework ensure a professional engineer registered in oklahoma designs the falsework .
num working drawings submit falsework drawings in accordance with subsection num plans and working drawings .
submit separate falsework drawings for each structure .
the department will allow one set of drawings for identical structures with identical falsework design and details .
begin falsework construction only after the engineer approves of the working drawings .
ensure the working drawings include the following a general design the falsework and provide design details showing the following characteristics provides the necessary rigidity supports the imposed loads and produces a finished structure to the lines and grades shown on the plans .
ensure the design calculations show the stresses and deflections in loadsupporting members .
bsubmission sets submit three sets of falsework drawings and one set of design calculations .
c design details include the information and details necessary to enable falsework construction without reference to source documents .
provide designcontrolling dimensions including those that control falsework design and erection .
forms falsework and temporary works num num dfoundation loads show the maximum applied structural load on the foundation material .
include a drainage plan or a description of the plan to protect foundations from saturation erosion and scour .
e materials specifications describe proposed falsework material .
use manufacturers tests and recommended working loads to describe materials that standard nomenclature can not define such as aashto or astm .
determine whether the physical properties and conditions of the falsework material can support the assumed design loads .
f concrete placement provide a plan for the proposed concrete placement operation including details of the equipment labor and procedures .
for each concrete pour include placement rates and design pressures .
include a superstructure placing diagram showing the concrete placing sequence and construction joint locations .
g settlements show anticipated total settlements of falsework and forms including falsework footing settlement and joint takeup .
design falsework and forms so anticipated settlement does not exceed num in num mm .
design and construct the falsework to elevations that anticipate settlement during concrete placement and allow for camber needed to compensate for falsework member deflections during construction .
htraffic show the locations of openings in the falsework intended for traffic .
provide details showing horizontal and vertical clearances and locations of temporary railing .
describe the sequence of falsework erection and removal .
num design base design of the temporary works on aashto lrfd bridge design specifications load factors specified in articles num and num .
investigate all applicable load combinations including construction loads .
base member capacity on field conditions .
ensure design limitations are in accordance with the current edition of the aashto guide design specifications for bridge temporary works .
num falsework foundations fieldverify ground elevations at proposed foundation locations before design .
determine the soilbearing capacity if using spread footing foundations .
the maximum allowable bearing capacity for foundation material with the exception of rock is num tonft² num kpa .
do not place the edge of footings closer than num in num mm to the intersection of the bench and the top of the slope .
if the excavation is not supported by shoring place the footing edge no closer to the edge of the excavation than the greater of a distance of num ft num m or a distance equal to the excavation depth .
construct pile type foundations in accordance with section num driven foundation piles .
for falsework supported by footings placed on paved slopes do num forms falsework and temporary works num not strut the falsework to columns unless the columns are founded on rock or supported by piling .
size spread footings to support the footing design load at the soil bearing capacity without exceeding anticipated settlements .
provide steel reinforcement in concrete footings .
if steel towers have maximum leg loads greater than num kips num kn provide a design that allows for uniform settlement under all legs or each tower under all loading conditions .
inform the engineer of foundation protection plans .
num proprietary shoring systems if using proprietary shoring systems submit to the engineer a letter of certification from the shoring manufacturer indicating that the shoring system is being used in accordance with the manufacturer recommendations for loads and conditions of use .
num falsework over or adjacent to roadways and railroads design and construct falsework to protect it from vehicle impact .
provide protection for the following falsework supports for members crossing over a roadway or railroad and falsework supports where the horizontal distance from the traffic side of the falsework to either the pavement edge or a point num ft num m from the centerline of track is less than the total height of the falsework .
increase vertical design loads by num percent for falsework supports including posts columns and towers but not footings .
install temporary concrete traffic barriers before erecting falsework towers or columns adjacent to an open public roadway .
place barriers so falsework footings or pile caps clear concrete traffic barriers by at least num in num mm and all other falsework members clear the barriers by at least num in num mm .
do not remove barriers until approved by the engineer .
use steel falsework columns with a minimum section modulus of num in³ num mm³ around every axis or sound timbers with a section modulus of at least num in³ num mm³ around every axis .
mechanically connect the base of each column or tower frame that supports falsework over or adjacent to a public road to its supporting footing .
alternatively apply other lateral restraints capable of withstanding a horizontal force of at least num lb num kn applied to the base of the column in any direction .
mechanically connect columns or frames to the falsework cap or stringer to resist a horizontal force of at least num lb num kn in any direction .
neglect the effects of frictional resistance .
mechanically connect the following to the falsework cap or framing exterior falsework stringers stringers adjacent to the end of discontinuous caps stringers over points of minimum vertical clearance and every fifth remaining stringer .
ensure these mechanical connections are capable of resisting a load of at least num lb num kn in any direction including uplift on the stringer .
install connections before allowing traffic to pass beneath the span .
forms falsework and temporary works num num use bolts at least ⅝ in num mm in diameter to connect timber members to brace falsework bents adjacent to roadways or railroads .
solid sheath falsework bents within num ft num m of the centerline of a railroad track in the area from num ft to num ft num m to num m above and on the side facing the track .
construct sheathing using plywood at least ⅝ in num mm thick or lumber at least num in num mm thick .
provide bracing so the bent resists the required assumed horizontal load or num lb num kn whichever is greater without sheathing .
provide the minimum vertical and horizontal clearances as required by the contract .
num falsework for steel and precast concrete beams and girders do not erect beams over traffic .
use falsework design loads consisting of all loads supported by the falsework .
do not apply loads to existing new or partially completed structures that exceed the load carrying capacity of any part of the structure in accordance with the aashto lrfd bridge design specifications .
build supporting falsework to accommodate the erection method without overstressing the beams and girders .
ensure the supporting falsework produces the final structural geometry intended continuity and structural action .
block and brace beams and girders to ensure lateral stability .
brace or tie exterior girders that support overhanging bridge deck falsework brackets to adjacent interior girders to prevent exterior girder rotation and overstressing of the girder web .
alternatively use needle beams clamped to the bottom flanges of the exterior girder and the adjacent interior girder to prevent exterior girder rotation and overstressing of the girder web .
the department will not allow welding forms or falsework to structural steel .
design falsework and forms for concrete supported on steel structures to apply loads to girder webs within num in num mm of a flange or stiffener .
distribute the loads to prevent local distortion of the web .
space bracing and supports no more than num ft num m apart .
num falsework construction build camber into the falsework to compensate for falsework and structure deflection .
camber shown on the plans is only for structure deflection .
attach telltales to the soffit of concrete forms that will allow a determination from the ground of the total structure settlement during concrete placement .
do not apply dead loads to falsework other than forms and reinforcing steel until approved by the engineer .
discontinue concrete placement and make corrections if deviations occur that are greater than ⅜ in num mm from the falsework drawings .
if corrections are not made before initial set remove unacceptable concrete .
num inspection and certification after installing the falsework and before placing or removing concrete have a registered professional engineer proficient in structural design inspect the falsework .
submit to the engineer before concrete placement written certification that the installation meets the contract requirements .
num forms falsework and temporary works num b .
forms num general make concrete forms mortartight and strong enough to prevent deflection during concrete placement .
unless otherwise required by the contract comply with the tolerance requirements in table num .
table num maximum dimensional tolerances for castinplace formed concrete a item tolerance in mm deviation from plan line b num num crosssectional dimensions of columns piers and beams slabs and walls num ½ num num bridge deck thickness ½ ¼ num num a compare variations with the dimensions as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
b tolerance measurements include alignment plumb grade and level and are perpendicular to the plan line or surface .
the engineer will inspect plumb of retaining walls before and after backfilling .
place embeds before concrete placement .
clean the inside surfaces of forms .
remove loose material before completing forms for deck slab of castinplace box girders or cells or voids of other members .
do not place concrete until inspection and approval of the forms .
num removable formwork coat forms with form oil to allow easy release .
use form oil that will not discolor the concrete .
except where the formed member is less than num ft num m wide provide and place form panels for exposed surfaces in uniform widths of at least num ft num m and in uniform lengths of at least num ft num m. arrange panels in symmetrical patterns conforming to the general lines of the structure .
for vertical surfaces place panels with the longer dimension horizontal .
make the horizontal joints level and continuous .
alternatively for walls with sloping footings that do not abut other walls place panels with the longer dimension parallel to the footing .
align form panels on each side of the panel joint with supports or fasteners common to both panels .
provide ¾ in num mm triangular fillets at sharp edges of the concrete .
the department will allow devices cast into the concrete to support forms or to lift precast members but will not allow devices driven into the concrete for fastening forms or form supports .
use form ties to prevent the forms from spreading during concrete placement .
do not use twisted wire loop form ties .
use form ties and anchors that will not damage the concrete surface when removed .
construct metal ties or anchors within the forms to allow removal to a depth of at least num in num mm from the face without damaging the concrete .
fill cavities with cement mortar and finish .
make forms rigid so the formed concrete surface does not vary more than ⅜ in num mm using a num ft num m straightedge or template or vary more than num of the forms falsework and temporary works num num center to center distance between studs joists form stiffeners form fasteners or wales .
the department considers interior surfaces of underground drainage structures as enclosed surfaces .
form exposed surfaces for each element of a concrete structure with the same forming material or with material that produces similar surface textures color and appearance .
support roadway slab forms of box girder type structures on wales or similar supports fastened to the top of the web walls .
num stayinplace steel deck forms a general do not rest form sheets directly on top of girder stringer or floor beam flanges .
fasten sheets to form supports with a bearing length of at least num in num mm at each end .
place form supports in contact with the girder stringer or floor beam flange and attach with bolts clips or other methods approved by the engineer .
do not weld forms to girder stringer or floor beam flanges or reinforcing steel .
clean wire brush and paint exposed form metal where the galvanized coating is damaged .
paint with a minimum of num mil num µm of zinc rich paint containing at least num percent zinc .
the department does not require touchups for minor heat discoloration in areas of welds .
replace forms damaged by bending or crimping .
locate transverse slab construction joints at the bottom of a flute .
field drill ¼ in num mm diameter weep holes at least num in num mm on center along the line of the joint .
lap adjacent forms and connect form sheets without welding at a maximum of num in num mm centers along the lap .
at the lap place the first panel to be loaded during concrete placement on top .
use epoxycoated reinforcing steel in bridge floors that use stayinplace forms .
if epoxycoated reinforcing steel is not shown on the plans provide epoxy coated steel at no additional cost to the department .
the department will not allow the use of reinforcing steel placed on the forms as support chairs .
provide means for inspection of the underside of forms after concrete placement .
at least num hr later test for soundness and bonding of the forms by sounding with a hammer .
if soundness testing indicates noncompliant concrete remove forms as directed by the engineer .
do not use a cutting torch to remove forms .
repair or replace concrete as required by the contract .
bdesign requirements num design load use a design load consisting of the weight of the forms reinforcement and plastic concrete plus num lbft² num pa for construction loads .
num allowable bending stress limit the unit working stress in the steel form sheet to a maximum of num times the minimum yield strength of the provided material as required by the contract to no greater than num ksi num mpa .
num forms falsework and temporary works num num allowable deflection limit the deflection of form sheets to a maximum of num of the form span no greater than ¾ in num mm .
use the calculated design load less num lbft² num pa for construction loads or num lbft² num pa whichever is higher to calculate the deflection .
num maximum camber limit the form camber to not exceed the deflection under actual load .
do not use camber to compensate for deflection exceeding the limits required by the contract .
num design span length the department defines the span length of form sheets as the distance between the flanges of the supporting beams minus num in num mm measured parallel to the form flutes .
num design properties calculate physical design properties in accordance with the american iron and steel institute north american specification for the design of cold formed steel structural members .
num weight limitation limit the combined load of the forms and additional concrete necessitated by use of stayinplace forms to a maximum of num lbft² num knm² greater than the design dead load of the bridge deck .
the department will not allow the use of plywood sheeting on steel stayinplace deck forms .
num deck reinforcement maintain the dimensions of deck reinforcement shown on the plans from the top surface of the concrete deck including cover .
num flange bracing the department does not consider stayinplace forms as lateral bracing for compression flanges of supporting structural members .
cshop drawings prepare shop drawing for stayinplace steel forms showing the following the layout of the form sheets on the bridge floor identifying form sheets by piece marks the steel grade dimensional and section properties for form sheets and supports the type and spacing of chairs lap details and planned direction of concrete placement views of all connections a bill of materials and installation instructions .
c. removal of forms and falsework remove all forms except stayinplace forms .
unless otherwise required by the contract remove forms and falsework in accordance with the time periods in forms falsework and temporary works num num table num .
release falsework for castinplace posttensioned portions of structures after tensioning prestressing steel .
table num form and falsework release criteria forms and falsework time supporting spans num ft num m i.e .
slab spans pan girders rcb decks pier caps num days num ft num m i.e .
bridge decks on girders rcb decks diaphragms pile bent pier caps num days not supporting dead concrete weight i.e .
columns walls side forms for abutments and pier caps num hr for railings and barriers num hr after removing the forms for the structure cure in accordance with section num structural concrete .
refer to section num structural concrete for sequence of placement and application of load requirements .
the time periods in table num assume a concrete cure temperature of num ºf num ºc or higher .
for each day temperatures are below num ºf num ºc add a day to the original curing time for form and falsework release period .
if the concrete attains num percent of the strength required by the contract the engineer may shorten the time period for falsework release .
determine strengths from test cylinders cured at the work site under similar environmental conditions in accordance with section num portland cement concrete .
if the contractor proposes to prematurely apply loads to an element it may be necessary to leave the forms and falsework in place until such time that num percent of the strength is obtained and a minimum time has elapsed in accordance with subsection num.h load on decks and approach slabs and subsection num.i application of loads .
completely remove falsework .
remove falsework piling at least num ft num m below the surface of the original ground line or stream bed .
if falsework piling is driven within the limits of ditch or channel excavation remove the piling to at least num ft num m below the bottom and side slopes of the excavated areas .
d. temporary retaining structures num general excavate in accordance with section num excavation and backfill for structures and the osha standard outlined in numcfr num subpart p. num verticalsided excavations sheet and brace verticalsided excavations to retain the earth and water pressure and surcharges and to protect adjacent property and facilities during construction .
employ a registered geotechnical engineer to identify unknown soils .
employ a registered structural engineer to design temporary retaining structures and prepare working drawings .
submit calculations and drawings for the temporary retaining structure to the engineer before beginning work .
num cofferdams and shoring size cofferdams to allow pumping outside the concrete forms and concrete placement in dry conditions .
num forms falsework and temporary works num if water can not be controlled enough to produce dry conditions use a cofferdam with a class aconcrete seal placed underwater below the elevation of the footing .
control the water level within the cofferdam during concrete seal placement to prevent water flow through the seal .
construct cofferdams to protect green concrete from a sudden rise of the stream and erosion .
do not leave bracing inside the permanent concrete structural members .
before constructing obtain approval from the engineer to substitute round pier bases of equal stability for square or rectangular bases as shown on the plans .
unless otherwise required by the contract remove cofferdams and shoring with all sheeting and bracing after completing the footing .
e. temporary water control systems num general temporary water control systems consist of dikes bypass channels flumes other surface water diversion works cutoff walls and pumping systems including wellpoint and deep well systems used to prevent water from entering excavations for structures .
num working drawings when shown on the plans submit working drawings for temporary water control systems in accordance with subsection num plans and working drawings .
include details of the design and equipment operating procedures and the discharge locations .
design and operate the system in accordance with water pollution control and environmental requirements .
num operations pump from the interior of foundation excavation using a method that will preclude the possibility of water moving through fresh concrete .
stop pumping ground water from an excavation during and at least num hr after concrete placement unless using a sump separated from the concrete work by a watertight wall or other means .
before pumping to dewater a sealed cofferdam allow the seal to set to withstand the hydrostatic pressure .
regulate pumping from wellpoints or deep wells to avoid damage by subsidence to adjacent property .
f. detour bridges construct and maintain the detour bridge as required by the contract or an alternative design approved by the engineer .
use a registered professional engineer to design the alternative detour bridge .
submit signed and sealed working drawings and calculations for approval of the alternative design in accordance with subsection num plans and working drawings .
ensure the alternative design is equivalent to the design shown on the plans .
use the roadway width and traffic rail shown on the plans .
in the submittal show the design parameters required by the contract .
design in accordance with aashto standard specifications for highway bridges .
use an hsnum live load unless otherwise required by the contract .
forms falsework and temporary works num num forms falsework and temporary works verify that used beams satisfy the minimum section modulus required by the approved design .
account for section loss due to corrosion fatigue life or bent cracked or damaged flanges or webs .
replace unsatisfactory beams at no additional cost to the department .
remove detour bridges as required by the contract or directed by the engineer .
beams become the contractors property at the end of the project .
num method of measurement vacant num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit a engineered lump sum the cost of falsework engineering services to be included in the contract unit price for the related concrete pay item .
unless specified in the contract as pay items the department will consider the cost of forms and falsework and engineered falsework to be included in the contract unit price for the relevant concrete pay item .
if the contractor chooses to use stayinplace forms the department will not pay for additional quantities of concrete and reinforcing steel in excess of the quantities shown on the plans .
the department will consider the cost of temporary retaining structures and temporary water control systems to be included in the contract unit price for the relevant excavation pay item .
the department will pay for piling and drilled shafts for detour bridges in accordance with section num driven foundation piles and section num drilled shaft foundations .
lump sum lump sum num prestressed concrete bridge members num section num prestressed concrete bridge members num description this work consists of providing and placing precast prestressed beams and other precast concrete bridge components in the bridge structure .
posttensioned concrete bridge members are not covered by section num .
prestressing .
the stressing of bridge members in which the stressing forces are placed in the steel strand before the concrete is placed .
detensioning .
the transfer of stress from the steel strand tendons into the hardened concrete .
sweep .
horizontal deviation from a straight line parallel to the centerline of the member .
camber .
upward deflection of the member caused by prestressing forces .
num materials a .
general provide materials in accordance with the following sections and subsections material section or subsection structural concrete num joint fillers and sealants num reinforcing steel for structures num steel wire strand for prestressing num b .
concrete unless otherwise required by the contract provide class p concrete meeting the minimum strengths required by the contract .
design concrete to have at least num percent of the numday strength required by the contract at the time of detensioning unless otherwise required by the contract .
cast all members with the same strength required by the contract using the same mix design .
c. strand and structural steel for a structure provide the same type grade and manufacturer of strand .
for each member limit the variation in modulus of elasticity to num percent for all members in the same span .
tension stressrelieved strand to num percent of the ultimate strength .
tension lowrelaxation strand to num percent of its ultimate strength .
if substituting lowrelaxation strand for stressrelieved strand tension it to num percent of the ultimate strength .
make strand substitutions for all strands in all members in the same span .
the department will not allow substituting stressrelieved strand for lowrelaxation strand .
provide strands free of material that may reduce the bond with concrete including prestressed concrete bridge members num num but not limited to the following corrosion that causes pitting or loss of section scale flaking dirt grease wax or oil .
within members do not use strands that have been broken steamed or fully stressed and relaxed more than twice .
the department will allow no greater than num percent of the strand in a pattern to contain one broken wire if the num percent stressing tolerance is not exceeded .
do not weld to strand or weld near strand .
num equipment a. prestressing equipment prestress using jacking equipment approved by the engineer .
use hydraulic jacks that provide and sustain the contract required forces equipped with a pressure gauge or a load cell to determine the jacking stress .
provide plumbing and gauges that prevent fluctuation in the gauge readings before the release of the jacking load .
measure initial stress using a dynamometer or other graduated device that can be read within a tolerance of num lb num n. measure the final stress with a graduated device that can be read within a tolerance of num percent of the stress .
the department will not allow the use of load cells to measure stress less than num percent of the cell capacity .
indicate the allowable operating range on or near the measuring device dial or display .
measure strand elongation within a tolerance of num in num mm .
use jacks and stress measuring gauges calibrated by a testing laboratory approved by the department .
calibrate each jack and gauge as a unit with the jack cylinder extended to the position corresponding to final jacking force .
provide a certified calibration chart or curve for each jack and gauge combination .
calibrate annually .
make additional calibrations under the following conditions after major maintenance stresses and elongations differ more than specified limits or erratic results are encountered .
b .
forms and beds provide forms and beds in accordance with section num forms falsework and temporary works unless otherwise required by the contract .
use only steel forms except the department will allow singleuse wood bulkheads .
the department will not allow the use of aluminum forms or finishing tools .
provide smooth mortartight forms without surface irregularities .
repair form imperfections that cause the following reduce the concrete cover by more than ¼ in num mm protrude more than num in num mm or cover more than num percent of the total surface area .
num prestressed concrete bridge members num num provide a ¾ in num mm bevel on the exposed edges of prestressed concrete members except for the top of the top flange .
support forms on unyielding casting beds .
use abutments beds and forms designed by a registered professional engineer in the state of oklahoma .
design beds to minimize differential settlement and movement .
c. calibration records keep calibration records for equipment .
use calibration records for tensioning .
num construction methods a .
shop drawings submit shop drawings for prestressed concrete bridge members in accordance with subsection num plans and working drawings .
ensure the shop drawings include the following title sheet with the following index of shop drawing sheets and general notes erection sheets showing the following location of members anchor bolts and diaphragms beam lengths and spacing bearing centerlines span numbers and construction phases detail sheets of each fabricated member and component showing the following member dimensions pretensioned and mild reinforcement plates chair and tie requirements inserts diaphragm holes dunnage and handling locations piece mark locations bills of materials and design information .
ensure the design information on the detail sheets includes the following casting length adjustment due to elastic shortening strand specification stressing data compressive strength requirements .
if necessary include detail sheets for fabricated components such as bent rebar embedded plates anchor plates and bearing pads .
show items such as reinforcing steel strand anchors inserts and diaphragm holes in detail to avoid placement conflicts .
show in a sketch or note the lap lengths of reinforcing steel including steel mesh maximum strand support chair spacing and reinforcing added to support other reinforcing .
prestressed concrete bridge members num num b .
contractors quality control provide certified quality control qc personnel separate from production personnel a production and qc procedures manual inspection and testing to ensure prestressed concrete bridge members meet the contract requirements .
before fabricating members submit a production and qc procedures manual to the engineer for approval .
include stepbystep details of the fabricating methods for member types and controlling quality .
resubmit the manual every two years or when procedures change .
in the manual describe the following stressing procedures concrete mix design batching and mixing placement and finishing curing materials requirements and other production practices .
in the stressing procedures describe the following initial strand tensioning to equalize stresses and eliminate slack in the strands uplift and holddown devices pretensioning and detensioning methods elongation and stress measurements and anchorage details .
in the qc procedures describe the following materials sampling and testing procedures bed and product inspection methods member identification record keeping for bed and product inspection stressing records materials testing calibration records and any other qc functions .
describe the use of standard testing methods such as those from astm or aashto .
submit qc records to the engineer upon request .
c. preparation of beds and forms before each use clean beds and forms of debris and contaminants .
use commercial quality form oil or another form release agent approved by the engineer that allows the release of the forms and does not discolor the concrete .
prevent buildup of release agents .
prevent contamination of bonded reinforcement prestressed or nonprestressed by the form release agent .
clean or replace contaminated reinforcement .
make form joints smooth and tight to prevent cement paste leakage .
maintain forms and ensure the forms conform to the dimensions of the structure shown on the plans .
check form alignment and grade before casting in accordance with the num prestressed concrete bridge members num approved production or qc manual .
maintain form alignment during the casting operation .
d. tensioning requirements num general notify the engineer before tensioning to allow inspection .
prestress members using the following pretensioning method tension prestressing strands place and cure concrete and stress the concrete by releasing the strands from anchorage after the member reaches the strength required by the contract .
complete posttensioning in accordance with section num posttensioning .
tension straight or draped strands using a single or multistrand stressing method .
design the stressing method to ensure uniform stress among and along the strands .
leave space between members to allow for cutting the strands during release .
during stressing record the stressing measurements date time and ambient temperature .
inspect the strands after tensioning .
clean or replace strands contaminated by form release agent .
if more than num hr has elapsed since stressing restress the strands as directed by the engineer before placing the concrete .
num initial tensioning equally tension each strand to eliminate slack before starting elongation readings .
use a tension intensity from num to num percent of the final jacking force .
mark each strand after initial tensioning but before final tensioning and after final tensioning to measure elongation and monitor each anchor wedge for slippage .
num target stressing values calculate the target force and elongation in accordance with the following the target force equals the total jacking force needed for tensioning the target elongation corresponds to the target force make appropriate allowances for losses such as friction slippage and relaxation of anchors and splices and adjust target values if the temperature difference between the strands and the concrete at placement is greater than num f num c. limit overstressing of strands to num percent of the ultimate strength shown on the manufacturers mill certification .
num stress measurement measure strand tension using a pressure gauge or load cell .
mark strands without damaging them to measure elongations .
for single and multistrand stressing record the force and elongation measurements for each strand and strand group .
monitor slippage of individual strands for multistrand stressing and restress individual strands to meet the contract requirements .
record each strand heat number .
prestressed concrete bridge members num num tension until the force and elongation are both within num percent of the respective target value .
ensure the control measurements of force and elongation algebraically agree within num percent .
stop tensioning before reaching the targets if the force or elongation exceeds the respective target value by more than num percent .
if discrepancies occur check the entire stressing operation and determine and correct the source of error before proceeding .
num draped strands tension draped strands using one of the following methods .
partially jacking the strands in a straight position from one end of the bed and finishing by vertically displacing the strands into their draped positions or if more than two beams are on the casting bed jacking from both ends of the bed and holding the strands in the draped position using rollers pins or other lowfriction devices approved by the engineer .
num strand splicing use no more than one splice per strand .
splice strands of similar physical properties with the same source and twist or lay .
during multistrand stressing splice either less than num percent or num percent of the strands .
locate splices outside the prestressed members .
num debonding strand provide debonding on strands as required by the contract .
use one of the following methods interlocking plastic tubing solid plastic tubing two layers of split plastic tubing with seams greater than num apart or another method approved by the engineer .
seal ends and seams of debonding with water resistant tape .
ensure debonding is within num in num mm of the target length .
measure the length of debonding to the end of the plastic seal .
e. concrete num general perform concrete work in accordance with section num structural concrete except as modified in section num .
consolidate the concrete internally or internally and externally .
do not damage or displace reinforcement during consolidation .
replace rejected members at no additional cost to the department .
the engineer will not accept concrete containing cement balls or that segregates under normal consolidation .
place concrete when the concrete temperature is from num f to num f num c to num c. use type i or type iii cement in class p concrete .
obtain reinforcing steel cover using plastic coated epoxy coated or plastic supports or chairs .
bend uncoated tie wire or metal supports within num in num mm of any formed surface away from the form to obtain the cover required by the contract .
num prestressed concrete bridge members num unless otherwise required by the contract finish the top surface of members with a rough float followed by a transverse finishing with a stiff brush .
finish formed surfaces with a class num finish in accordance with subsection num.gnum class num ordinary surface finish .
num curing unless otherwise required by the contract cure precast members using the water method or the steam or radiant heat method in accordance with section num structural concrete .
to prevent surface drying fog exposed concrete surfaces until regular curing starts .
if differential movement between forms and beds causes damage to members during curing perform the following anchor the forms to prevent differential movement or loosen side forms when loosening will not damage the members .
for steam or radiant heat curing record the temperature surrounding the member using at least three continuous temperature recorders per line .
for water curing if the expected ambient temperature is less than num f num c use at least one temperature recorder per line .
num testing before casting notify the engineer for inspection .
sample and test in accordance with section num structural concrete except as modified by the following for beams and piles sample and test each member at least once .
take the sample from a batch of concrete of which more than num percent will be incorporated into the member it represents .
for prestressed stayinplace form deck panels sample concrete at a rate of at least one sample for each num yd³ num m³ of concrete .
randomly select batches for sampling in advance .
vary sampling patterns for each casting operation .
determine slump air content temperature and compressive strength from each acceptance sample .
perform additional sampling and testing for quality control .
before detensioning cure all cylinders in the same manner as the members they represent in accordance with section num of aashto t num .
after detensioning cure the remaining cylinders in accordance with section num of aashto t num .
from each sample make and test at least one cylinder for detensioning and three cylinders for numday testing .
make additional cylinders for detensioning and early testing of numday requirements .
test the numday cylinders at num days regardless of any previous testing .
for detensioning determine sample strength using a cylinder from each concrete member or sample for deck panels .
detension when all sample locations in the line attain the detensioning strength required by the contract .
for numday strength use the average of three cylinders from the same concrete sample to determine sample strength .
the department will evaluate failed compressive strength tests in accordance with department policy on acceptance of low strength concrete cylinder tests .
prestressed concrete bridge members num num f. detensioning design detensioning procedures to minimize shock to the members minimize movement against restrained items such as forms inserts and holddowns prevent members from impacting each other and prevent overstressing or damaging members .
list the detensioning procedure for each member or reference them on the shop drawings .
list referenced procedures in the production and qc manual .
detension after the concrete attains the compressive strength for release required by the contract .
detension immediately after steam or radiant heat curing while the concrete is still warm and moist .
prevent the temperature surrounding the members from falling below num f num c before detensioning .
detension within num hr of ending water curing .
if transferring the stressing force by jacking limit the tension force to num percent over the target stressing force or num percent of the ultimate strand strength whichever is less .
cut or release strands in an order that minimizes lateral eccentricity of prestress .
if cutting strand with an acetylene torch minimize shock loading by heating the strand to induce slow yielding and to relieve stress and then cutting .
correct the strand cutting procedure if indications of shock loading such as brooming of strand appear .
cut strands flush with the end of the member using a saw or other device approved by the engineer .
the department will not allow the use of an acetylene torch within num in num mm of concrete surfaces .
use wire brushing or abrasive blast cleaning to remove dirt and residue .
clean and paint flushcut strand ends and adjoining concrete within num in num mm of the strand .
coat the cut strand ends with at least num mil num µm of zincrich paint containing at least num percent zinc .
thoroughly mix the paint before application .
work the paint into voids with a brush or by spraying .
use an epoxy modified grout to cover the exposed strand ends and zincrich paint .
provide epoxy in accordance with subsection num epoxy resin and other adhesives for general use with concrete type e. ensure the beam ends are vertical to the beam end sole plates within a tolerance of ⅛ inft num mmnum m of the beam height .
the department will not allow drilling or coring members without the approval of the engineer .
g. storage inspection and transportation maintain members in an upright position .
handle members using the lifting eyes or loops .
support beams in storage and transit within num ft num m of the designed bearing locations .
support stayinplace panels and piles as shown on the shop drawings .
prevent damage to members during storage handling and transportation .
replace damaged members at no additional cost to the department .
repair minor chipping spalling and scars as directed by the engineer .
mark members with a piece mark as shown on the shop drawings .
include the member mark number piece number job identification and date cast .
num prestressed concrete bridge members num the engineer must inspect approve and stamp members at least num hr before shipment to the project .
ship only approved and stamped members .
the contractor is responsible for any defects found after shipment .
allow members that attain the required numday compressive strength to age at least num hr before shipment .
h. tolerances correct the production process if member dimensions approach a tolerance limit specified in table num table num table num and table num .
immediately notify the engineer of members that do not meet these tolerances .
check dimensional tolerances before casting and after removal from the forms .
recheck timedependent tolerances such as length camber and sweep within num days before shipment .
check camber and sweep when the thermal effects of sunlight are negligible on cloudy days or during the early morning .
check local smoothness with a num ft num m straightedge .
ensure dimensional tolerances are in accordance with table num for aashto girders and bulbtees table num for doubletees table num for prestressed piling and table num for prestressed deck panels table num maximum dimensional tolerances for aashto girders and bulb tees dimensions tolerance length num in num mm width overall ⅜ in ¼ in num mm num mm width web ⅜ in ¼ in num mm num mm depth overall ½ in ¼ in num mm num mm depth flanges ¼ in num mm sweep ⅛ innum ft num mmm debonding length num in num mm variation from end squareness or skew num inft num mmm num in num mm camber variation from design camber camber variation from design camber ⅛ innum ft num mmm for spans of num ft num m or less ½ in num mm for spans over num ft num m num in num mm differential camber between adjacent members ⅛ innum ft num mmm position of strands individual ¼ in num mm bundled ½ in num mm draped strand holddown point num in num m position of plates sole plates ⅝ in num mm other plates num in num mm tipping and flushness of plates sole plates num ⅛ in num mm other plates ¼ in num mm position of inserts diaphragm holes num in num mm diaphragm hole variation from squareness or skew num in num mm other inserts ½ in num mm prestressed concrete bridge members num num table num maximum dimensional tolerances for aashto girders and bulb tees dimensions tolerance position of handling devices parallel to length num in num mm transverse to length num in num mm position of stirrups longitudinal spacing num in num mm projection above top ¾ in num mm local smoothness of any formed surface ¼ innum ft num mmnum m table num maximum dimensional tolerances for doubletees dimension tolerance length num in num mm width overall ¼ in num mm width webs ⅛ in num mm depth overall ¼ in num mm thickness flanges ¼ in ⅛ in num mm num mm flange overhang flange edge to web edge ¼ in num mm distance between webs ¼ in num mm sweep ⅛ innum ft num mmnum m variation from end squareness or skew num inft num mmm num in num mm camber variation from design camber ⅛ innum ft num mmm ¾ in num mm differential camber between adjacent members ⅛ innum ft num mmm ¾ in num mm position of strands individual ¼ in num mm bundled ½ in num mm draped strand holddown point num in num mm position of plates sole plates ½ in num mm other plates num in num mm tipping and flushness of plates sole plates num ⅛ in num mm other plates ¼ in num mm position of inserts diaphragm holes num in num mm diaphragm hole variation from squareness or skew num in num mm other inserts ½ in num mm position of handling devices parallel to length num in num mm transverse to length num in num mm position of stirrups longitudinal spacing num in num mm projection above top ¾ in num mm local smoothness of any formed surface ¼ innum ft num mmnum m num prestressed concrete bridge members num num table num maximum dimensional tolerances for prestressed concrete piling dimension tolerance length num in num mm width or diameter ⅜ in num mm variation from longitudinal axis bow ⅛ innum ft num mmm variation from end squareness or skew ¼ inft num mmnum m ½ in num mm position of individual strands ¼ in num mm position of handling devices num in num mm longitudinal spacing of spiral reinforcement ¾ in num mm local smoothness of any formed surface ¼ innum ft num mmnum m table num maximum dimensional tolerances for prestressed concrete stayinplace forms dimension tolerance length in direction of panel strands ¾ in ¼ in num mm num mm width ¼ in ½ in num mm num mm thickness ¼ in ⅛ in num mm num mm variation from end squareness or skew ¼ in num mm camber sweep and warping ¼ innum ft num mmnum m position of individual strands vertically num in ¼ in num mm num mm horizontally ½ in num mm position of handling devices parallel to length num in num mm transverse to length num in num mm local smoothness of any formed surface ¼ innum ft num mmnum m i. corrective actions correct members that do not meet the tolerances specified in table num table num table num or table num in one of the following ways at no additional cost to the department replace the member .
correct the member tolerance problem as directed by the engineer .
if unable to correct a usable member submit the member for review and acceptance at a reduced price in accordance with subsection num conformity with plans and specifications .
include a description of the problem and the proposed corrective action .
provide structural and physical evaluation by an oklahoma registered professional engineer as required by the contract .
if the submittal is rejected replace the member at no additional cost to the department .
num method of measurement vacant bridge decks approaches rails and parapets num num num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit a prestressed concrete beams linear foot meter b prestressed concrete double tees linear foot meter c prestressed concrete deck panels square foot square meter if the contractor chooses to use stayinplace forms the department will not pay for additional quantities of concrete and reinforcing steel in excess of the quantities shown on the plans .
the department will pay for prestressed concrete piling in accordance with section num driven foundation piles .
the department will consider the cost of embedded plates to be included in the contract unit price for the relevant prestressed member pay item .
section num bridge decks approaches rails and parapets num description this work consists of constructing concrete bridge decks approach slabs and railings and parapets for bridges roadways wing walls retaining walls and other structures .
num materials provide materials in accordance with the following sections and subsections material section or subsection structural concrete class aa num joint fillers and sealers num reinforcing steel for structures num curing agents num metal bridge railing materials num aluminum alloy tubes for railings num cast aluminum alloy bridge railing posts num pipe railing num provide a corrosioninhibiting admixture for castinplace bridge deck concrete and precast deckform concrete if using stayinplace prestressed concrete deck forms .
num equipment a. finishing machine provide an engineer approved selfpropelled finishing machine supported on rails or steelclad headers capable of transversely finishing the bridge deck and approach num bridge decks approaches rails and parapets num num slabs .
fasten the rails and headers parallel to the deck centerline and set the line and grade with allowance for deadload deflections .
before placing concrete submit a machine description that includes the make model a finishing plan and an equipment breakdown plan that lists spare equipment and parts and estimates for down time .
spare equipment will include one engine for the finishing machine .
provide enough equipment and labor to limit down time so that concrete placement can be completed within the time requirements in table num .
b. fogging equipment provide a fogging system that creates fog with pressurized water and a series of fogging nozzles not more than num ft num m apart that will continuously cover the finished concrete with cool moist air .
provide high pressure equipment capable of generating at least num psi num mpa at a flow rate of num gpm num lmin or lowpressure equipment with nozzles capable of supplying a maximum flow rate of num gpm num lmin .
mount fogging equipment to the trailing edge of strikeoff work bridges or both with nozzles positioned to spray above a horizontal plane .
provide hand held foggers for areas which require supplemental fogging .
do not use hand held foggers as the primary fogging equipment or as a finishing aid .
c. grooving machine if sawcut grooving is required by the contract provide a selfpropelled grooving machine to groove hardened concrete .
use a grooving machine equipped with the following features diamond saw blades mounted on a multiblade arbor at the contract required spacing a depth control device that detects variations in the concrete surface and adjusts the height of the cutting head to maintain the contract required depth an alignment control device and a vacuum attachment that removes and collects slurry or residue from the grooving operation .
d. work bridges provide at least two work bridges to provide access for floating straight edging fogging curing and finishing the concrete .
num construction methods ensure the bridge deck thickness is ½ in num mm from the thickness dimensions shown on the plans .
the engineer may direct removal and replacement of spans or sections between construction joints if the thickness tolerance is not met .
construct approach slabs in accordance with section num portland cement concrete pavement except as modified by section num .
a .
forming bracing and finishing machine rails at the prework meeting submit to the engineer for approval a bridge deck plan that covers the following falsework forming and bracing details in accordance with subsection num.a falsework bridge decks approaches rails and parapets num num stayinplace form shop drawings lap details and methods for sealing corrugations and method of attachment to beams in accordance with subsection num.b forms .
placing consolidating finishing fogging and curing equipment and backup equipment located onsite in accordance with subsection num equipment .
quantities of material and numbers of equipment for rainy cold and hot weather protection in accordance with subsection num.b protection of concrete from environmental conditions .
concrete mix design the plant supplying the concrete and the expected delivery and placement time in accordance with subsection num mix design and proportioning and subsection num.c handling and placing concrete .
quality control plan for concrete placement that includes the purpose intent and interpretation of the qc specifications .
identification of checks used to ensure the deck conforms to the dimensions shown on the plans and quality required by the contract .
process for delivering placing consolidating finishing and curing the concrete in accordance with section num and section num structural concrete .
begin falsework after the engineer approves the bridge deck plan .
provide forms and bracing for the deck overhang to support the weight of construction loads .
brace exterior steel girders to prevent girder rotation and over stressing the girder web in accordance with subsection num.anum falsework for steel and precast concrete beams and girders .
set rails on nonyielding supports outside the concrete placement for the length of the deck to allow the finishing machine float to clear the concrete .
use rails that adjust for elevation .
set rails to allow for settlement camber and deflection of falsework .
adjust rails to correct for additional settlement or deflection during finishing operations .
if located within the deck remove the rail supports to at least num in num mm below the finished surface when the concrete placement operation no longer requires them .
fill the void with fresh concrete .
b .
construction joints build construction joints in accordance with subsection num.d construction joints or as directed by the engineer .
where the deck is continuous over abutments or piers place a construction joint at the end of simple spans .
wait at least num hr before placing adjacent deck sections .
after concrete placed on both sides of the joint hardens sawcut the top of the joint num in num mm deep and ¼ in num mm wide .
seal the joint with sealant shown on the plans or approved by the engineer .
if sealing construction joints on bridges subject to traffic vibrations use a rapid cure joint sealant in accordance with subsection num.g rapid cure joint sealant and elastomeric mortar .
c. expansion joints num metal expansion joints provide metal expansion joints fabricated in accordance with section num structural steel .
num bridge decks approaches rails and parapets num install expansion joint assemblies so the joint surface matches the plane of the adjacent concrete along the length of the assembly .
secure the assemblies in place during concrete placement .
cut rigid connections between opposite halves of an expansion joint assembly after initial concrete set to prevent damage from joint movement from thermal changes in the superstructure .
provide an opening in the traffic rail and concrete parapets matching the expansion joint dimension .
before installing the neoprene gland in sealed expansion joints clean steel surfaces that will contact the neoprene .
num joints made of elastomeric mortar and rapid cure joint sealant provide elastomeric mortar and rapid cure joint sealant in accordance with subsection num.g rapid cure joint sealant and elastomeric mortar .
strip forms and clean the concrete surfaces to ensure proper bond of the elastomeric mortar .
for existing concrete surfaces saw flush and clean joints in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
blastclean steel surfaces in accordance with sspcspnum nearwhite blast cleaning .
after preparing the surface notify the engineer for inspection of the joint before installing the elastomeric mortar .
install the elastomeric mortar when the joint surface temperature reaches at least num f num c. if recommended by the manufacturer apply heat to improve the elastomeric mortar curing time .
before exposing joint to traffic allow the mortar to cure for at least num hr or if joint surface temperatures fall below num f num c cure for num hr .
after installing the elastomeric mortar install the rapid cure joint sealant when the joint surface temperature is at least num f num c. install the sealant in expansion joints when the joint openings are from ¾ in to num½ in num mm to num mm .
if an opening is larger than num½ in num mm notify the engineer .
provide an elastomeric mortar and sealant manufacturers technical representative at the beginning of work to inspect sealing operations .
d. reinforcing steel placement place reinforcing steel in accordance with section num reinforcing steel for structures .
place transverse reinforcing steel bar ends num in num mm from the edge of the deck or slab .
place the ends of longitudinal reinforcing steel bars and parapet bars num in num mm from the end of the concrete or expansion device .
ensure tolerances in accordance with subsection num.b placing and fastening .
support reinforcing steel with wire supports .
unless otherwise required by the contract extend longitudinal reinforcing steel bars through construction joints .
e. concrete place concrete in accordance with section num structural concrete .
if using stayinplace prestressed concrete deck forms with a corrosioninhibiting admixture limit temperature for bridge deck and approach slab concrete to a maximum of num f num c. num predeck pour inspection at least num hr before placing the deck and with the engineer present inspect for the following bridge decks approaches rails and parapets num num forms are mortar tight cleaned and oiled .
stayinplace steel forms are lapped in the direction required by the contract .
concrete panels are set to allow concrete to flow between the bottom of the panel and the top of the beam in accordance with section num forms falsework and temporary works .
falsework has been inspected and certified and telltales installed and marked in accordance with section num forms falsework and temporary works .
reinforcement is clean coating damage is repaired ties are tight support provides a stable mat and clearances and spacing meet plan dimensions and tolerances in accordance with section num reinforcing steel for structures .
finishing machine rails are stable .
backup equipment is on site .
no oil or fuel leaks from machinery .
the dry run produces cover clearance and deck thicknesses in accordance with table num maximum dimensional tolerances for cast in place formed concrete .
equipment and materials for weather protection are in place .
temperature reading locations during cure period are identified in accordance with section num structural concrete .
work bridges curing materials and equipment are prepared for concrete placement .
fogging application equipment is in good working order with no leaks .
sufficient quantities personnel and methods for placement of curing mats including procedures for prewetting and maintaining moisture in curing mats during cure time .
identify locations for concrete discharge sampling and testing in accordance with subsection num mix design and proportioning .
begin placing the deck with the engineers approval .
num placement deposit the concrete ahead of the finishing machine and slightly higher than the finished surface .
always maintain excess concrete in front of the screed cutting edge .
carry the excess to the edge of the pour or forms and remove .
place concrete at a rate of at least num fthr num mhr measured longitudinally along the bridge deck .
during hot weather place concrete at dawn at dusk or at night in accordance with subsection num.b protection of concrete from environmental conditions .
num lighting place concrete at night in accordance with subsection num.cnumc lighting .
num finishing after consolidating the concrete use the finishing machine to transversely strikeoff the concrete to the profile shown on the plans .
use a float to finish the num bridge decks approaches rails and parapets num concrete to a smooth even surface along the bridge length .
finish transversely unless the contract allows longitudinal finishing .
the department will not allow spraying water on the concrete surface to assist finishing operations .
while the concrete is plastic test the surface line and grade with a num ft num m straightedge .
fill depressions with fresh concrete and remove high areas .
consolidate strikeoff and refinish the repaired areas .
ensure the surface across joints is in accordance with subsection num.anum surface elevation and smoothness .
finish approach slabs the same as bridge decks .
for overlaid approach slabs use the same final finish as for bridge deck overlays .
num fogging and curing requirements fog all bridge deck placements .
begin fogging bridge decks behind the finishing operations for the entire deck width .
continue fogging to produce a semi gloss water sheen on the surface until application of the curing material .
reduce fogging if water accumulates on the surface and begins to run off .
ensure the fogging nozzles atomize the droplets and dampen without creating pools of water .
do not use water from fogging as an aid to finish the concrete .
continuously cure the concrete immediately after finishing for at least seven days .
if using a polozzon such as flyash of greater than num percent continuously cure the concrete immediately after finishing for at least num days .
cure the bridge deck or approach slab in accordance with subsection num.enuma water with waterproof cover .
cure pedestrian walkways the same as bridge decks .
the department will not allow the use of curing compounds during the seven day curing period .
a water with waterproof cover continuously apply fog after the concrete strikeoff and until covering the concrete with wet burlap .
mount fogging equipment on the finishing equipment .
prevent the water from dripping flowing or ponding during fogging placement of absorbent material or before the concrete sets .
apply one layer of wet burlap or an alternative material approved by the engineer within num min of concrete strikeoff .
apply a second layer within num min .
maintain a moist surface after strikeoff and during the curing period .
using a misting hose keep the burlap saturated until the concrete sets enough to allow foot traffic .
when the concrete sets place soaker hoses on the burlap and supply water to maintain continuous saturation of the burlap over the entire concrete surface .
place white polyethylene film over the soaker hoses covering the concrete surface .
use the widest available sheets and overlap adjacent sheets at least num in num mm .
use a pressure sensitive tape mastic glue or other engineer approved adhesive to tightly seal and form a waterproof cover .
secure the polyethylene film to prevent displacement by the wind .
repair or replace sheet portions that become damaged before the end of the curing period or lose waterproofing ability .
bridge decks approaches rails and parapets num num bcuring membrane ensure the curing compound has not expired .
within num min of removing the wet burlap and polyethylene at the end of the seven day curing period or at the end of the num day curing period when using pozzolan of greater than num percent apply two coats of curing membrane while the surface is damp .
apply the curing membrane at a coverage rate of at least num gal per num ft² num l per num m² unless otherwise required by the contract .
if the concrete surface dries fog spray to maintain a damp condition .
spray the second coat of curing membrane immediately after and perpendicular to the first .
protect the curing membrane for at least seven days .
apply an additional coat to marred areas of the membrane .
if the curing membrane is continuously marred the engineer may direct the application of wet burlap polyethylene sheeting or other impermeable material to ensure contract required concrete curing .
num removing forms remove forms in accordance with subsection num.c removal of forms and falsework .
f. surface correction through grinding after curing test the concrete driving surfaces using a num ft num m straightedge or other contract allowed device .
mark and grind areas with spots higher than ⅛ in num mm .
begin grinding after completion of the curing period and in accordance with section num diamond grinding concrete pavement .
grind areas that do not meet smoothness specifications in accordance with subsection num.anum surface elevation and smoothness .
do not reduce the concrete cover over reinforcing steel to less than num in num mm .
restore the skidresistant surface in ground areas using sawcut grooving .
remove and replace at no additional cost to the department bridge decks and approach slabs that can not be corrected to meet the specified tolerances .
the department will not measure grinding for surface correction for payment .
g. transverse grooving num groove geometry sawcut grooves to the dimensions and tolerances specified in table num .
table num dimension and allowable size of sawcut groove dimension allowable size in mm width ⅛ ¼ num num depth ⅛ num num num spacing a cc ½ num num num a randomly vary the groove spacing from ¾ in to num½ in num mm to num mm on bridges at least num ft num m long .
make the groove crosssections rectangular for sawcut grooves .
measure the width tolerance at the middepth of the grooves .
cut grooves within num ft num m of the parapet face guardrail or curb .
continuously run the grooves across the width of the bridge to within num ft num m of the opposite parapet face guardrail or curb .
the department will not allow cutting of grooves within num in num mm of a num bridge decks approaches rails and parapets num construction joint .
do not overlap parallel grooving patterns .
for curved bridges cut grooves transverse to the curve cord within the spans .
num grooving hardened concrete provide sawcut transverse grooves under the following conditions the department specifies sawcut transverse grooving as a pay item replace transverse grooving after grinding and correct outoftolerance transverse grooving .
begin sawcut grooving after completion of the concrete curing period and grinding repairs .
if spalling occurs discontinue grooving and correct the cause .
during grooving work if a single blade on a multiblade grooving machine can no longer cut a groove repair the damaged blade after completion of the shift .
the engineer will not require the repair of the omitted groove .
if more than one blade is damaged discontinue use and repair the damaged areas as directed by the engineer .
num slurry removal while grooving continuously vacuum the slurry and residue .
prevent the flow of slurry into open traffic lanes or drainage facilities .
after grooving clean slurry residue from the pavement or bridge deck .
dispose of slurry off the project site at an approved waste site as per subsection num removal and disposal of salvaged materials structures and obstructions and subsection num laws rules and regulations to be observed as required by the contract .
h. load on decks and approach slabs num general do not apply loads to concrete structures until the concrete has attained sufficient strength .
determine strengths from test cylinders cured at the work site under similar environmental conditions in accordance with section num portland cement concrete .
provide continuous wet cure to any exposed deck throughout the entire sevenday wet cure period ten days for decks containing fly ash .
num construction loads the engineer will limit construction loads on the new deck to the following foot traffic during the seven day curing period .
reinforcing steel or form placement for the bridge rail or barrier after the deck concrete has cured sufficiently to not be damaged by the operations .
light truck traffic with a gross vehicle weight no greater than num ton num metric ton or placement of the concrete for the bridge rail or barrier seven days after the deck concrete placement or when the deck concrete reaches num percent of the contract required compressive strength and the underlying forms and falsework are still in place .
legal loads num days after deck concrete placement or when the deck concrete reaches num percent of the contract required compressive strength and the underlying forms and falsework are still in place .
heavy stationary loads greater than num ton num metric ton to less than num ton num metric ton num days after the deck concrete placement or the deck bridge decks approaches rails and parapets num num num concrete reaches num percent of the contract required compressive strength and the underlying forms and falsework are still in place .
unless the engineer approves the use in writing prohibit the following construction loads heavy stationary loads over num ton num metric ton and vehicles greater than legal loads .
for posttensioned structures complete the span tensioning before applying loads more than num lb num kg .
obtain the engineers approval before operating a mixer on the bridge decks .
the department will only allow rubber tire construction vehicles on bridge decks or approach slabs unless approved by the engineer .
num traffic loads the department will not allow traffic loads on concrete decks or approach slabs until num days after the completion of concrete placement and after the concrete attains num of the contract required compressive strength .
i. rails parapets and curbs construct concrete rails parapets and curbs in accordance with section num structural concrete and section num reinforcing steel for structures .
do not place railings parapets and curbs until the span falsework is released and the dead load deflections have occurred for castinplace slab span box girder or post tensioned superstructures .
num forming provide forms in accordance with section num forms falsework and temporary works .
the department will allow the slip form method of parapet construction if the results and curing finishing and protection of the concrete meet contract requirements .
num curing cure rail and parapet concrete in accordance with subsection num.fnum formsinplace method or subsection num.fnum water method .
use either the formsinplace or the water curing method .
use the water method on exposed surfaces .
if removing forms and applying finish before the end of the specified curing period resume curing for the remainder of the curing period .
num finish provide a class num finish for rail and parapet concrete surfaces and curb sides in accordance with subsection num.gnum class num rubbed finish .
use a wooden float to finish the tops of curbs .
num line and grade build the line and grade of the parapet or rail as required by the contract .
unless otherwise required by the contract make parapets vertical .
construct handrails parallel to curbs .
num bridge decks approaches rails and parapets num bridge decks approaches rails and parapets num method of measurement the engineer will measure the following area of approach slabs by the top surface dimensions required by the contract or approved by the engineer .
area of sawcut grooving bounded by the ends of the approach slabs and the edges of the clear roadway .
expansion joints from end to end along the joint centerline .
rapid cure joint sealant along the joint centerline at the roadway surface .
concrete rail concrete parapet or handrailing with concrete posts from the outside of the end posts with no deduction for expansion joint gaps .
handrailings with metal posts from end to end .
the engineer will not measure grinding for surface correction .
num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit a approach slab square yard square meter b sawcut grooving square yard square meter c expansion joints linear foot meter d concrete rail linear foot meter e concrete parapet linear foot meter f handrailing linear foot meter g rapid cure joint sealant linear foot meter h elastomeric mortar cubic foot cubic meter the department will pay for the quantities of class aa concrete and reinforcing steel for concrete bridge decks shown on the plans in accordance with section num structural concrete and section num reinforcing steel for structures .
the department will consider the cost of lighting to be included in the contract unit price for the relevant pay item .
the department will consider the cost of other joint fillers and joint sealers to be included in the contract unit price for other bid items .
unless otherwise required by the contract the department will pay for incidental steel items metal drains in accordance with section num structural steel and section num reinforcing steel for structures .
overlays for concrete bridge decks num num section num overlays for concrete bridge decks num description this work consists of preparing deck surfaces and placing overlays on bridge decks and the approach pavement to provide a smooth transition to the main line pavement .
concrete overlays and asphalt membrane overlays are covered .
num materials provide materials in accordance with the following section and subsections material section or subsection portland cement concrete num high density concrete for bridge deck repair and overlay num latex modified concrete for bridge deck overlays num early strength concrete for bridge deck patching and overlays num multiple layer polymer concrete overlay special provisions num.b.num waterproof membrane for asphalt overlay num reinforcing steel for structures num provide the following overlay types as required by the contract high density concrete hdc latex modified concrete lmc early strength concrete esc or other materials as required by the contract .
num equipment provide equipment with traps filters drippans or other devices to keep oil and deleterious material off the deck .
use the following types of surface preparation equipment as required by the contract a. hydrodemolition equipment provide hydrodemolition equipment with a filtering and pumping unit that operates with selfpropelled computerized equipment .
ensure the hydrodemolition equipment uses a high pressure water jet that can remove unsound concrete in a single pass .
provide equipment with water usage rate of at least num gpm num lmin and a pressure of at least num psi num mpa .
b .
mechanical scarifying equipment use selfpropelled equipment to maintain accurate depth of cut and slope .
use equipment that automatically establishes profile grades along both edges of the machine by referencing the bridge deck with a ski or matching shoe or by an independent grade control .
equip with an integral loading device that removes the materials cut from the bridge deck and discharges them into a truck in a single operation .
c. vacuum cleanup equipment provide vacuum cleanup equipment that cleans hydrodemolition and milling debris .
use a vacuum system equipped with dust control devices that remove wet debris and num overlays for concrete bridge decks num water in the same pass .
provide equipment that washes the deck with pressurized water before vacuuming to dislodge debris and slurry from the deck surface .
d. shot blast cleaning equipment provide shot blasting equipment with oil traps .
e. handheld blast cleaning equipment provide handheld blast equipment for sand blasting or water blasting to expose fine and coarse aggregates .
provide water blasting equipment that delivers at least num gpm num lmin at num psi num mpa .
f. sawing equipment provide saws that cut concrete to the depth required by the contract .
g. powerdriven hand tools provide powerdriven hand tools jack hammers and chipping hammers no heavier than the num lb num kg class .
h. proportioning and mixing equipment num hdc use proportioning and mixing equipment in accordance with subsection num equipment for high density concrete .
provide volumetric proportioning on a mobile mixer with continuous mixing or a stationary concrete mixer with rotatingpaddles .
num lmc and esc provide proportioning and mixing equipment of a selfcontained mobile continuousmixing type volumetric based units in accordance with the following provide a selfpropelled mixer that can carry enough dry and unmixed cement sand coarse aggregate and latex modifier to produce and place at least num yd³ num m³ of concrete mix uninterrupted .
equip mixers with a visible recording meter and ticket printout to indicate the quantity of cement going into the mix .
provide mixers with a positive control for the water flow and latex emulsion into the mixing chamber .
use a flow meter to indicate flow rate .
provide calibrated mixers to proportion and blend the composition continuously or intermittently as required by the contract .
i .
placing and finishing equipment num placing equipment for placing and prescreeding use hand tools to place stiff plastic concrete to the strike off level of the screed .
num finishing machines use a finishing machine that can screed concrete within num in num mm of the face of the curb or parapet wall .
extend the screed at least num in num mm beyond the sides of the placement section overlapping placed courses overlay forms and existing and planned sawcut edges .
ensure each screed has positive controls for the vertical position the tilt angle and the crown shape .
power and gear the machine to maintain smooth operations in forward and reverse .
raise the screed to overlays for concrete bridge decks num num clear the screeded surface for traveling in reverse .
use a machine capable of final screeding within num min of depositing the concrete on the deck .
see table num concrete overlay placement rates for other production rate specifications .
support the machine on adjustable rails not shimmed to obtain the profile shown on the plans .
if placing concrete in a lane that abuts a completed lane equip the machine to travel on the completed lane without damaging its surface .
provide deck foggers and misters on the deck finisher and work bridges in accordance with subsection num.b fogging equipment .
num special notes for high density concrete for high density concrete overlays use a mechanical strikeoff to provide a uniform thickness of concrete in front of the oscillating screed .
equip the oscillating screed to consolidate the concrete to num percent of the unit weight in accordance with aashto t num .
install identical vibrators along the screed length on num ft num m maximum centers .
make the bottom face of this screed at least num in num mm wide with a turnedup or rounded leading edge to prevent surface tearing .
num special notes for latex modified overlays for latex modified overlays use a finishing machine equipped with at least two finishing devices a vibrating screed that consolidates the modified composition to num percent of the rodded unit weight and either a vibrating oscillating screed or a finishing device with at least one rotating cylindrical drum no longer than num ft num m. equip the vibrating screed for latex modified concrete with positive control of vibration so that vibration frequency can be varied between num vibrations per minute and num vibrations per minute .
make the bottom face of the screed at least num in num mm wide .
j .
special notes for polymer concrete overlays num mechanical equipment provide a polymer distribution system a mechanical aggregate spreader and a selfpropelled sweeper broom or vacuum truck .
provide compressed air that is free from oil and water .
num hand applications use calibrated containers a paddletype mixer squeegees rollers and a broom to mix the resin and apply resin and aggregate in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
num night construction for night work provide lighting in accordance with subsection num.cnumc lighting .
num overlays for concrete bridge decks num num construction methods a .
general provide controls to limit dust .
perform concrete work in accordance with section num structural concrete .
protect traffic under the bridge and adjacent to the work zone while removing bridge deck concrete .
b .
work plan before work begins submit a work plan to the engineer .
allow num days for the engineers review .
include the following in the work plan forming details a list of project specific equipment to remove concrete including hand tools if using hydrodemolition a plan for treating water used to remove concrete a list of project specific equipment and backup equipment for the following concrete procedures mixing placing consolidating finishing and curing a list of onsite equipment and material quantities for protection from rainy cold and hot weather concrete mix designs and the expected travel time for delivery and placement a planned work schedule including the following traffic control project phasing surface preparation production rate patching cure times and estimated time for overlay placement an outline of the process used for concrete including the following rework areas removal surface preparation delivery placement consolidation finishing and curing and a list of checks that will ensure the overlay meets the dimensions shown on the plans and the quality required by the contract .
for polymer concrete overlays include the following additional items in the work plan the compatibility of patching materials with the polymer concrete overlay material the minimum air and deck surface temperatures overlays for concrete bridge decks num num the manufacturer approval of the work plan and the number of courses and minimum cure times for each course the manufacturers written support of approval for any deviations from these specifications and necessary test reports documentation explanations and justification to support the proposal .
for asphalt membrane overlays include the following additional items in the work plan type of membrane and tack that will be used limitations of pavementdeck temperature and moisture content how the pavementdeck temperature and moisture content will be measured length of time the membrane can be exposed before placing the asphalt overlay maximum temperature for the asphalt concrete overlay material and how the curb line and deck drains will be sealed .
obtain authorization from the engineer to proceed before starting work .
c. surface preparation num surface preparation for polymer concrete or asphalt membrane overlays remove and dispose of existing overlays asphalt unsound concrete and foreign material from the surface .
clean the deck surface by shotblasting or waterblasting in accordance with subsection num.d shot blast cleaning equipment .
shotblast after sandblasting .
before placing the overlay ensure the deck has no visible moisture .
test for moisture by taping a plastic sheet to the deck for at least num hr in accordance with astm d num or other engineer approved methods .
place overlay on hydraulic cement concrete of the contract required strength .
num surface preparation for concrete overlays for new decks use a shotblast or waterblast to prepare the surface .
for existing decks prepare deck surfaces using hydrodemolition vacuuming shielding and water control .
scarify mill in conjunction with hydrodemolition .
provide controls to limit dust .
use jack hammering and other engineerapproved methods to place the new concrete overlay where hydrodemolition can not be used .
remove and dispose of existing overlays asphalt unsound concrete and foreign material from the surface in accordance with subsection num removal and disposal of salvaged materials structures and obstructions and subsection num laws rules and regulations to be observed .
provide a rough bondable surface at the depth shown on the plans .
use the contract required overlay material for deck patching .
monolithically place this material for the partial depth repairs .
make full depth repairs before placing the overlay in accordance with section num repair of concrete bridge decks .
place expansion joints as required by the contract .
a overlays for decks with overlays remove the overlay with scarification .
scarify the top surface of the bridge deck before hydrodemolition .
remove approximately ¼ in num mm of original deck surface .
in cases where a new deck is being overlayed the engineer may omit the scarification and hydrodemolition .
num overlays for concrete bridge decks num bdamage of reinforcing steel if the mechanical scarifying equipment snags the top mat of deck reinforcing steel immediately stop and adjust the removal depth .
repair or replace damaged and dislodged reinforcing at no additional cost to the department .
remove additional concrete to position the new reinforcing steel at the height shown on the plans and contract required lap splice lengths using a num lb num kg chipping hammer at an angle of no more than num from horizontal .
c hydrodemolition if using hydrodemolition for surface preparation perform the following shield traveling public from debris .
block drains expansion joints and areas where water can drain from the deck .
provide sediment basins to strain water before releasing it .
adjust drainage treatment until the released water runs clear .
provide a technical field representative on the project site during calibration and hydrodemolition surface preparation operations .
calibrate the hydrodemolition equipment on an area of sound concrete and verify that it has a water pressure of at least num psi num mpaand a water usage rate of at least num gpm num lmin .
establish the rate of travel .
after calibration move the equipment to an unsound area to verify that recorded settings remove the unsound concrete .
modify these settings to remove concrete to the minimum depth shown on the plans .
hydrodemolish the top surface of the reinforced concrete bridge deck to make a rough and bondable surface .
wash the deck surface with pressurized water to dislodge debris and slurry .
before the debris and slurry dry use a high powered vacuum cleaner to clean the deck in one pass .
remove dried material at no additional cost to the department .
sound the dry deck and mark unsound areas .
repeat the process if the hydrodemolition surface preparation does not leave a bondable surface remove unsound concrete rust oil asphalt or other foreign matter and leave a clean etched concrete surface free of laitance .
splice exposed reinforcing steel if more than num percent of the reinforcing steel section bar area is lost .
where more than one half the reinforcing steel is exposed handwork areas with num lb num kg chipping hammers at num angles from horizontal to provide at least ¾ in of clearance around the bar .
minimize the amount of reinforcing steel exposed during hydrodemolition .
use handheld blast cleaning equipment or num lb num kgchipping hammers to clean and provide a bondable surface of the portion of the curb the parapet wall or both at the edge of the new overlay .
overlays for concrete bridge decks num num d surface wetting for concrete overlays before placing latex modified concrete clean the repair areas with air blast then flush them with water .
keep the surfaces wet for at least num hr and remove puddles before placing latex modified concrete .
d. mixing num high density concrete mix high density concrete at the project site in accordance with subsection num.c mixing concrete .
num latex modified concrete mix and proportion latex modified material in accordance with the following a measurement of material use a mobile continuous mixer to proportion latex modified concrete material for the contract required mix .
calibrate the mixer for each material in the engineers presence .
operate the mixer at the manufacturers recommended speed .
make yield checks .
bmixing of material mix material uniformly and in accordance with the equipment manufacturers recommended procedure .
finish at the rate specified in table num concrete overlay placement rates .
e. placing and finishing overlays num preplacement check at least num hr before placing the deck inspect and ensure the following with the engineer the forms are mortar tight cleaned and oiled delaminations were removed by sounding the deck the concrete surface is clean and bondable reinforcing steel is clean splicedin new reinforcing steel replaces damaged reinforcing steel reinforcing steel coating damage is repaired ties are tight support provides a stable reinforcing steel mat clearances and spacing meet dimensions and tolerances as required by the contract finishing machine rails are stable equipment is operational backup equipment is on site and does not leak oil or fuel num overlays for concrete bridge decks num the dry run produces acceptable results for cover and clearance the calibration of the mixing equipment produces the specified mix design and rate equipment and materials specified on the work plan for weather protection are inplace and identify locations for temperature readings during cure period .
num polymer concrete overlays ensure a technical representative from the manufacturer is present during polymer concrete overlay operations .
the representative will recommend the acceptability of all phases to the engineer including the surface preparations component mixing and type and method of applications .
sufficiently blend the polymer components and uniformly cover the work area at the contract required rate .
provide a finished overlay thickness that measures at least ¼ in num mmfrom the highest point on the deck surface to the top surface of the polymer not the peaks of the aggregate .
apply layers of polymer overlay separately as the manufacturer recommends and at the minimum rate specified in table num polymer and aggregate coverage rates .
ensure that the total coverage rate is at least num gal per num ft² num l per num m² .
maintain polymer and aggregate compounds at a temperature of at least num f num cduring application .
unless the manufacturer recommends otherwise in writing place the concrete overlay when the air temperature is no greater than num f num c and is not expected to drop below num f num c within num hr after application .
table num polymer and aggregate coverage rates course polymer galnum ft² num m² aggregate lbyd² kgm² num num num num num additional num num num num allow the overlay to cure before placing traffic on it to prevent wheel load damage .
cure in accordance with table num .
table num minimum curing times for overlay courses based on ambient temperature course num f num f num f num f num f num f num f num f num f num f num f num num hr num hr num hr num hr num hr num hr additional num hr num hr num hr num hr num hr num hr a cure course num for num hr if the ambient temperature falls below num f during curing .
if work damages the overlay surface repair the damaged area by sawcutting rectangular sections to the top of the concrete deck surface and replacing the courses at no additional cost to the department .
num concrete overlay a dimensions make hdc overlays at least num in num mm thick .
make lmc and esc overlays from num½ in to num in num mm to num mm thick .
make class aa reinforced concrete overlays a minimum of num in num mm thick .
limit the width of overlay passes to a maximum of num ft num m. overlays for concrete bridge decks num num bjoints num high density concrete before placing the adjacent overlay course saw the previously placed high density concrete overlay course to have straight and vertical edges at transverse and longitudinal joints .
before placing new concrete remove slurry from prepared areas .
num lconcret before placing concrete install transverse bulkheads to the thickness of the concrete layer and equal to the grade and profile shown on the plans .
c finishing machine setup adjust the finishing machine to the overlay profile shown on the plans .
place finishing machine rails outside the concrete area .
positively anchor the rails to give them horizontal and vertical stability .
anchor a holddown device only into concrete that will be resurfaced .
submit working drawings for anchoring support rails for engineer approval .
before placing concrete make a dry run with the finishing machine to check the anticipated overlay thickness .
attach a filler block with a thickness ⅛ in num mm less than the overlay thickness to the bottom of the screed .
with screed guides in place pass the screed over the area to be concreted .
correct screed elevations to provide the contract required clearance .
dplacement in general place concrete overlay continuously in accordance with table num .
place class aa reinforced concrete in accordance with numenum .
in case of an interruption in lmc or esc placement install a transverse bulkhead .
during delays less than num hr use several layers of wet burlap to protect the end of the placement from drying .
vibrate the surface screed and the internal fresh concrete that is at least num in num mm thick .
table num concrete overlay placement rates total overlay area per bridge yd² m² minimum placement rate yd³hr m³hr num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num e work bridges always use at least two movable work bridges during concrete placement .
use one work bridge for fogging the surface and finishing .
use the other to apply curing material .
f evaporation control and curing control evaporation and cure overlay in accordance with subsection num.enum .
curing periods may be reduced for esc overlays .
num overlays for concrete bridge decks num g temperature limitations keep the concrete temperature for the overlay material from num f to num f num c to num c. implement the following cold weather practices if the air temperature falls below num f num c from num hr before to num hr after placement or the substrate temperature falls below num f at the time of placement ensure the concrete mix temperature at least num f num c during placement .
schedule the placement during rising temperatures and at the warmest part of the day .
place esc when air and deck temperatures rise above num f num c. num asphalt membrane overlays ensure a technical representative from the manufacturer is present during asphalt membrane operations .
the representative will recommend the acceptability of all phases to the engineer including the surface preparations placement of the membrane including flashing for the curbs appropriate use of tack coats primers and type and method of applications .
place the waterproof membrane primers and tack coats in accordance with the manufacturers specifications instructions and provisions .
when placing membrane ensure that the membrane temperature is at least num f num c. extend the membrane num ft num m beyond each end of the bridge onto the approaches .
seal the curb lines of the waterproofing membrane using a method of treatment recommended by the manufacturer .
unless otherwise directed by the manufacturer roll the waterproofing membrane with a pneumatic roller .
vibratory rollers are not to be used during pavement application .
when applying asphalt concrete overlay use asphalt temperatures in accordance with the mix design .
ensure the asphalt temperatures do not exceed the limits for the membrane in use .
f. acceptance testing for overlays num tensile strength test the engineer will choose test sites .
notify the engineer num hr before performing the tensile strength test .
provide at least one tensile test site for each span or at least one test site for each num yd² num m² of deck surface .
test in accordance with astm c num .
ensure the tensile test has a strength of at least num psi num mpa with num percent of the failure in the existing concrete deck .
submit result documentation to the engineer .
num straightedge test before sawcut grooving test the overlay surface with a straightedge num ft num m long .
lay it parallel and then transverse to the centerline .
grind high areas greater than ⅛ in num mm from the lower edge of the straightedge .
g. transverse groove final finish for overlays for concrete overlays sawcut transverse grooves in accordance with subsection num.g transverse grooving .
overlays for concrete bridge decks num num overlay of concrete bridge decks h. limitation of operations during the curing period required by the contract keep traffic off the finished surface and do not prepare work on areas adjoining the new concrete .
num method of measurement the engineer will not measure class a and class b repairs necessitated by hydrodemolition for payment .
the engineer will measure sawcut grooving in accordance with subsection num method of measurement .
num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit a bridge deck concrete overlay square yard square meter b removing existing overlay square yard square meter c multiple layer polymer concrete overlay square yard square meter d asphalt membrane overlay square yard square meter e hydrodemolition square yard square meter the department will pay for bridge deck repairs in accordance with section num repair of concrete bridge decks .
the department will consider the cost of reinforcing steel sawing removals lighting and incidental items to be included in the contract unit price for the relevant overlay pay item .
the department defines hydrodemolition as variable depth overlay .
the department will consider the costs of variable depth to be included in the contract unit price for bridge deck overlay .
asphalt membrane overlay includes asphalt tack coat membrane primer and flashing .
in the case of variable depth the department will not measure class a or class b patching for payment .
num structural steel num section num structural steel num description this work consists of providing fabricating and erecting steel structures and structural steel portions .
num materials use materials in accordance with the following section and subsections material section or subsection structural steel num highstrength fasteners num welding num welded stud shear connectors num galvanizing num shafting for pins and rollers num steel castings num iron castings num bronze castings num paintinorganic zincepoxyurethane system num.a elastomeric bearing pads num num equipment vacant num construction methods a .
general for main load carrying members use a structural steel fabricating plant with an unrestricted certification under the aisc quality certification programs in the major steel bridges category with endorsement f for the fabrication of fracture critical members .
provide fracture critical elements in accordance with ansiaashtoaws dnum bridge welding code .
select design details in accordance with the aashto standard specification for highway bridges .
paint structural steel in accordance with section num painting .
paint exposed surfaces of nonweathering grades of steel unless galvanized or otherwise required by the contract .
apply inorganic zinc primer to the top flange of girders .
the department will not allow painting of weathering steel unless required by the contract .
blastclean superstructures made of weathering steel in accordance with sspcspnum commercial blast cleaning .
before cutting or welding painted steel remove paint within num in num mm of the work and repaint steel in accordance with section num painting .
use falsework to erect structural steel and temporary bracing in accordance with section num forms falsework and temporary works .
structural steel num num b .
notice of beginning of work provide a written notice to the engineer num calendar days before beginning work at the shop .
begin work after the department provides inspectors .
c. acceptance for each heat of steel provide copies of the following before fabrication mill orders and certified mill test reports type a certifications including chemical analysis and physical test results charpy vnotch impact tests and buy america certification in accordance with subsection numb source of supply and quality requirements .
provide type d certifications from the fabricator for small quantity items that do not have mill test reports .
for contract required finegrain practice confirm material production to the requirements on the test report .
allow full access for inspection of fabrication in accordance with subsection num plant inspection .
immediately replace or correct rejected materials and work .
ship fabricated material only after the inspector approves and stamps accepted pieces .
inspect pieces at point of delivery and report damages caused by shipment to the engineer .
acceptance does not prevent subsequent rejection .
the engineer may reject materials or work not meeting contract specifications .
immediately replace or correct rejected materials and work .
the engineer will make the final decision on appeals .
d. working drawings prepare and submit drawings in accordance with subsection num plans and working drawings .
the engineers approval of the drawings covers the requirements for strength and detail only .
the department is not responsible for errors in dimensions .
num shop drawings show component part dimensions of the structure and details of miscellaneous parts for steel structures .
adjust girder dimensions shown on the shop drawings to account for vertical curve camber dead load deflection and grade .
these dimensions are not detailed in the contract plans .
where orientation of plates is required by the contract show the rolling direction .
cut flanges and webs of plate girders from plates so the long dimension of the girder parallels the rolling direction .
identify on the shop drawings the type and grade of each piece that will be made of steel with assembly marks that are crossreferenced to the original pieces of mill steel and their certified mill test reports .
the engineer must approve the locations of shop welded splices .
locate shopwelded splices to avoid points of maximum tensile or fatigue stress .
place splices in webs at least num in num mm from shop splices butt joints in flanges or stiffeners .
the engineer may specify additional nondestructive tests on shopwelded splices .
num structural steel num place a complete set of the bill of materials with pay weights on all shop drawings .
num erection drawings for structural steel bridge members provide erection drawings showing member locations .
for steel superstructures that require falsework support during erection in accordance with section num forms falsework and temporary works submit drawings of the proposed erection method .
include details of falsework bents bridge member attachments erection sequence and lifting point locations .
the engineer may require calculations to demonstrate the accuracy of factored resistances member capacities and final geometry .
num camber diagram provide a camber diagram showing the camber locations shown on the plans at each panel point of trusses or arch ribs field splices and fractions of span length at least at every tenth point of continuous beams and girders or rigid frames .
show calculated cambers for structure preassembly in accordance with subsection num.fnum preassembly of field connections .
num transportation drawings if required by the contract provide transportation drawings for the engineers approval .
show support points tiedowns temporary stiffening trusses or beams and other details to support and brace the member .
provide calculation sheets showing the dead load and impact stresses from loading and transportation .
use impact stresses at least num percent of the dead load stress .
use a total load at least num percent of the dead load .
ship and store members upright .
e. fabrication num identification of steels assemblymark individual pieces and provide cutting instructions to the shop to maintain the identity of the original piece .
alternatively use material provided from stock identifiable by heat number and mill test report .
during fabrication but before assembling members write the material specification on the piece or use the identification color code in accordance with aashto m num with the exception of grade num w num w steel .
for steel not specified in aashto m num provide information on the color code in accordance with aashto m num .
steeldie stamp or firmly attach tags to mark the grade of steel pieces that will be fabricated and may lose paint color code markings .
the department does not require steeldie stamping and tags for grade numw numw steel .
if steelstamping place the impressions on the thicker tensionjoint member in transition joints .
num storage of material store structural material on supports above the ground .
keep material free of foreign material .
protect material from corrosion .
store highstrength fasteners in accordance with subsection num.f.num.d installation .
structural steel num num num plates a direction of rolling unless otherwise required by the contract ensure the primary rolling direction runs parallel to the principle tensile direction the compressive stresses or both .
provide and cut steel plates for main members and splice plates for flanges and main tension members .
bplate cut edges num edgeplaning remove sheared edges on plates thicker than ⅝ in num mm to a depth of ¼ in num mm beyond the original sheared edge or beyond reentrant cuts .
fillet reentrant cuts before cutting to a radius of at least ¾ in num mm .
num oxygencutting oxygencut structural steel in accordance with ansiaashtoaws dnum bridge welding code .
num visual inspection and repair of plate cut edges visually inspect and repair plate cut edges .
cut the edges in accordance with ansiaashtoaws dnum bridge welding code .
c bent plates num general bend unwelded loadcarrying rolledsteel plates .
if taking material from the stock plates ensure that the bend line runs num to the rolling direction .
alternatively bend coldbent ribs for orthotropicdeck bridges with bend lines in the rolling direction .
before bending round the corners of the plates to a radius of num in num mm .
num coldbending coldbend so the plate does not crack .
use the minimum bend radii in accordance with table num minimum bending radii .
measure the minimum bend to the metal concave face .
table num minimum bending radii plate thickness t in mm bending radius multiple of t ½ num num ½ num num num num½ num num½ num num num num½ num½ num num num½ num½ num num num num for steels with grade num num and grade numw numw allow for springback three times the springback for grade num num steel .
use a lower die span at least num times the plate thickness for breakpressforming .
make multiple hits .
num hotbending if using a radius shorter than the minimum radius for cold bending hotbend the plates at a maximum of num f num c except for num structural steel num grade numw numw grade num num and grade numw numw .
if grade num num and grade numw numw steel plates are heated to at least num f num c or if grade numw numw steel plates are heated to at least num f num c requench and temper in accordance with the producing mill standard practice .
if directed by the engineer test to verify restoration of contract required properties .
num stiffeners provide pairs of bearing stiffeners on each side of the web .
mill to bear at the bottom flange and tight fit at the top flange .
provide fillet welds num in num mm on both sides of the bearing stiffener at the web .
give a full penetration weld to the top and bottom flanges of the bearing stiffener .
ensure the engineer inspects the fit of the bearing stiffener to the flanges before covering with weld .
vertically install bearing stiffeners in the finished structure .
fabricate intermediate stiffeners not intended to support concentrated loads to provide a tight fit against flanges .
provide fillet welds ¼ in num mm in size at the web and compression flange of the stiffener .
on exterior girders place intermediate stiffeners on the outside of the web .
on interior girders place intermediate stiffeners on alternating sides of the web .
provide pairs of diaphragm stiffeners on each side of the web .
make diaphragm stiffeners to fit tightly against both flanges .
provide fillet welds ¼ in nummm in size at the web and top and bottom flanges of the stiffener .
clip the corners of stiffeners at flangeweb intersections .
if clip dimensions are not shown on the plans use the following dimensions along the flange num½ in num mm and along the web four to six times the web thickness and fromnum½ in to num in num mm to num mm .
num abutting joints mill or sawcut abutting joints in compression members of trusses and columns to produce a square joint and uniform bearing .
the department will allow a maximum ⅜ in num mm opening at other joints not required by the contract to be faced .
num facing of bearing surfaces finish bearing plates base plates and other bearing surfaces that will come in contact with each other or with concrete in accordance with table num .
table num ansi surface roughness values bearing surface surface roughness value µin µm steel slabs num num heavy plates in shoes to be welded num num milled ends of compression members milled or ground ends of stiffeners and fillers num num bridge rollers and rockets num num pins and pin holes num num sliding bearings num num structural steel num num machine slidingbearings with a surface roughness greater than ansi num num µm so the cut runs parallel to the direction of movement .
fabricate parts in bearing to provide a uniform even contact with the adjacent bearing surface .
ensure that the gap between bearing surfaces is no greater than num in num mm .
the department does not require machining of base and sole plates that are plane true and within the values of table num ansi surface roughness values except machine sliding surfaces of base plates .
avoid machine surfaces of fabricated members until completion of fabrication .
machine metal components after heat treatment .
num straightening material when heat straightening steels not shown on table num heat straightening temperatures do not allow the heated area to exceed num f num c. control the heat application with temperature indicating crayons liquids or bimetal thermometers .
if approved by the engineer straighten plates angles and builtup members without damaging the metal .
straighten distorted members mechanically or if approved by the engineer with localized heat .
ensure the temperatures remain within the values of table num .
table num heat straightening temperatures material distance from weld in mm maximum temperature f c num num num num grade numw numw num num num num num num num num grade num num or grade numw numw num num num num keep parts to be heatstraightened free of external forces and stresses .
num bolt holes a holes for highstrength bolts and unfinished bolts num general make bolt holes in accordance with table num bolt hole sizes per bolt size english and table num bolt hole sizes per bolt size metric for standard oversize short slotted and long slotted holes .
provide holes if required by the contract .
table num bolt hole sizes per bolt size english bolt hole size in circular diameter slotted width length bolt size a diameter in standard oversize short long ⅝ num num num ⅞ num num ¾ num num num num num num⅞ ⅞ num num num num⅛ num num num num num¼ num num num num½ num structural steel num table num bolt hole sizes per bolt size english bolt hole size in circular diameter slotted width length bolt size a diameter in standard oversize short long num⅛ d num d num d num d ⅜ d num num½d a bolt size is represented by d for calculating bolt hole sizes .
table num bolt hole sizes per bolt size metric bolt hole size mm circular diameter slotted width length bolt size diameter mm standard oversize short long num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num punch or drill bolt holes except as modified in accordance with subsection num.enuma holes for highstrength bolts and unfinished bolts .
fullsize punch material that forms the member parts that are no greater than five thicknesses of metal if the thickness of the material is less than ¾ in num mm for structural steel ⅝ in num mm for highstrength steel or ½ in num mm for quenched and tempered alloy steel unless subpunching and reaming in accordance with subsection num.enume preparation of field connections .
subdrill and ream or drill fullsize holes for material thicker than ¾ in num mm for structural steel ⅝ in num mm for highstrength steel or ½ in num mm for quenched and tempered alloy steel .
if required by the contract subdrill with thickness limitation or subpunch ¼ in num mm smaller .
after assembling ream num in num mm larger or drill fullsize .
num punched holes use a die diameter no greater than num in num mm of the punch diameter .
ream the holes to accommodate the bolt sizes .
clean cut the holes without torn or ragged edges .
the department will allow slightly a conical hole from punching .
num reamed or drilled holes ream or drill holes so they are cylindrical and perpendicular to the member .
direct the reamer by mechanical means .
if mechanical direction is not possible the department will allow other methods approved by the engineer .
remove burrs on the surface .
ream and drill with twist drills twist reamers or rotobroach cutters .
assemble and secure connecting parts that are being reamed or drilled and matchmarked before disassembling .
structural steel num num num accuracy of holes the engineer will accept holes with diameters that do not deviate more than num in num mm from the drill or reamer nominal diameter .
ensure the width of slotted holes produced by flame cutting or a combination of drilling or punching and flame cutting does not exceed the nominal width by greater than num in num mm .
grind flamecut surfaces until smooth .
baccuracy of hole group num accuracy before reaming punch fullsize subpunched or subdrilled holes after assembling but before reaming so a cylindrical pin ⅛ in num mm smaller in diameter than the nominal size of the punched hole may be placed perpendicular to the face of the member without drifting in at least num percent of the contiguous holes in the same plane .
the engineer will reject holes if a pin num in num mm smaller in diameter than the nominal size of the punched hole can not be inserted .
num accuracy after reaming the engineer considers the maximum allowed offset of num percent of adjacent holes through adjacent thicknesses of metal as num in num mm after reaming .
use steel templates with hardened steel bushings in holes measured from the connection centerlines as inscribed on the template .
use connection centerlines if locating templates from the milled or scribed ends of members .
c numericallycontrolled drilled field connections instead of drilling and reaming holes drill or punch fullsize bolt holes in unassembled pieces connections or both .
dholes for ribbed bolts turned bolts or other approved bearingtype bolts subpunch or subdrill holes for ribbed bolts or turned bolts num in num mm smaller than the bolt nominal diameter of the bolt .
when assembled ream or drill from the solid plate assembly .
provide finished holes with a driving fit .
e preparation of field connections subpunch or subdrill and ream when assembled or drill fullsize holes to a steel template in field connections and splices of main members of trusses arches continuous beam spans bents tower faces plate girders and rigid frames .
for holes for field splices of rolled beam stringers continuous over floor beams or cross frames drill fullsize unassembled to a steel template .
alternatively drill fullsize holes unassembled to a steel plate for floor beams or cross frames .
for floor beams and stringer field end connections subpunch and ream while assembled or drill fullsize to a steel template .
before reaming or drilling fullsize field connection holes through a steel template bolt the template in place .
use template duplicates of the reaming matching members or the opposite faces of a single member .
locate templates for connections on similar parts or members to duplicate the parts or members without matchmarking .
num structural steel num for connections instead of subpunching and reaming or subdrilling and reaming use holes drilled fullsize through thicknesses or material assembled in position .
num pins and rollers a general fabricate straight smooth pins and rollers in accordance with subsection num steel castings .
bboring pin holes bore smooth straight pin holes to the diameter required by the contract at num angles to the axis of the member and parallel with each other .
use a finishing cut to produce the final surface .
for pins num in num mm or smaller in diameter produce a pin hole diameter no greater than num in num mm larger than the pin .
for larger pins produce a pin hole diameter no greater than num in num mm .
ensure the outsidetooutside distance of end holes in tension members and the insidetoinside distance of end holes in compression members varies from the specifications no greater than num in num mm .
bore pin holes in builtup members after assembly .
c threads for bolts and pins provide threads on bolts and pins for structural steel construction in accordance with screw threads profile ansi bnum bnum m with a tolerance class numg for external threads and class numh for internal threads .
numannealing and stress relieving machine finish bore and straighten annealed or normalized members before heat treatment in accordance with to astm a num .
ensure points on the member do not differ by more than num f num c. the department will not allow annealing or normalizing of members of grade numw numw or grade numw numw steels .
stressrelieve as required by the contract .
record each furnace charge identify pieces in the charge and record the temperatures and schedule used .
provide recording pyrometers to determine the temperatures of materials in the furnace .
make records available for the engineers approval .
the maximum holding temperature for stress relieving grade numw numw and grade numw numw steels is num f num c and num f num c respectively .
stress parts built up by welding sections of plate together in accordance with subsection num of ansiaashtoaws dnum bridge welding code .
numcurved girders a general cut flanges of curved welded girders to the radii required by the contract .
alternatively curve flanges of curved welded girders with heat if the radii is in accordance with aashto standard specifications for highway bridges .
structural steel num num bheat curved rolled beams and girders num materials do not heat curved steels manufactured to a contract required minimum yield point greater than num ksi num mpa .
num type of heating curve beams and girders using continuous or vtype heating as approved by the engineer .
using the continuous method simultaneously heat a strip along the edge of the top and bottom flange .
ensure the strip obtains the contract required curvature .
using the vtype method heat the top and bottom flanges in truncated triangular or wedgeshaped areas with their base along the flange edge and spaced at regular intervals .
obtain the contract required curvature .
at the same rate heat along the top and bottom flange .
terminate the apex of the truncated triangular area before reaching the web juncture and the flange .
the department will not allow applying heat to the web .
if the curvature radius is at least num ft num m extend the apex of the truncated triangular heating pattern to the flange and web juncture .
if the curvature radius is less than num ft num m extend the apex of the truncated triangular heating pattern ⅛ of the flange width or num in num mm whichever is less .
construct the truncated triangular pattern with an angle from num to num with a base no greater than num in num mm .
the engineer may approve pattern variations .
after cooling locate the flange edges to be heated on the inside of the horizontal curve .
if the flanges have a thickness of at least num¼ in num mm concurrently heat both flange surfaces .
num temperature ensure the steel temperature does not exceed num f num c. artificially cool the girder after it has naturally cooled to num f num c. obtain the engineers approval of the artificial cooling method .
num position for heating heatcurve girders with webs in vertical or horizontal positions .
if webs vertically curved support the girder to prevent overturning .
if webs horizontally curved support the girder at the ends and intermediate points to obtain a uniform curve .
ensure that the flange bending stress does not exceed the contract required design stress .
if horizontally heating the girder position intermediate safety catch blocks at the girder midlength within num in num mm of the flanges .
num sequence of operations heatcurve the girder in the fabrication shop before painting .
heatcurve before or after welding the transverse intermediate stiffeners .
unless providing for girder shrinking attach connection plates and bearing stiffeners after heat curving .
if longitudinal stiffeners are required by the contract separately heatcurve or oxygencut the stiffeners and then weld them to the curved girder .
attach cover plates to rolled beams before curving if the total num structural steel num thickness of one flange and cover plate is less than num½ in num mm and the curvature radius is at least num ft num m. for other rolled beams with cover plates heatcurve the beams before attaching the cover plates .
before welding to the curved bottom separately heatcurve or oxygencut these cover plates .
num camber camber girders before heatcurving .
use heatcambering methods to camber rolled beams as approved by the engineer .
for plate girders cut the web to the contract required camber and allow for shrinkage .
apply heat to correct deviations as directed by the engineer .
num measurement of camber curves the engineer will measure horizontal curves and vertical camber after the completion of welding and heating and the flanges have cooled to a uniform temperature .
check horizontal curves with the girder in the vertical position .
numfullsize tests provide facilities material supervision and labor to make and record the fullsize tests of fabricated structural members required by the contract .
nummarking and shipping paint and mark members with an erection mark shown on the working drawings .
at the engineers request provide copies of material orders shipping statements and erection drawings showing the weight of the individual members .
mark the weight of members over num lb num kg on the material orders shipping statements and erection drawings .
ship fastener components from each rotationalcapacity lot in the same container .
if each nut and washer size has one production lot number ship them in separate containers .
ship pins small parts and packages of bolts nuts and washers in boxes crates kegs or barrels with a gross weight per package no greater than num lb num kg .
mark a list and description of the contained materials on the outside of each shipping container .
f. assembly num bolting clean surfaces of metal before assembling .
pin and draw together assembled member parts before drilling reaming or bolting .
disassemble pieces to remove burrs and shavings .
ensure members do not contain deformaties .
during assembly drift position the parts without enlarging the holes or distorting the metal .
place a washer that turns under the bolted assembly element during installation .
num welded connection make surfaces and edges uniform clean and smooth .
prepare edges in accordance with ansiaashtoaws dnum bridge welding code .
structural steel num num num preassembly of field connections a general preassemble main member field connections of trusses arches continuous beams plate girders bents towers and rigid frames before erecting to verify the geometry of the completed structure or unit and to verify or prepare field splices .
submit preassembly details for the engineers approval .
use preassembly methods and details as shown on the erection drawings and camber diagrams .
preassemble at least three contiguous panels or sections adjusted for line and camber .
for successive assemblies include at least one panel or section of the previous assembly .
if necessary reposition and pin assemblies for alignment .
add at least two sections or panels to the advancing end .
for structures longer than num ft num m make each assembly at least num ft num m long regardless of the length of individual continuous panels or sections .
begin assembly from a structure location in one or both directions as required by the contract .
bbolted connections prepare bolted connection holes in accordance with subsection num.enum bolt holes .
if applicable assemble major components with milled ends of compression members in full bearing then ream subsized holes to the size required by the contract .
c check assemblynumerically controlled drilling if using numerically controlled drilling or punching make a check assembly for each major structural type on the project .
fabricate the check assembly at least three contiguous shop sections .
for a truss fabricate the check assembly of members associated with at least three contiguous chord lengths .
base check assemblies on considerations such as the order of erection joints in bearings and special complex points .
with the exception of check assemblies the department does not require shop assemblies .
recheck inaccurate check assemblies at no additional cost to the department .
obtain engineer approval for each assembly before reaming or dismantling numerically controlled drilled check assembly .
dfield welded connections the department will not allow the use of field welded connections unless required by the contract .
verify the fit of members with the segment preassembled in accordance with subsection num.fnuma general .
num matchmarking provide a diagram of matchmarked connecting parts preassembled in the shop to ensure they fit in the field .
num connections using unfinished or turned bolts a general use unfinished turned or ribbed bolts as required by the contract in accordance with astm a num property class num num ksi num mpa tensile strength .
use bolts with single selflocking nuts or double nuts .
use beveled washers where bearing faces have a slope of at least num with respect to a plane num structural steel num normal to the bolt axis .
refer to subsection num.f.num connections using highstrength bolts for highstrength bolted connections .
bturned bolts provide turned bolts with a body surface ansi roughness no greater than num in num mm .
provide hexheaded bolts and nuts of the contract required nominal size .
ream holes for turned bolts .
provide bolts for a light driving fit .
keep bolt threads outside of the holes .
provide a washer under the nut .
num connections using highstrength bolts a general use direct tension indicators dti on connections using highstrength bolts .
install bolts in holes in accordance with subsection num.enum bolt holes .
bbolted parts use steel material within the grip of the bolt with no compressible material .
fabricate bolted steel parts to fit together after tightening the bolts .
limit the maximum slope of the surfaces of parts in contact with the bolt head or nut to num with respect to a plane normal to the bolt axis .
c surface conditions in painted joints paint the faying surfaces with inorganic zinc primer of the inorganic zincepoxyurethane izeu paint system in accordance with subsection num requirements for paint systems .
before blastcleaning and painting remove burrs that prevent seating in the snugtight condition .
during assembly clean joint surfaces .
repair damage that would prevent solid seating of the connected parts in the snugtight condition .
if the contract requires a paint system other than izeu paint the faying surfaces using a class b primer with a minimum slip coefficient of num tested in accordance with the research council on structural connections test method to determine the slip coefficient for coatings used in bolted joints .
otherwise treat the joint as a nonpainted joint .
assemble the painted joints after the primer cured for the minimum time used in the qualifying test .
in nonpainted joints do not paint areas closer than one bolt diameter but at least num in num mm from the edge of holes and bolt pattern areas .
during assembly clean joint surfaces of foreign material and scale except tight mill scale .
remove burrs that prevent connected parts from seating in the snugtight condition .
hotdipgalvanize faying surfaces in accordance with aashto m num and rough with a hand wire brush .
dinstallation num general install fasteners of the same lot number together .
protect fasteners from dirt and moisture .
from protected storage remove the number of fasteners that will be installed and tightened during a work shift .
return unused structural steel num num fasteners to protected storage .
do not clean lubricant from fasteners .
before installation clean relubricate and test slipcritical connection fasteners for rotational capacity .
lubricate galvanized nuts with a lubricant containing a visible dye .
provide plain bolts oily to the touch when delivered and installed .
remove lubricant before painting .
provide a skidmorewilhelm calibrator or an approved bolttension measuring device at job sites that require the installation and tightening of hightension strength fasteners .
use the tensionmeasuring device for the rotationalcapacity test and to confirm the requirements of table num minimum required bolt tension english table num minimum required bolt tension metric and the wrench calibration .
ensure the bolting crew understands the tightening method .
for short grip bolts use dti with solid plates to test as follows check the dti with a longer grip bolt in the skidmorewilhelm calibrator .
ensure the frequency of confirmation testing number of tests to be performed and test procedure are in accordance with subsection num.fnumdnum turn of nut tightening and subsection num.fnumdnum direct tension indicator tightening .
at least annually confirm the accuracy of the tension measuring device by a department approved testing agency .
install and tighten fasteners together with contract required washers at specified locations in accordance with subsection num.fnumdnum washers and in aligned holes .
tighten to at least the minimum tension specified in table num and table num .
use the direct tension indicator method where required by the contract .
table num minimum required bolt tension english a bolt size in aashto m num and astm a numm lbf aashto m num and astm a numm lbf ⅝ num num ¾ num num ⅞ num num num num num num⅛ num num num¼ num num a equal to num percent of the contract required minimum tesile strength of bolts rounded to the nearest num lb .
num structural steel num table num minimum required bolt tension metric a bolt size mm aashto m num and astm a numm kn aashto m num and astm a numm kn num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num a equal to num percent of the contract required minimum tesile strength of bolts rounded to the nearest num kn .
if using impact wrenches provide capacity and air to tighten each bolt in num seconds .
the department will not allow reusuing aashto m num and aashto m num fasteners .
the engineer will not consider touchingup or retightening previously tightened bolts that were loosened by the tightening of adjacent bolts as reuse provided the snuggingup continues from the initial position and does not require greater rotation than specified by table num .
table num a nut rotation for snugtight condition geometry of outer faces of bolted parts b bolt length measured from head underside to bolt end both faces normal to bolt axis one face normal to bolt axis other face sloped no more than num bevel washers not used both faces normal to bolt axis other face sloped no more than num bevel washers not used num diameters ⅓ turn ½ turn ⅔ turn num num diameter ½ turn ⅔ turn num turn num num diameters c ⅔ turn num turn num turn a applicable to connections where material within the grip of the bolt is steel .
b nut rotation is relative to bolt regardless of the element being turned .
the tolerance is a num range for bolts installed by ½ turn or less .
the tolerance is a num range for bolts installed by ⅔ turn or more .
c for bolt lengths greater than num diameters determine the required rotation by tests in a tension device simulating the actual conditions .
snugtightness exists if the plies of the joint are in firm contact .
use a few impacts of an impact wrench or a full effect of a worker using an ordinary spud wrench to attain snug tightness .
install the bolts in the connection holes and snugtighten them from the most rigid part of the connection to the free edges .
snugtighten the bolts and ensure the connection fully compacts .
num rotationalcapacity tests subject black and galvanized highstrength fasteners to jobsite rotationalcapacity tests in accordance with aashto m num and the following structural steel num num include washers as part of the test .
test each combination of bolt production lot nut lot and washer lot as an assembly .
if washers are required by the contract include them in the lot identification .
assign a rotationalcapacity lot number to each combination of lots tested .
test at least two assemblies per rotationalcapacity lot .
assemble and test bolt nut and washer assemblies in a skidmorewilhelm calibrator or approved device .
for bolts too short to test in a skidmorewilhelm calibrator test the assembly in a steel joint .
calculate the maximum torque requirement using a pvalue equal to the turn test tension .
after snugtightening tighten the fastener twice the number of turns specified in table num nut rotation for snugtight conditions in a skidmorewilhelm calibrator or other department approved device .
during this test ensure that the maximum recorded tension is equal to or greater than the turn test tension .
after exceeding the turn test tension of num times the fastener tension record one reading of tension and torque .
ensure the measured torque at a tension p follows the equation num p d where measured torque footpounds newton meter p measured bolt tension pounds kilonewtons and d bolt diameter feet millimeters .
num washers where the outer face of the bolted parts has a slope greater than num use a hardened beveled washer to compensate for the lack of parallelism .
use hardened square or rectangular beveled washers for american standard beams and channels in accordance with aashto m num .
where necessary clip washers at least ⅞ of the bolt diameter from the center of the washer on one side .
for hardened washers not contract required for connections use aashto m num and aashto m num bolts except as follows use hardened washers under the head and the nut if installing aashto m num bolts in material with a contract required yield point less than num ksi num mpa use a hardened washer in accordance with aashto m num if installing aashto m num bolts or aashto m num bolts num in num mm or smaller in diameter in oversize or shortslotted holes in an outer ply num structural steel num use hardened washers in accordance with aashto m num under the head and the nut .
ensure the combined thickness of hardened washers does not exceed num in num mm if installing aashto m num bolts or aashto m num bolts with a diameter of num in num mm or smaller in a longslotted hole in an outer ply and is structural grade material needing hardening provide a plate washer or continuous bar at least num in num mm thick to cover the slot .
ensure the combined thickness of hardened washers does not exceed num in num mm if using aashto m num bolts greater than num in num mm in diameter in longslotted holes in external plies use a single hardened washer in accordance with aashto m num at least num in num mm thick and use alternative design fasteners in accordance with subection num highstrength fasteners with a bearing circle on the head or nut with a diameter at least that of hardened washers in accordance with aashto m num without washers .
num turnofnut tightening if turnofnut tightening is specified use hardened washers in accordance with subsection num.fnumdnum washers .
at the start of the work test nut tightening with a device that indicates bolt tension .
provide samples of at least three boltandnut assemblies of each diameter length and grade .
demonstrate that the method for estimating the snugtightness and controlling the turns develops a tension at least num percent greater than the tension specified in table num minimum required bolt tension english and table num minimum required bolt tension metric .
retest if directed by the engineer .
after snugtightening tighten bolts in accordance with table num and table num .
ensure the fastener part not turned by the wrench does not rotate .
tighten from the most rigid part to the free edges of the joint .
num installation of alternative design bolts if fasteners designed to indicate the bolt tension or to automatically provide the tension specified in table num minimum required bolt tension english table num minimum required bolt tension metric and subsection num highstrength fasteners are to be installed test a sample at least three boltandnut assemblies of each diameter length and grade .
if flathardened washers are required by the contract include them in the test assembly .
arrange the washers in the connections to be tensioned .
test calibration to demonstrate that each bolt tenses at least num percent greater than the tension specified in table num and table num .
follow the manufacturers installation procedure .
retest if directed by the engineer .
if using alternative design fasteners to control or indicate bolt tension of the fasteners install bolts in connection holes and tighten to bring plies of the joint into firm contact without yielding .
do not fracture the control or indicator .
to minimize relaxation of previously tightened fasteners continue to tighten from the most rigid part of the connection to the free edges .
structural steel num num tensioning may require more than one cycle of partial tightening before final twistoff of the control or indicator of individual fasteners .
num direct tension indicator tightening if using dtis in accordance with subsection num highstrength fasteners with highstrength bolts to indicate bolt tension test assemblies in accordance with subsection num.fnumdnum verification and install them in accordance with subsection num.fnumdnum installation .
install dtis with the protrusions against the head of the bolt and turn the nut to tighten the fastener .
prevent the element against the dti from turning during installation and final tensioning .
during verification do not exceed the maximum number of refusals after snugging allowed by the contract .
num verification perform verification testing in a calibrated bolt tensionmeasuring device .
use a flat insert instead of the bolt head holding the insert .
perform three verification tests for each combination of fastener rotationalcapacity lot dti lot and dti position relative to the turned element .
do not turn the element against the dti .
test in two stages .
install the bolt nut and dti assembly so from three threads to five threads are between the bearing face of the nut and the bolt head .
tighten the fastener first in accordance with the load specified in table num direct tension indicator requirements under verification tension for the grade and diameter of the fastener .
if using an impact wrench tighten to slightly below the dtispecified load and then use a manual wrench to tighten to the contract required tension .
record the number of refusals of a num in num mm tapered feeler gauge in the spaces between the protrusions .
ensure the maximum number of refusals for coated dtis does not exceed one less than the spaces on the dti .
the engineer will reject the dti if the number of refusals exceeds the values in table num or if spaces refuse the gauge .
table num direct tension indicator requirements english a verification testing kip maximum verification refusals dti spaces minimum installation refusals bolt size diameter in m num a num m num a num m num a num m num a num m num a num m num a num m num a num m num a num ⅝ num num num num num num num num ¾ num num num num num num num num ⅞ num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num⅛ num num num num num num num num num¼ num num num num num num num num a the test methods refer to aashto m num astm a num aashto m num and astm a num .
num structural steel num table num direct tension indicator requirements metric a verification testing kn maximum verification refusals dti spaces minimum installation refusals bolt size diameter mm m num a num m num a num m num a num m num a num m num a num m num a num m num a num m num a num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num a the test methods refer to aashto m num astm a num aashto m num and astm a num .
after recording the number of refusals tighten the fastener until the num in num mm feeler gauge does not fit in spaces and at least one gap remains .
record the load at this condition and remove the fastener from the tensionmeasurer .
reject the dti lot if the nut can not be handreassembled for the thread length of the bolt excluding thread runout unless the recorded load is less than num percent of the average load measured in the rotationalcapacity test of the fastener lot as specified in subsection num.fnumdnum rotationalcapacity tests .
if the bolt is too short to test in the calibration device test the dti on a long bolt in a calibrator in accordance with subsection num.fnumdnum direct tension indicator tightening .
determine the number of refusals at the verification tension listed in table num direct tension indicator requirements english and table num direct tension indicator requirements metric .
test another dti from the same lot with a short bolt in a work hole .
tighten the fastener assembly until the num in num mm feeler gauge does not fit in spaces and at least one gap remains .
disassemble the fastener remove it from the hole and reassemble it by hand for the thread length of the bolt excluding thread runout .
reject the dti lot if the nut can not be run down this thread length .
num installation install the fastener using dtis in two stages .
ensure the fastener element does not rotate against the dti .
snug the connection with bolts installed in the connection holes and tighten them to bring the plies of the connection into firm contact .
if the number of spaces in which a num in num mm feeler gauge is refused exceeds those listed under maximum verification refusals in table num direct tension indicator requirements english and table num direct tension indicator requirements metric replace the assembly and resnug .
structural steel num num tighten the connection until the number of refusals of the num in num mm feeler gauge is equal to or greater than the number listed under minimum installation refusals in table num and table num .
to minimize relaxation of previously tightened fasteners tighten fasteners from the most rigid part of the connection to the free edges .
if no gap remains replace the assembly .
num inspection within num hr of bolt tightening inspect the tightened bolts in the presence of the engineer .
use an inspection torque wrench or alternative fasteners or dtis .
individually place three bolts of the same grade size and condition as those under inspection in a device calibrated to measure bolt tension .
calibrate them at least once per inspection day .
if using washers on the structure use one washer under the part turned in tightening each bolt .
if not using washers use the same specification material that abuts the part turned in the tensionmeasurer .
in the calibrated device tighten bolts to the contract required tension .
apply the inspecting wrench to the tightened bolt to determine the torque required to turn the nut or head num num in num mm at a num in num mm radius in the tightening direction .
use the average of the torque required for three bolts as the jobinspection torque .
in each connection randomly select at least two tightened bolts .
apply the jobinspection torque to selected bolts .
hold the bolts with the inspecting wrench in the tightening direction .
if this torque does not turn bolt heads or nuts the bolts are properly tightened .
if the torque turns at least one bolt head or nut apply the jobinspection torque to bolts .
tighten and reinspect bolts with heads or nuts that turn or retighten bolts and resubmit for inspection .
num welding ensure that welding welder qualifications prequalification of weld details and inspection of welds are in accordance with ansiaashtoaws dnum bridge welding code .
the department will not allow welding or tacking of brackets clips shipping devices and other material to members unless otherwise shown by the shop drawings .
g. erection num general provide tools machinery and equipment to erect the structure .
ensure falsework and forms are in accordance with section num forms falsework and temporary works .
num handling and storing material place material stored at the job site above the ground on skids .
keep material clean and drained .
place and shore girders and beams upright .
support long num structural steel num members such as columns and chords on skids placed close enough together to prevent deflection .
if the contract requires erection only check the material received against shipping lists and promptly report shortages or injuries to the engineer in writing .
after receiving material assume responsibility for damaged or lost material .
num bearings and anchorages provide and install bridge bearings and anchors in accordance with section num bearing assemblies .
if placing the steel superstructure on a substructure verify the construction of concrete pedestals as shown on the plans before ordering material .
if actual centerline bearing of the assembly does not line up horizontally within num in num mm of the vertical bearing stiffener plates weld additional vertical bearing stiffeners to the beam or girder .
num erection procedures a conformance to drawings erect as the contract requires and in accordance with erection drawings .
revise drawings and verify stresses and geometry for deviations from the erection procedure .
berection stresses allow for erection stresses due to unapproved methods of erection or equipment that will remain in the finished structure as lockedin stresses .
provide material to keep stresses within specified limits .
during erection provide temporary bracing or stiffening devices to accommodate handling stresses in individual members or segments of the structure .
c maintaining alignment and camber during erection support segments of the structure to align and camber in the completed structure .
install cross frames and diagonal bracing for stability and correct geometry .
provide temporary bracing to ensure structure alignment and camber .
num field assembly before assembling in accordance with erection drawings clean bearing surfaces and permanent contact surfaces .
do not hammer or damage the members .
assemble splices and field connections with at least two cylindrical erection pins per part .
ensure there are at least eight cylindrical erection driftpins per splice or connection .
install at least four driftpins in the web two driftpins in the top flange and two driftpins in the bottom flange .
place the pins in the corner holes of the splice plates .
where field bolted diaphragms are required by the contract erect at least every other diaphragm at the time the beams are set in place with bolts or driftpins placed in half of the connection holes .
where field welded diaphragms are required by the contract erect diaphragms as the beams are set in place by a ¾ inch num mm makeup bolt at each connection point .
structural steel num num install additional cylindrical driftpins to align the parts .
fill the remaining holes with bolts and tighten them from the most rigid part of the connection to the free edges .
replace cylindrical driftpins with tightened bolts .
after tightening the bolts release temporary erection supports at a splice or connection .
indicate special assembly and support situations on the erection and falsework drawings .
fittingup bolts may be the same highstrength bolts used in the installation .
if other fittingup bolts are required by the contract use the same nominal diameter as the highstrength bolts .
use cylindrical driftpins num in num mm larger than the bolts .
num pin connection use pilot and driving nuts to drive pins at no additional cost to the department .
drive the pins to fully bear members .
screw pin nuts tight and burr the threads at the face of the nut with a pointed tool .
num misfit correct minor misfits if approved by the engineer .
correct errors reaming cutting chipping or other misfits at no additional cost to the department .
the engineer will reject errors in the shop fabrication or deformation from handling and transport .
h. expansion joints install expansion joints in accordance with section num bridge decks approaches rails and parapets .
submit complete working drawings for fabrication and installation of expansion joints .
include the joint manufacturers instructions for installation .
show the joint opening dimension for an ambient temperature of num f num c and adjustments to that dimension due to temperature variations .
conform expansion joints to concrete floor sections matching cross slopes and break points .
assemble expansion joints in the shop check for fit and match mark for shipment .
for sealed expansion joints fabricate the steel receptors to be continuous for the length of the joint .
minimize the number of splices in the steel receptor .
to splice use a partial penetration weld ground smooth .
the department will not allow welding in the areas in contact with the neoprene .
continuously provide and install a neoprene gland the length of the joint .
where the contract requires joints to be mitered for skew of at least num splice the neoprene by vulcanizing or other engineer approved method .
ensure spliced neoprene has equal strength and durability to unspliced neoprene .
make splices watertight .
num method of measurement the engineer will calculate weight on the basis of the net finished dimensions of the parts required by the contract .
the engineer will measure approved substituted sections larger than those required by the contract by the weight of the original sections .
the engineer will not deduct for cuts clips copes bolt holes pin holes or weld joint preparation in the measurement calculations .
num structural steel num the department will not consider and pay for changes in quantities resulting from alternative details proposed by the contractor in the drawings as approved by the engineer .
table num steel and iron density unit weights unit density lbft³ kgm³ steel rolled or cast num num cast iron num num malleable iron num num wrought iron num num the engineer will measure the weight of rolled shapes on the basis of their nominal weight per foot as required by the contract .
for unspecified weight refer to aashto m num .
the engineer will measure the weight of plates on the basis of the nominal weight for their width and thickness as required by the contract with no allowance for overruns .
the engineer will measure the weight of castings from the dimensions shown on the shop drawings deducting for open holes and adding num percent allowance for fillets and overruns .
the engineer will include steel and iron castings steel or cast iron pipe for drains and minor items in the weight .
for castings or small complex parts the engineer will subsitute scale weight for calculated weight .
the engineer will include the weight of heads nuts single washers dtis and threaded stickthrough of high tensile strength bolts in accordance with table num and table num .
table num bolt sizes and weights english bolt size in weight per num bolts lb ⅝ num ¾ num ⅞ num num num num⅛ num num¼ num table num bolt sizes and weights metric bolt size mm weight per num bolts kg num num num num num num num num num num num num num num the engineer will measure the weight of the following as structural steel anchor bolt assemblies anchor plates not embedded in concrete and diaphragm bolt assemblies for diaphragms between prestressed concrete girders .
the engineer will calculate the weight of threaded bars on the basis of smooth bar of the diameter required by the contract .
bearing assemblies num num the engineer will determine the weight of nuts and washers from the aisc reference manual .
the engineer will not include the weight of additional material required under subsection num.gnumb erection stresses to accommodate erection stresses or the weight of additional bearing stiffeners required under subsection num.gnum bearings and anchorages .
the engineer will measure metal expansion joints in accordance with section num bridge decks approaches rails and parapets .
num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit a structural steel pound kilogram b structural steel a num grade hps numw numw pound kilogram section num bearing assemblies num description this work consists of providing and installing bearing assemblies and elastomeric bearing pads .
num materials a .
general provide materials in accordance with the following section and subsections material section or subsection welding num stainless steel for bridge bearing assemblies num elastomeric bearing pad num b .
steel laminates provide steel laminates in accordance with aashto m num grade num or astm a num grade num .
c. stainless steel provide stainless steel in accordance with subsection num stainless steel for bridge bearing assemblies for bearing plates and bearing assemblies including anchor bolts nuts washers contact plates and contact angles .
num bearing assemblies num num equipment vacant num construction methods a .
shop drawings submit drawings for the bearing assemblies and pads in accordance with subsection num plans and working drawings and subsection num elastomeric bearing pads .
b .
fabrication assemble and check the geometry of bearing assemblies in the shop .
c. packaging handling and storage before shipping mark the top of the bearing components and their orientation in the structure .
protectively package bearings .
dismantle bearing assemblies for inspection and installation .
during storage protect bearing devices and components at the work site from damage .
d. installation provide bearing surfaces on members and bridge seats with a smooth uniform surface .
construct castinplace bearing surfaces in accordance with subsection num.k girder bearing surfaces .
set anchor bolts before placing concrete or install them in accordance with subsection num.dnum doweling into existing concrete .
leave a ⅛ in num mm gap between the top of the washers and the bottom of the nut on fixed and expansion bearing assemblies .
if the plan requires two nuts on each anchor bolt tighten the top nut sufficiently against the lower nut to lock them together as a unit .
clean the bearing assemblies of deleterious materials .
install the bearings at the positions and dimensions shown on plans .
center anchor bolts in the slotted holes on expansion bearing plates .
set elastomeric bearing pads for bearing assemblies on level concrete without bedding material .
field weld bearing plates to bottom flanges or embedded sole plates as the contract requires .
weld in accordance with subsection num welding .
weld the bearings after inspection .
do not expose the elastomer or bond to temperatures greater than num f num c. if bearing plates are less than num½ in num mm thick provide temperature measurements of the steel adjacent to the elastomer to ensure the steel does not exceed the temperature limitations .
replace the elastomeric bearing pads if the temperature exceeds num f num c. if the centerline of the bearing does not horizontally line up within num in num mmof the vertical bearing stiffener weld additional bearing stiffeners to the steel beam or girder .
e. elastomeric bearing pads if the contract requires install elastomeric bearing pads between the top of the beam and the bottom of the bridge deck .
concrete culverts num num num method of measurement the department will measure the number of completed and accepted fixed bearing assemblies expansion bearing assemblies and elastomeric bearing pads listed in the bid schedule that are completed and accepted for payment .
num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit a fixed bearing assemblies each b expansion bearing assemblies each c elastomeric bearing pads each the department considers the cost of anchor bolts bearing plates contact plates nuts contact angles nuts plain or laminated elastomeric bearing pads and welding to be included in the contract unit price for fixed bearing assemblies and expansion bearing assemblies .
section num concrete culverts num description this work consists of constructing concrete culverts .
num materials provide materials in accordance with the following section and subsections material section or subsection structural concrete class aa num reinforcing steel for structures num joint materials num.b provide precast concrete box sections for culverts in accordance with aashto m num or aashto m num .
num equipment vacant num construction methods a .
general complete construction in accordance with section num excavation and backfill for structures section num forms falsework and temporary works section num structural concrete and section num reinforcing steel for structures .
the department will allow precast concrete box culverts instead of castinplace concrete box culverts if approved by the engineer or allowed by the contract .
the department will not allow precast structures for bridge class structures unless otherwise shown on the plans .
num concrete culverts num construct curtain walls as shown on the plans to prevent undermining .
if the barrel length of castinplace culverts is longer than num ft num m install a construction joint in the culvert .
the department will allow construction joints installed in culverts from num ft to num ft num m to num m unless otherwise required by the contract .
construct the joint in accordance with subsection num.d construction joints .
extend longitudinal reinforcing steel through the joint at least num in num m and lap it num in num m with the longitudinal reinforcing steel in the adjoining section .
b .
finish apply a class numrubbed finish to the exposed wings curbs rails and retaining walls in accordance with subsection num.gnum class num rubbed finish .
c. bedding provide bedding for precast concrete box culverts at least num in num mm thick below the precast box sections .
provide bedding material that meets the requirements for class b bedding in accordance with subsection num.c bedding .
the department will include bedding and necessary excavation for the bedding in the price bid for the structure .
d. laying precast sections place precast concrete box sections after the engineer approves the bedding material condition .
slowly lower and place the precast section into final position .
use hoisting equipment that will not damage the section or the bedding material .
clean the inside before lowering the sections into place .
replace damaged sections at no additional cost to the department .
begin placing the precast sections at the downstream end of the culvert .
join precast sections in accordance with subsection num.h joining pipe conduit .
place the sections to the line and grade shown on the plans .
after the engineers approval of the placement of the precast culvert prevent displacement or damage to the sections when backfilling .
e. box culvert end sections for concrete box culverts cast end sections in place .
end sections include wingwalls curbs end of barrels curtain walls and aprons .
if using precast sections in skewed structures build wings in the same skewed relationship to the culvert walls as shown on the plans for the castinplace culvert .
build curbs and curtain walls perpendicular to the barrels of precast sections for skews between num and num .
f. working drawings for precast box sections before constructing precast concrete box culverts provide the engineer with complete sealed working drawings of the proposed construction in accordance with subsection num plans and working drawings .
show details of reinforcing steel and concrete dimensions .
concrete culverts num num concrete culverts g. extension of existing castinplace culvert if the contract requires extension of an existing castinplace culvert perform work as follows remove the existing wing walls curbs handrails aprons and other structures as shown on the plans .
repair culvert areas damaged during removal .
provide dowel bars of the same diameter and grade as the longitudinal reinforcing steel in the new adjoining section of culvert .
lap dowel bars num in num mm with each longitudinal bar in the new section in accordance with subsection num.dnum doweling into existing concrete .
num method of measurement vacant num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit removal of culvert end each the department will pay for precast concrete box culverts using the contract unit prices for the relevant pay items and quantities as determined by field measurements for castinplace concrete box culverts .
the department will pay for quantities of excavation and backfill reinforcing steel and dowel bars and concrete used in the construction of concrete culverts in accordance with section num excavation and backfill for structures section num reinforcing steel for structures and section num structural concrete respectively .
num structural concrete num section num structural concrete num description this work consists of providing placing finishing and curing concrete in bridges culverts and other structures .
num materials provide materials in accordance with the following sections and subsection material section or subsection portland cement concrete num supplementary cementitious materials num waterstops num concrete surface finish for structures num num equipment vacant num construction methods a .
general handle and measure materials batching and mixing in accordance with subsection num.c mixing concrete subsection num.d light and weather limitations and subsection num.e setting forms unless otherwise required by the contract .
use falsework and forms in accordance with section num forms falsework and temporary works .
support concrete until it reaches the contract required strength .
if approved by the engineer use maturity meters for form removal or for opening roadways .
submit a plan for using maturity meters at no additional cost to the department .
perform related work for concrete structures in accordance with section num forms falsework and temporary works section num prestressed concrete bridge members section num bridge decks approaches rails and parapets section num reinforcing steel for structures and section num posttensioning .
b .
protection of concrete from environmental conditions num general protect the concrete from environmental damage during placement and curing .
replace or repair frozen or damaged concrete .
place concrete with a temperature from num f to num f num c to num c. measure the concrete temperature immediately before placement .
place the concrete against forms the ground or reinforcement with a temperature from num f to num f num c to num c. keep at least two thermometers on the project that can record the maximum and minimum temperatures within num f num c. install the thermometers and submit the temperature data as directed by the engineer .
report readings and reset thermometers daily .
structural concrete num num num rain protection the department will not allow the placement of concrete during rain .
if rain occurs protect the surface of the concrete .
num hot weather protection use a water spray to cool surfaces hotter than num f num c that come in contact with poured concrete .
maintain the contract required concrete temperature using a combination of the following methods shade the material storage areas and the production equipment cool the aggregates by sprinkling them with water in accordance with subsection num water cool the aggregates or water by refrigeration or replace the mix water with ice ensuring it melts during mixing and inject liquid nitrogen .
num cold weather protection the department defines cold weather as the time during the concrete placement or curing period that the ambient temperature drops below num f num c. to determine ambient temperature measure the air temperature in the shade num ft num m above the ground .
before placing concrete in cold weather ensure the availability of protection material and equipment .
remove snow ice and frost from the surfaces coming in contact with the concrete .
ensure the temperatures of the surfaces that come into contact with fresh concrete are at least num f num c. if using heaters place the heaters and direct ducts in a manner that prevents fire hazards and excessive localized drying .
vent exhaust flue gases from combustion heating units to the outside of enclosures .
apply and withdraw the heat gradually and uniformly so the concrete surface does not heat to more than num f num c before setting .
when removing protection prevent the temperature from varying by more than num f num c in num hr .
during concrete mixing prevent the cement from coming into contact with aggregates hotter than num f num c. the department will not allow heating aggregates with a direct flame or on sheet metal over a fire .
do not use direct steam to heat fine aggregate .
the department will not allow salts to prevent freezing .
place concrete with a uniform temperature and free of frost lumps .
during cold weather protect the concrete for at least num calendar days so the surface temperature does not drop below num f num c. provide and install recording thermometers maturity meters or other recording temperature measuring devices to verify that the concrete is protected .
extend the protection period to num days if fly ash slag and silica fume are used in the concrete .
num structural concrete num c. handling and placing concrete num general place and consolidate concrete preventing mix segregation and producing a dense homogeneous concrete free of voids and rock pockets .
prevent displacement of reinforcing steel and other embedded materials in the concrete .
place and consolidate concrete before initial set .
place the concrete in accordance with the time limits in table num .
begin measuring time when adding the cement to the mix .
do not retemper concrete or add airentraining admixtures after initial batching .
if submitted as part of the mix design add high range waterreducing admixtures at the project site in accordance with section num portland cement concrete .
table num time limits for completion of concrete placementconsolidation cement type time limit hr type i or ii num type i or ii with retarding admixture num type iii num type iii with retarding admixture num place the concrete after the engineer approves the forms materials and footing foundation material .
remove mortar debris and foreign material from the forms and reinforcing steel .
moisten the forms and subgrade before placing the concrete against them .
remove temporary form spreaders when the concrete placement precludes their need .
place concrete uninterrupted between construction or expansion joints .
place and consolidate fresh concrete against previously placed concrete before initial set .
place successive batches within num min of the preceding batch .
increase this period to num min if the ambient temperature falls below num f num c. if placement is delayed and the initial set occurs make an emergency construction joint in accordance with subsection num.d construction joints .
during and after concrete placement do not break the bond with reinforcing steel or damage the concrete .
keep foot traffic off the fresh concrete .
the department will not allow placing support platforms on reinforcing steel .
after the concrete sets do not apply force to reinforcing steel and forms projecting from the concrete until the concrete is strong enough to resist damage .
num sequence of placement release the forms and falsework in accordance with subsection num.c removal of forms and falsework .
a substructures to determine if bents piers or abutments meet strength requirements to support loads test a concrete sample of the same type and cured under the same conditions .
use the cylinder test to ensure the concrete reaches at least num percent of its numday compressive strength or ages at least num days .
if the ambient temperature falls below num ºf num ºc allow the concrete to age at least num days before loading the concrete .
structural concrete num num bvertical members for vertical members at least num ft num m high allow the concrete to set for num hr before placing concrete for integral horizontal members .
for vertical members less than num ft num m high allow the concrete to consolidate for at least num min .
if mounting friction collars or falsework brackets place concrete for horizontal members after the vertical member is in place at least num days or attains the numday strength .
c superstructures remove substructure forms before placing concrete in the superstructure to ensure the substructure can support the superstructure .
place concrete in the superstructure when the substructure attains the contract required strength .
place concrete for castinplace tbeams or pan girders in one to two operations .
if the section exceeds num ft num m deep place in two operations .
wait at least num calendar days after stem placement before placing the top deck slab concrete .
place concrete for box girders in two to three operations consisting of the bottom slab girder webs the top slab or as required by the contract .
place the bottom slab first .
place the top slab at least num calendar days after placement of the girder webs .
darches place concrete in arch rings to uniformly load the centering .
e box culverts allow the box culvert base slab to set num hr before placing the culvert walls .
for walls shorter than num ft num m place the walls and top slab in one operation .
for walls higher than num ft num m place the walls and top slab in accordance with subsection num.cnumb vertical members .
f precast elements place and consolidate concrete to prevent shrinkage cracks .
num placing methods a general place concrete close to its final position .
the department will not allow the use of vibrators to move a mass of fresh concrete .
place concrete in horizontal layers less than num in num m thick .
ensure the vibrators consolidate and merge new layers with the previous layer .
when placing concrete do not exceed the design loading for forms .
drop unconfined concrete from a height of less than num ft num m. confine concrete using a tube fitted with a hopper head or other device that prevents mix segregation and mortar spattering .
bequipment provide equipment that will not damage the concrete from vibration or cause mix segregation or mortar loss .
provide equipment with no aluminum parts that come in contact with the concrete .
remove mortar from inside surfaces of placing equipment .
num structural concrete num use chutes lined with smooth watertight material .
equip the chutes with baffles or reverses if working around steep slopes .
operate concrete pumps to discharge a continuous concrete stream without air pockets .
use conveyor belt systems less than num ft num m measured from end to end of the belt assembly .
arrange the belt assembly so sections discharge into a vertical hopper without mortar adhering to the belt .
use a hopper chute and deflectors at the discharge end of the conveyor belt so that the concrete drops vertically .
c lighting if placing concrete at night provide lighting required by the contract and avoid interruptions to concrete placement .
repair damage to the lighting system and replace burned out lamps .
num consolidation consolidate concrete using internal mechanical vibrators unless placing concrete in drilled shafts .
use external form vibrators on thin sections if the forms are designed for external vibration .
ensure vibrators transmit at frequencies of at least num hz .
use vibrators to consolidate the concrete batches immediately after placing them .
provide at least one spare vibrator in case of breakdown .
use vibrators to work the concrete around reinforcement embedded fixtures corners and angles in the forms .
beginning at the deposit point vibrate the concrete at uniformly spaced locations .
ensure the distance between the locations is no greater than one and onehalf times the visible effective radius of the vibration .
vertically insert vibrators so the affected vibrated areas overlap then slowly withdraw them from the concrete .
ensure the vibration consolidates the concrete without causing segregation .
do not cause grout formation .
the department will not allow vibrating reinforcement or through reinforcement to layers of concrete that has become nonplastic .
alternatively spade to make smooth surfaces and dense concrete along forms in corners and areas inaccessible to vibrators .
num underwater placement a general the engineer will allow underwater placement for seal concrete and drilled shafts .
use seal concrete to seal structures from water .
for concrete placed underwater increase the cement content in the concrete mix by num percent to compensate for loss .
place drilled shafts in accordance with section num drilled shaft foundations .
place concrete underwater in a compact mass and prevent seal concrete segregation .
maintain still water at the deposit point .
make underwater forms watertight .
during placement and curing vent cofferdams to equalize the hydrostatic pressure and prevent water from flowing through the seal concrete .
if placing seal concrete underwater maintain a continuous concrete flow .
keep the concrete surface level .
to ensure bonding place layers of seal structural concrete num num concrete before the preceding layer sets .
for large pours use more than one tremie or pump .
bequipment num tremies use watertight tremies with a diameter of at least num in num mm .
fit the top with a hopper .
use multiple tremies required by the contract .
ensure tremies can lower rapidly to retard or stop the concrete flow .
at the start of concrete placement seal the discharge end and fill the tremie tube with concrete .
keep the tremie tube full of concrete during placement .
if water enters the tube withdraw the tremie and reseal the discharge end .
maintain a continuous concrete flow until completing the placement .
num concrete pumps use pumps that seal out water while concrete fills the tube .
when the concrete begins to flow keep the end of the discharge tube full of concrete and below the surface of the deposited concrete until completing the placement .
c cleanup dewater after test specimens cured under similar conditions indicate that the seal concrete has sufficient strength to resist the expected loads .
remove all laitance or other unsatisfactory materials from the exposed surface by scraping chipping or other means which will not injure the surface of the seal concrete before placing the foundational concrete .
d. construction joints num general make construction joints where required by the contract .
extend reinforcing steel through joints .
place emergency construction joints as approved by the engineer and add steel dowels across the joint at no additional cost to the department .
num bonding unless otherwise required by the contract construct horizontal joints without shear keys and vertical joints with shear keys .
rough float the fresh concrete at a horizontal joint to consolidate the surface .
leave the joint roughened .
the department defines shear keys as depressions in the surface that cover onethird of the contact surface .
bevel the key forms so that removal does not damage the concrete .
clean debris from construction joints before placing fresh concrete against the joint surface .
use an abrasive blast with an amplitude of ¼ in num mm or other methods to clean joints without shear keys to expose clean aggregate .
clean joints with shear keys .
flush construction joints with water and allow them to dry before placing new concrete .
num structural concrete num num doweling into existing concrete do not use dowels in an overhead position or permanent sustained tension .
before bonding new concrete to existing concrete structures clean and flush the existing concrete in accordance with subsection num.dnum bonding .
drill holes for grouted reinforcing dowels at construction joints to the depth required by the contract without damaging adjacent concrete .
extend the holes to the greater of num bar diameters or the epoxy manufacturers recommended depth for the dowel bar hole depth .
ensure the hole diameter does not exceed the dowel diameter by more than ¼ in num mm .
use type h epoxy in accordance with subsection num epoxy resin adhesives for general use with concrete .
submit information on the proposed epoxy including the brand name specification type class and grade for engineer approval before use .
use equipment and techniques to proportion mix and place the epoxy in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
inject epoxy into the hole through a tube or hose long enough to reach the closed end of the hole .
start filling the hole from the closed end .
except in horizontal applications fill the hole to a level that after dowel insertion excess epoxy runs out .
twist the dowel to ensure a uniform epoxy coating .
clean excess epoxy around the hole while the epoxy remains fluid .
if the epoxy is inconsistent using this procedure use the manufacturers recommended procedure .
num forms at construction joints if forms overlap previously placed concrete at construction joints retighten the forms before depositing new concrete .
neatly form the visible joint faces with straight bulkheads or grade strips or otherwise finish joints .
e. installing expansion and contraction joints construct expansion and contraction joints as required by the contract .
expansion and contraction joints include the following joint types open filled reinforced with steel armor waterstops compression seals elastomeric expansion joint seals and joints with combinations of these features .
num open joints form open joints with wooden strip metal plate or other engineer approved material .
remove the joint forming material without breaking the corners of the concrete .
do not extend reinforcement across open joints .
use an edging tool with a radius of ½ in num mm to finish the edges of nonarmored joints .
num filled joints cut premolded expansion joint filler to the joint surface dimensions .
secure the joint filler on one surface of the joint with galvanized nails waterproof adhesive or other engineer approved methods .
minimize the use of splices in the filler material .
splice in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
after structural concrete num num removing the forms remove and cut concrete or mortar sealed across the joint .
fill joint gaps at least ⅛ in num mm wide with hot asphalt or other engineer approved filler .
place devices as shown on the plans .
num steel joints construct metal expansion joints in bridge decks in accordance with section num bridge decks approaches rails and parapets .
num water stops place rubber or plastic waterstops as required by the contract .
where joint movement is required by the contract use waterstops that allow the movement .
a rubber waterstops before installation submit the following for approval performance test data a num yd num m sample of contract required types of waterstop and if using splices at least one preliminary field splice .
form waterstops with a crosssection uniform in width and web thickness .
the department will not allow splicing straight strips .
fullmold junctions in the special connection pieces .
provide cured dense nonporous homogeneous special connection pieces .
fabricate dense homogenous splices made watertight by vulcanizing or machine throughout the crosssection .
make splices with a minimum tensile strength of num percent of the unspliced rubber waterstop .
bplastic waterstops before installation submit at least one preliminary field splice sample .
heat splices in accordance with the manufacturers instructions to make watertight .
fabricate splices with a minimum tensile strength of num percent of the unspliced plastic waterstop .
c placing waterstops protect waterstops from displacement or damage .
keep waterstop surfaces free of deleterious material until embedded in the concrete .
enclose embedded waterstops in dense concrete .
num compression joint seals use onepiece compression joint seals for transverse joints and the longest lengths for longitudinal joints .
clean and dry joints and remove spalls and irregularities .
apply a lubricantadhesive to both sides of the seal immediately before installation .
compress the seal and place it in the joint as recommended by the manufacturer .
ensure the seal contacts both joint walls along seal length .
discard twisted curled nicked or improperly formed seals .
reinstall joint seals that stretch more than num percent of their original length if compressed .
remove excess lubricantadhesive before it dries .
num elastomeric expansion joint seal install the joint in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
num structural concrete num f. concrete curing num general cure all new concrete using one or more method in accordance with subsection num.fnum through subsection num.fnum .
unless otherwise required by the contract begin curing immediately after the surface water evaporates and finishing is complete .
do not damage the concrete surface during curing operations .
if the concrete begins to dry before curing begins use a fog spray to moisten the surface .
keep surfaces moist after removing forms .
cure immediately after the first rub .
unless using steam or radiant heat curing methods continuously cure the concrete for at least num calendar days .
if more than num percent of the portland cement weight consists of pozzolans cure continuously for at least num calendar days .
except for concrete in bridge floors and pavements reduce the curing period if cylinders cured under the same conditions indicate that the concrete reaches at least num percent of its contract required strength .
use curing agents in accordance with subsection num curing agents .
num formsinplace method for formed surfaces leave the forms in place without loosening them .
if removing forms during the curing period for rubbing strip forms from areas that can be rubbed in one shift .
keep the surface of the exposed concrete moist during rubbing .
after rubbing continue the curing process by applying the water method or a type numd curing compound .
num water method keep the concrete surface wet using ponding spraying or covering material .
ensure covering material does not discolor or damage the concrete .
num liquid membrane curing compound method use type num white pigmented liquid membrane on visible bridge deck and approach slab surfaces .
use either type numd clear curing compounds or type num hite pigmented liquid membrane on other surfaces .
mix membranecuring solutions that contain pigments before use .
continue to agitate during the application .
use equipment that produces a fine spray .
apply the curing compound at a coverage rate of at least num gal per num ft² num l per num m² in one to two applications .
if using two applications apply the second within num min at right angles to the first application .
continue curing applications until gray is not visible .
apply a new coat of curing compound if rain damages the membrane during the curing period .
the department will not allow the use of the liquid membrane method on surfaces that receive a class num rubfinish .
the engineer will allow curing compound on construction joints if sandblasting removes the compound before the next concrete placement against the joint .
protect reinforcing steel from the liquid membranecuring compound .
structural concrete num num num waterproof cover method cover the wet concrete surface with wide sheets of waterproof material that prevents moisture loss .
lap adjacent sheets at least num in num mm and tightly seal the seams with pressure sensitive tape mastic glue or other methods approved by the engineer .
secure the material so wind does not displace it .
repair damaged sheets .
num steam or radiant heat method use the steam or radiant heat method for precast concrete members manufactured in established plants .
conduct steam or radiant heat curing in an enclosure to contain the heat and steam .
ensure a uniform temperature inside the enclosure .
place the temperature recorder inside the enclosure .
apply steam or radiant heat after the concrete initial set or from num hr to num hr after final placement for normal set concrete .
allow retarded set concrete to sit from num hr to num hr .
measure the time of initial set in accordance with aashto t num astm c num .
after placement and before using this curing method use steam or radiant heat to maintain the curing chamber temperature from num f to num f num c to num c. prevent localized high temperatures on the members caused by directly applying steam or radiant heat .
limit the rate of ambient temperature change in the curing enclosure to num fhr num chr .
ensure the temperature inside the enclosure does not exceed num f num c. maintain the curing temperature until it reaches the contract required concrete detensioning strength .
when discontinuing steam or radiant heat allow the ambient air temperature in the enclosure to cool to num f num c above the outside temperature .
do not reapply steam or radiant heat after cooling .
for the steam method use low pressure saturated steam with num percent relative humidity .
apply the radiant heat using pipes that circulate steam hot oil hot water or electric heating elements .
if using the radiant heat method cover exposed concrete with plastic sheeting or a liquid membranecuring compound .
after the curing remove compound residue from areas requiring surface bonding .
unless maintaining the ambient temperature above num f num c transfer the stressing force on prestressed members immediately after discontinuing the curing .
g. finishing formed concrete surfaces replace or repair rock pockets or honeycombed concrete .
provide a durable uniformly textured and colored tightly bonded surface finish .
except for class num finish apply a penetrating water repellent treatment in accordance with section num penetrating water repellent treatment .
apply coatings grout and mortar when the surface temperature is num f num c or higher except for class num mortar finish see below .
comply with the manufacturers temperature requirements when they are more restrictive .
num class num ordinary surface finish finish formed concrete surfaces with a class num ordinary surface finish .
if another class of surface finish is required by the contract apply it after the class num finish .
num structural concrete num begin finishing upon form removal .
remove irregularities from exposed surfaces or those specified for waterproofing .
remove bulges and offsets with carborundum stones or discs .
remove poorly bonded rock pockets or honeycombed concrete and replace them with concrete or packed mortar in accordance with subsection num.h mortar and grout .
the engineer may identify rock pockets or honeycombed concrete areas that may materially affect structural strength or steel reinforcement effectiveness determine that the areas are defective and require their replacement .
clean and point defects and saturate the area with water .
finish the area with less than num hr old mortar in accordance with subsection num.h mortar and grout .
after the mortar sets rub and continue curing if required by the contract .
match exposed surfaces to surrounding concrete .
tool and remove free mortar and concrete from construction and expansion joints .
leave joint filler exposed along its length with clean edges .
rub or grind bearing surfaces on piers and abutments to the elevation and slope shown on the plans .
if the final finished surface is not uniform provide a class num rubbed finish .
num class num rubbed finish except for superstructure soffits concrete girder bottoms concrete girder interior faces and the interior faces of reinforced concrete boxes finish concrete surfaces with a class num rubbed finish .
saturate the concrete surfaces with water immediately before rubbing with a medium coarse carborundum stone with a small amount of mortar on the face .
mix mortar from cement and fine sand in the same proportions as the finished concrete .
continue rubbing to remove form marks projections and irregularities and to obtain a uniform surface .
leave the paste in place .
after completing other surface work rub with a fine carborundum stone and water until smooth and uniform in color .
after the surface dries rub with burlap to remove loose powder .
ensure the surface is free from unsound patches paste powder and marks .
for slip formed surfaces achieve a rubbed finish .
num class num tooled finish provide a class num surface finish if required by the contract .
let the concrete set for at least num calendar days .
use air tools .
chip away the surface mortar and break the aggregate particles to expose a group of broken aggregate particles in a matrix of mortar .
num class num sandblasted finish provide a class num surface finish required by the contract .
let the concrete set for at least num calendar days .
protect adjacent surfaces that are not sandblasted .
sandblast the surface to produce a finegrained surface exposing the aggregate .
num class num wire brushed or scrubbed finish provide a class num surface finish if required by the contract .
begin after form removal .
scrub the surface with stiff wire or fiber brushes and a solution of num part muriatic acid to num parts water .
scrub away the cement film to expose the aggregate structural concrete num num particles .
leave an even pebbled texture .
wash the surface with water and aci recommended amount of ammonia .
num class num mortar finish except for bearing surfaces or unless otherwise required by the contract provide a class num surface finish .
use cement mortar in accordance with section num concrete surface finish for structures .
unless otherwise specified by the contract use a lighter color than the concrete .
build num in num in num m num m concrete finish sample panels .
obtain the engineers approval of the color .
protect the approved sample panel during the work .
finish designated surfaces to match the color of the approved sample .
complete other adjacent work before applying the mortar finish .
after completing the class num surface finish remove deleterious material by lightly abrasivecleaning the surface .
wash the surface with a jet spray of water .
protect the untreated surfaces .
apply the finish to a dry surface when the surface temperature reaches at least num f num c with a forecast of at least num f num c during the num hr following application apply the finish as the manufacturer specifies .
apply the coating using a plastertype spray gun or the brush and float method .
cure cementbased mortar coatings as specified for curing concrete .
clean concrete areas that will not be finished .
clean and recoat defective areas at no additional cost to the department .
num class num paint finish paint concrete if the contract requires .
before painting apply water repellent in accordance with section num penetrating water repellant treatment .
paint concrete in accordance with section num concrete surface finish for structures .
before painting clean surfaces with a power washer with a pressure of at least num psi num mpa .
submit the manufacturers specifications to the engineer num days before application .
apply the paint in accordance with the manufacturer recommendations .
h. mortar and grout num general this work consists of making and placing of mortar and grout for use in concrete structures other than in prestressed ducts .
the use of mortar includes filling voids and repairing surface defects .
the use of grout includes filling sleeves for anchor bolts .
num materials and mixing provide materials for mortar and grout to fill voids repair surface defects and fill sleeves for anchor bolts in accordance with section num portland cement concrete .
if the width or depth of the void is less than ¾ in num mm modify the sand grading for use in grout or mortar so material passes through a no .
num sieve .
use type i portland cement and air entraining admixture .
unless otherwise required by the contract use num part cement to num parts sand for mortar and num part cement to num part sand for grout .
num structural concrete num if using nonshrink mortar or grout as required by the contract use a nonshrink admixture or expansive hydraulic cement in accordance with astm c num .
use enough water to allow placing and packing .
for mortar limit the amount of water so the mortar forms a ball if squeezed .
use hand methods or rotating paddletype machines to mix .
mix to thoroughly blend ingredients .
do not retemper mortar or grout and place it within num hr of mixing .
num placing and curing clean foreign material from areas that contact the mortar or grout .
flush the areas with water and allow them to dry before placement .
fill and tightly pack holes and locations identified by the engineer with mortar or grout .
for structural repairs use the water method to cure mortar and grout surfaces for at least num days .
apply loads on mortar or grout after completion of curing .
replace defective mortar and grout .
i .
application of loads num general do not apply loads to concrete structures until the concrete has attained sufficient strength and when applicable sufficient prestressing has been completed .
determine strengths from test cylinders cured at the work site under similar environmental conditions in accordance with section num portland cement concrete .
num earth loads place backfill around structures to minimize overturning or sliding forces .
if backfill placement causes flexural stress in the concrete and unless otherwise approved by the engineer allow concrete to reach at least num percent of its contract required strength and age at least num days before placing backfill .
for a rigid frame bridge or a bridge where the abutments are integral with the superstructure place the superstructure and remove the forms that support the girders and deck before backfilling the abutments .
the department will not allow placement of embankments around supporting forms .
num construction loads allow the concrete in substructure elements to reach at least num percent of its contract required strength and age at least num days before loading these elements with girders precast concrete or steel .
additionally the girders may be erected earlier than the num days once the pier caps and abutments reach at least num percent of its contractrequired strength and the underlying forms and falsework remain in place on the pier caps .
place construction loads on bridge decks in accordance with section num bridge decks approaches rails and parapets .
limit construction loads on structures to the load carrying capacity in accordance with aashto standard specifications for highway bridges .
calculate capacities using the lowest measured actual strength of the structure .
structural concrete num num j .
concrete anchorage devices use chemical grouted or castinplace concrete anchorage devices to attach equipment or fixtures to concrete .
provide the following concrete anchorage device sample manufacturers installation instructions and material data and certifications .
fabricate metal parts of the anchorage devices from stainless steel or steel protected with a corrosionresistant metallic coating that does not react to concrete .
supply anchorage devices with hardware .
for chemical or grouted anchors conduct a system approval test at the job site on one anchor unincorporated in the work .
conduct a static load test in accordance with astm e num .
demonstrate that the anchorage device can withstand a direct tension test load for at least num hr .
ensure the device can withstand at least the values shown in table num and table num and moves no more than num in num mm .
demonstrate that if loaded to failure the steel of the anchor device fails and not the chemical grout or concrete .
table num sustained load test values english anchorage device stud size in tension test load lbf ¼ num ⅜ num ½ num ⅝ num ¾ num table num sustained load test values metric anchorage device stud size tension test load kn mnum num mnum num mnum num mnum num install concrete anchorage devices in accordance with the manufacturer recommendations .
ensure the attached equipment or fixtures bear firmly against the concrete .
torque nuts in accordance with table num and table num unless otherwise recommended by the manufacturer .
table num torque for anchorage devices english anchorage device stud size in torque lb ft ¼ num ⅜ num ½ num ⅝ num ¾ num num structural concrete num table num torque for anchorage devices metric anchorage device stud size torque n m mnum num mnum num mnum num mnum num num in the engineers presence test a random sample of at least num percent of the anchors .
proofload the anchors to num percent of the steel yield stress .
if an anchor fails reset and prooftorque it and the remaining anchors .
to apply the proof load torque the anchors against load indicator washers and apply direct tension load to the anchor or another method approved by the engineer .
after proofloading release the load on the anchor and retighten to the load specified in table num and table num or to the manufacturer recommended load .
k. girder bearings surfaces finish concrete bearing surfaces in accordance with subsection num.gnum class num rubbed finish .
before erecting girders check concrete bearing surfaces for smoothness levelness and elevation in the engineers presence .
build the concrete bearing surfaces within ¼ in num mm of the elevations shown on the plans .
ensure the bearing surfaces do not slope more than num percent from horizontal .
if bearing surfaces do not meet the contract required tolerances notify the engineer and submit a written proposal to modify the installation .
l. testing evaluate the compressive strength in accordance with subsection num mix design and proportioning .
perform other tests as required by the contract .
num method of measurement the engineer will measure structural concrete along the neat lines of the structure as shown on the plans unless otherwise modified to fit field conditions .
the engineer will not deduct the volume occupied by reinforcing steel anchors weep holes piling or pipes and ducts less than num in num mm in diameter .
the engineer will measure concrete volumes less than num yd³ num m³ per structure as class a concrete small structures if included as a pay item .
num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit a class aa concrete cubic yard cubic meter b class a concrete cubic yard cubic meter c class a concrete small structures cubic yard cubic meter d class c concrete cubic yard cubic meter e class p concrete cubic yard cubic meter do not measure floodlighting for payment .
structural concrete num num structural concrete the department may accept concrete with strengths air content or both lower than required in accordance with subsection num conformity with plans and specifications .
the department will use the following equation to calculate the strength pay factor for concrete volumes with strengths less than the specified requirements low strength pay factor actual strengthspecified strength² multiply the contract price by the low strength pay factor for the represented concrete volume .
check any outlying concrete cylinder breaks in accordance with astm e num table num upper num significance level .
use the following table to compute the air content pay factor for volumes of concrete with entrained air less than the specified requirements except for drill shafts in accordance with subsection num conformity with plans and specifications .
table num air content pay factor below target air pay factor num num num num num num x actual air target air num unacceptable multiply the contract price by the air content pay factor for the represented volume of concrete .
if testing of subsequent loads of concrete are within num percent of the entrained air target the pay factor will only apply to the volume of concrete outside the num percent of the entrained air target .
if any concrete entrained air test results are believed to be an outlier then the engineer will check each test result in accordance with the astm e num using table num upper num significance level .
if the pay factors are determined by the engineer to be less than num percent the contractor may elect to core the represented concrete at no additional cost to the department .
the proposed method and location of the coring must be approved in advance by the engineer .
coring must be performed in the presence of a department representative .
testing of the cores will be conducted by the materials division and the cores must comply with the sample requirements of the applicable test methods .
do not use volumes of concrete with entrained air num percent or greater .
replace concrete with entrained air of num percent or greater at no additional cost to the department .
num earth retaining systems and sound barrier walls num section num earth retaining systems and sound barrier walls num description this work consists of constructing earth retaining systems castinplace concrete sound barrier walls and slopewalls .
num materials a .
general provide materials in accordance with the following sections and subsections material section or subsection structural concrete num reinforcing steel for structures num portland cement concrete num cover material for pipe underdrains num granular backfill num drainage conduits num for slopewalls use class a concrete with coarse aggregate for thin section concrete .
b. precast elements provide precast walls retaining walls and sound walls from manufacturers certified by the national precast concrete association npca .
use class aa concrete in accordance with section num structural concrete for manufacturing precast wall elements .
c. filter fabric provide filter fabric in accordance with subsection num geotextiles for subsurface drainage purposes .
d. granular backfill for mechanically stabilized earth mse walls provide granular backfill for mse walls in accordance with subsection num granular backfill .
provide backfill material with an internal friction angle of at least num .
determine the internal friction angle using the standard direct shear test in accordance with aashto t num .
test portions of material that pass through a no .
num num mm sieve .
at the optimum moisture content compact a material sample to num percent in accordance with aashto t num method c or method d with oversized correction .
if at least num percent of sizes are greater than ¾ in num mm sieve size the department does not require testing for backfills .
if using backfill material with steel soil reinforcement provide backfill material that meets the following electrochemical requirements ph of num to num resistivity of num ohm meter chlorides num ppm and earth retaining systems and sound barrier walls num num sulfates num ppm .
num equipment vacant num construction methods a .
general for earth retaining systems and noise barrier walls use construction methods in accordance with section num excavation and backfill for structures section num forms falsework and temporary works section num structural concrete section num reinforcing steel for structures and section num drainage conduits .
the department may allow alternative designs for earth retaining systems and sound barrier walls .
obtain the engineers approval of the working drawings before using an alternative design .
the department may allow the use of design methods for structure types or elements not covered by these specifications if documented in published literature proven adequate through use by expert personnel performing the design for these walls and if approved by the engineer .
b .
working drawings provide working drawings and design calculations for alternative earth retaining systems and noise barrier walls or as required by the contract .
submit drawings in accordance with subsection num plans and working drawings and include the following verification of existing ground elevations for structures involving construction in original ground the layout of an effective retaining wall or noise barrier wall that maintains or surpasses the height and length required by the contract design calculations proving that the design satisfies aashto lrfd specification design parameters including internal external overall and compound stability details of elements required for the construction of the system including complete material specifications earthwork requirements for retaining walls including specifications for material and backfill compaction details of revisions or additions to drainage systems or other facilities other information required by the contract or requested by the engineer for concrete walls that require an architectural finish show the layout and identify each piece of form liners and show the sequence of construction .
c. backfill place backfill material within the lines shown on the plans .
use the type of granular backfill for retaining walls required in the contract .
num earth retaining systems and sound barrier walls num d. drainage num concrete gutters construct concrete gutters to the profile required by the contract or shown on the plans .
provide drainage outlets at sags in the profile the low points of the gutter and other contract required locations .
num weep holes construct weep holes at locations required by the contract or shown on the plans .
place at least num ft³ num m³ of coarse cover material for pipe underdrains encapsulated with filter fabric at the weep holes .
cover joints with filter fabric between precast concrete retaining wall face panels that function as weep holes .
bond the filter fabric to the face panels in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
dry the face panels and clean off dust and loose materials before applying the filter .
num drainage blankets construct drainage blankets from the following materials coarse cover material for pipe underdrains encapsulated in filter fabric or filter sand collector pipes outlet pipes and cleanout pipes .
before installing filter fabric compact the subgrade to the contract required density and grade it to the elevation shown on the plans .
remove material and sharp objects that could damage the fabric .
stretch and align the fabric .
smoothout wrinkles .
overlap adjacent borders from num in to num in num mm to num mm .
repair damaged fabric by covering the area with a piece of fabric that meets the overlap specifications .
place coarse cover material in horizontal layers and compact it .
the department will not allow ponding or jetting of the coarse cover material or adjacent backfill .
when spreading and compacting maintain at least num in num mm of cover material between the construction equipment and the fabric .
place perforated collector pipes in the cover material to the elevations shown on the plans .
place outlet pipes at sags in the flow line the low ends of the collector pipes and other contract required locations .
place cleanout pipes at the high ends of collector pipes and locations shown on the plans .
num geocomposite drainage systems install geocomposite drainage systems at the locations required by the contract or shown on the plans .
place and secure geocomposite drainage material against the excavated face lagging or back of wall as required by the contract .
before placing concrete against geocomposite drainage material protect the drainage material from damage and grout leakage .
earth retaining systems and sound barrier walls num num e. wall systems num castinplace concrete walls a architectural finish if an architectural finish on the exposed wall surfaces is shown on the plans complete the following submit a sample of the form liner for engineer approval with working drawings .
use the least possible number of joints in the form liner .
discard and replace damaged form liner .
bretaining wall placement unless otherwise required by the contract cast retaining walls with a num percent batter toward the backfill to compensate for wall deflection .
postpone backfilling until after casting and curing each section within a continuous section of wall in accordance with section num structural concrete .
c vertical precast concrete wall elements with castinplace concrete footings support precast concrete wall elements to prevent vertical or horizontal displacement .
continue to support precast concrete wall elements until footing concrete has been placed completely cured and has sufficient strength to support precast concrete wall elements in accordance with section num .
num mse walls ensure the engineer approves mse retaining wall systems used on odot projects before use .
for mse retaining walls build a facing system .
connect steel or polymeric soil reinforcement to the facing system .
place structure backfill material around the reinforcement .
design the mse retaining walls in accordance with the current edition of the aashto lrfd standard specifications for highway bridges the contract and subsection num plans and working drawings .
use mse retaining walls designed by a registered engineer in the state of oklahoma .
design mse retaining walls for internal external overall and compound stability .
the design and analysis of mse retaining walls with parapet walls or concrete railing must include the effects of rail load applied at the top of the rail parapet in accordance with the design specification .
unless otherwise shown on the plans ensure the following for backfill design parameters for mse retaining walls a maximum friction angle of numº when computing horizontal stress in the mse mass a cohesion of num and unit weight of at least num lbft³ num kg m³ .
if constructing an mse precast retaining wall system in cut areas or hill sides with established piezometric levels create a drainage blanket behind and beneath the stabilized zone if required by the contract .
for mse structures provide drainage to prevent saturation of the stabilized backfill and intercept surface flows num earth retaining systems and sound barrier walls num with aggressive elements such as deicing chemicals .
ensure the shop drawings provided by the proprietary wall company show the drainage system the intercept system or both .
allowable longitudinal differential settlements for mechanically stabilized earth structures are largely a function of panel size and joint design .
the department will allow differential settlements in the longitudinal direction of num percent for discrete modular panels less than num ft² num m² in area with a design joint of at least ¾ in num mm .
proportionally reduce the allowance for larger panels or for panels with smaller design joints .
allowable transverse differential settlements are a function of reinforcement length size and ability of the panel connection to rotate .
control or limit the vertical movements between panel connection and the reinforcement to maintain allowable reinforcement yield strains .
provide additional soil testing if required by the mse retaining wall design and analysis .
submit a copy of these calculations including shop drawings of the retaining wall to the engineer for review and approval .
the department requires mse walls to have a service life of at least num years .
design reinforcing elements with a metal area that correlates with the corrosion area expected over num years .
base the design section on the area defined by the following equation as an ac where ac area of design section an area of the original reinforcement and as area of the sacrificial section lost to corrosion .
provide data for resistivity ph chlorides and sulfates using contract required test procedures for the sites .
complete service life calculations in accordance with the federal highway administration geotechnical engineering notebook chapter num section num section num for structures exposed to deicing salts .
the increased chloride concentration will affect the upper num ft num m of backfill measured from the roadway surface .
submit a copy of these service life calculations to the engineer for review and approval .
a facing provide facing made of precast concrete panels required by the contract and shown on the plans .
provide a class numrubbed finish or the architectural treatment required by the contract .
ensure the face not exposed to view has a uniform surface finish no open aggregate pockets and surface distortion of ¼ in num mm or less .
locate and secure soil reinforcement connection hardware during concrete placement .
prevent contact between hardware and the facing reinforcing steel .
bsoil reinforcement unless otherwise required by the contract galvanize steel reinforcement and steel connection hardware in accordance with aashto m num .
earth retaining systems and sound barrier walls num num form facing mesh by bending the soil reinforcement mesh to numº .
connect it to the soil reinforcing mesh above with a prebent tie .
provide a backing mat made of num in num in num mm num mm wnum wnum welded wire fabric meeting astm anum and in accordance with subsection num welded steel wire fabric .
welded wire fabric to be shop fabricated from colddrawn wire .
wire must conform with aashto m num .
provide backing mat with a height num in num mm smaller than the facing mesh height .
retain soil by placing hardware cloth with openings no greater than ¼ in num mm between the backfill and backing mat .
galvanize in accordance with aashto m num .
to avoid the loss of backfill fines ensure the hardware cloth extends num in num mm beyond the facing mesh height .
inspect reinforcing and attachment devices to ensure they meet contract size requirements with no defects .
provide shopfabricated reinforcing wire mesh made of cold drawn steel wire in accordance with subsection num cold drawn steel wire .
weld it into the finished mesh fabric in accordance with ansiaashtoaws d num structural welding codesteel .
galvanize the fabricated mesh .
repair damage to mesh galvanization before installation .
provide a galvanized coating in accordance with aashto m num .
provide a high density polyethylene hdpe integrally formed grid structure as a soil reinforcement geogrid .
provide a geogrid with a high tensile modulus relative to the reinforced material large apertures thick ribs and junctions to allow mechanical interlock with the reinforced material .
ensure the geogrid has a high continuity of tensile strength through the ribs and junctions of the structure .
the geogrid must resist deformation under sustained long term load ultraviolet degradation and biological or chemical degradation in the reinforced material .
the geogrid must at least meet the physical property requirements of type num subsection num geogrid subgrade reinforcement of pavement structures .
use ½ in num mm diameter schedule num polyvinyl chloride plastic pipe astm d num or a ½ in ¼ in num mm num mm hdpe bar as connector pins at each geogrid splice .
make tie strips of hot rolled steel grade num grade num or equivalent in accordance with aashto m num .
make numinch num mm coil embed of cold drawn steel wire in accordance with aisi cnum .
galvanize in accordance with astm b num .
fill the cavity of the coil embed with nooxid grease or an equivalent approved by the engineer .
provide a num in num mm diameter coil bolt with num in num mm of thread cast of num ductile iron in accordance with astm a num .
galvanize in accordance with astm b num .
ensure fasteners consist of hexagonal cap screw bolts and nuts with a ½ in num mm diameter galvanized in accordance with aashto m num .
make connector pins and mat bars for the reinforced soil embankment system from astm a num grade num aashto m num .
weld to the soil reinforcement mats as shown on the plans .
num earth retaining systems and sound barrier walls num cold form panel anchors of cold drawn wire in accordance with astm a num aashto m num .
galvanize anchors after forming .
provide polymeric reinforcement of the type and size required by the contract or shown on the working drawings .
provide connection hardware as required by the contract or shown on the working drawings .
c construction install joint filler to the dimensions and thicknesses shown on the plans .
install num in num mm wide strips of filter cloth on the back face of the panel over the panel joints .
to secure the cloth apply an adhesive compound to the back face of the panel .
provide and install one of the following preformed cork in accordance with aashto m num type ii preformed epdm rubber pads in accordance with astm d num for numaa num rubbers or neoprene polychloroprene elastomeric pads with a durometer hardness from num to num in horizontal joints between panels .
grade the structure foundation level for a width at least the length of reinforcement elements plus num ft num mm or as shown on the plans .
before constructing the wall compact the foundation using two passes of a vibratory drum compactor except where the wall is constructed on rock .
replace unacceptable foundation soils below the footing elevation with concrete or controlled lowstrength material clsm at no additional cost to the department .
provide the type of a castinplace unreinforced concrete leveling pad at each panel foundation shown on the plans .
cure the leveling pad for at least num hr before placing wall panels .
provide the pad with at least num ft num mmof backfill cover .
ensure a field representative from the chosen proprietary wall system is available during wall erection .
provide the representatives services at no additional cost to the department .
during erection handle panels with lifting devices connected to the upper edge of the panels .
during backfill placement place panels in successive horizontal lifts in the sequence shown on the plans .
when placing backfill material behind the panels hold the panels in a vertical position with temporary wedges or bracing in accordance with the recommendations of the wall supplier .
for structures with precast facing panels ensure that concrete vertical tolerances and horizontal alignment tolerances do not exceed ¾ in num mm when measured with a num ft num m straight edge .
during construction prevent panel offset from surpassing ¾ in num mm .
maintain an overall vertical wall tolerance of no more than ½ in num mm per num ft num m in height .
check the plumb and tolerances of the panel row at the face before erecting the next panel row .
for panels that do not meet the contract required tolerances remove the backfill and reset the panels .
ensure uniform horizontal vertical and slope joints with openings between panels from½ in to num¼ in num mm to num mm wide .
place reinforcement elements earth retaining systems and sound barrier walls num num normal to the wall face unless otherwise shown on the plans .
before placing the reinforcing elements compact backfill as specified by the backfill placement procedures shown on the plans .
place backfill immediately after erecting each course of panels .
do not damage or disturb the wall materials or misalign the facing panels .
replace damaged wall materials at no additional cost to the department .
correct misalignment or distortion from placing backfill outside the contract required limits at no additional cost to the department .
compact backfill to num percent of the maximum density in accordance with aashto t num method c or method d with oversize correction as specified in note num or as shown on the plans .
before and during compaction uniformly distribute the moisture of the backfill material throughout each layer .
remove and rework backfill material with a placement moisture content greater than optimum .
place backfill layer in num in num mm or less lifts .
use a lightweight mechanical tamper roller or vibratory system for compaction within num ft num m of the backface of the wall using at least three passes .
at the end of each work day slope the last level of backfill away from the wall to direct runoff .
prevent surface runoff from entering the wall construction site .
f. slopewalls construct slopewalls in accordance with section num concrete or bituminous sidewalks driveways dividing strip and tactile warning devices .
the department will not allow the placement of horizontal construction joints in the slopewalls .
space vertical construction joints less than num ft num m measured along the top of slopewall .
the engineer will determine the final number and location of construction joints in the field .
g. sound barrier walls num castinplace sound barrier wall construct castinplace sound barrier walls in accordance with section num structural concrete section num reinforcing steel for structures and section num drilled shaft foundations .
if an architectural finish on the exposed wall surfaces is shown on the plans complete the following submit a sample of the form liner for engineer approval with working drawings .
use the least possible number of joints in the form liner .
discard and replace damaged form liner .
num earth retaining systems and sound barrier walls num num num precast sound barrier walls design the precast sound barrier walls in accordance with the current edition of the aashto guide specification for structural design of sound barriers the contract and subsection num plans and working drawings .
use precast sound barrier walls designed by a professional engineer registered in the state of oklahoma .
ensure the engineer designed the precast sound barrier walls for external and internal stability .
construct precast sound barrier wall in accordance with section num structural concrete section num reinforcing steel for structures and section num drilled shaft foundations .
the department will allow a final tolerance of ⅛ in per num in for level and plumbness .
num method of measurement the engineer will measure the area of retaining wall sound barrier wall and mse retaining wall from the top of footing to the wall top .
the engineer will measure the area of slopewall in accordance with the dimensions shown on the plans .
num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit a retaining wall square yard square meter b sound barrier wall square yard square meter c slopewall d mse retaining wall e geocomposite wall drain square yard square meter the department will consider the cost of the following to be included in the contract unit price for relevant wall pay item engineering and associated costs excavation backfill backfill material concrete reinforcing steel form liners perforated pipe underdrain geocomposites filter fabric pipe underdrain cover material concrete surface finish and sheeting and shoring .
square yard square meter square yard square meter reinforcing steel for structures num num the department will pay for drilled shafts and piling required by the contract in accordance with section num drilled shaft foundations and section num driven foundation piles respectively .
section num reinforcing steel for structures num description this work consists of providing and placing reinforcing steel .
num materials a .
general provide reinforcing steel consisting of deformed bars epoxycoated deformed bars and colddrawn wire mesh .
provide reinforcing steel in accordance with section num reinforcing steel .
ensure the strength requirements are in accordance with grade num num unless otherwise required by the contract .
provide colddrawn wire for spiral ties and other reinforcing designated in w wire sizes .
b .
bar lists and bending diagrams use the bar list and bending diagrams in the contract to estimate quantities .
ensure bent bars are dimensioned outtoout .
before ordering verify and correct the quantity size and shape of the bar reinforcement .
if the bar list and bending diagram are not included in the plans create and submit them for the engineers approval in accordance with subsection num plans and working drawings .
obtain the engineers approval before constructing vertical reinforcement in columns walls and piers .
c. fabrication num bending fabricate reinforcing bars in accordance with aci num numm .
coldbend reinforcing bars unless otherwise required by the contract .
if the engineer allows heating for field bending reinforcing bars ensure the physical properties of the steel remain unaltered .
do not bend bars partially embedded in concrete unless otherwise required by the contract .
num hook and bend dimensions if the hook dimensions or the bend diameters are not shown on the plans provide hooks in accordance with aci num numm .
num identification ship bar reinforcement in standard bundles tagged and marked in accordance with crsi manual of standard practice .
num reinforcing steel for structures num num equipment vacant num construction methods a .
protection of material num general store reinforcing steel on platforms or skids .
protect steel from damage .
use clean reinforcing steel meeting the minimum dimensions crosssectional area and tensile properties in accordance with the contract required steel size and grade .
use reinforcing steel that is not cracked laminated or contaminated with deleterious material .
leave thin powdery rust and tight rust that does not affect the cross section .
num epoxy coated reinforcing support coated bars on pads .
pad bundled bands .
lift bars using a strong back multiple supports or a platform bridge .
prevent bartobar abrasion .
avoid dropping or dragging bundles .
before placement inspect the bars for coating damage .
clean damaged areas by removing contaminants and damaged coating .
remove rust by blastcleaning or powertoolcleaning .
roughen the areas then patch the defects with prequalified patching or repair in accordance with aashto m num .
after placement clean and patch new damage .
treat the damaged bars as specified by the resin manufacturer before oxidation occurs .
overlap the original coating with the patching material by num in num mm or as recommended by the manufacturer .
provide a dry film thickness at least num mil num mm thick on the patched areas .
replace bars with severely damaged coatings .
the department considers severely damaged coating as a coating with damage to at least num in num mm of the bar length and num percent of the surface area .
coat mechanical splices after splice installation in accordance with aashto m num for patching damaged epoxy coatings .
b .
placing and fastening num general place reinforcing steel in the positions required by the contract .
while placing concrete use supports to firmly hold the reinforcing steel in place .
the department will not allow spotwelding of reinforcing steel .
measure the spacing of parallel bars from center to center .
for circular cages measure along the curve .
for concrete clearance measure the distance from the concrete face to reinforcing steel .
space parallel bars center to center from two and onehalf times the bar diameter to one and onehalf times the maximum nominal size of the concrete coarse aggregate plus one bar diameter .
for bridge decks place reinforcing steel within ¼ in num mm of the location shown on the plans .
for slabs and walls less than num in num mm thick place reinforcing steel within ½ in num mm of the location shown on the plans .
provide num in num mm of clear cover measured perpendicular to the nearest concrete reinforcing steel for structures num num surface for reinforcement unless otherwise specified in the contract .
for structure elements in direct contact with the ground such as footings abutments retaining walls and piers provide num in num mm of clear cover .
space parallel bars within num½ in num mm of the contract required spacing .
the engineer will not accept cumulated spacing variations .
ensure the average of the spaces between two adjacent spaces does not exceed the contract required spacing .
for mats and cages tie reinforcing bars at intersections .
if spacing is less than num in num mm in both directions tie alternate intersections .
tie intersections around the perimeter of a mat .
tie intersections of the last stirrup hoop or complete turn of a spiral at both ends of a cage .
tie bundle bars together at intervals no greater than num ft num m. bundle bars only if the location and splice details are required in the contract .
use plasticcoated ties to tie epoxycoated bars .
obtain engineer approval before placing concrete reinforcement .
num support system support reinforcing steel with mortar blocks wire bar supports supplementary bars or other approved devices .
use enough supports to maintain the bar position within tolerances .
space slab bar supports no more than num ft num m apart transversely or longitudinally .
the department will not allow the use of reinforcing steel or bar supports to carry equipment and platforms for workers .
num mortar blocks use mortar blocks with the same color and texture as the poured concrete encasing the mortar block .
provide mortar blocks with a compressive strength equal to or greater than that of the poured concrete encasing the mortar block .
for blocks in contact with the forms make the face of the blocks no bigger than num in num in num mm num mm .
attach concrete block supports to the bar with num gauge num mm wire cast in the center of each block .
if supporting epoxycoated reinforcing use plastic or epoxycoated wire .
num wire supports if using wire supports use ferrous metal chairs and bolsters in accordance with the crsi manual of standard practice .
use class num plasticprotected class num type a epoxycoated or class num type b stainlesssteelprotected metal supports in contact with exposed concrete surfaces and metal deck forms .
use stainless steel supports in accordance with astm a num type num .
use a dielectric material to coat chairs tiewires and other devices that support position or fasten epoxycoated reinforcement .
use plastic supports only for prestressed concrete bridge members .
c. splices num general provide reinforcing steel in lengths required by the contract .
unless otherwise required by the contract obtain written approval by the engineer before splicing except for splices of no .
num no .
num or smaller bars .
num reinforcing steel for structures num num num lapped splices provide lap lengths as shown on the plans .
splice reinforcing bars at locations shown on the plans .
stagger splices if possible .
do not place slab bar mechanical splices next to each other .
make lapped splices by wiring the reinforcing bars together to maintain their position .
the department will not allow lap splicing of bars larger than no .
num no .
num bars use welded or mechanical splices approved by the engineer .
num mechanical splices if shown on the plans use mechanical couplers with at least num percent of the contract required yield strength of the reinforcing steel .
when directed by the engineer remove and test two of every one hundred coupler splices installed to verify the capacity .
the engineer will randomly select the splices for testing .
num splicing of mesh for welded wire fabric shipped in rolls flatten the fabric before placement .
splice sheets of mesh or bar mat reinforcement by overlapping at least one mesh width plus num in num mm .
securely fasten at the ends and edges .
num method of measurement the engineer will measure reinforcing steel in the concrete based on the total calculated weight mass for the sizes and lengths of bars wire or welded wire fabric required by the contract .
the engineer will calculate the weight mass of plain or epoxycoated reinforcing bars in accordance with table num reinforcing bar weights .
the engineer will calculate the weight mass of reinforcing wire welded wire fabric and plain bar of sizes other than those listed in table num .
table num reinforcing bar weightmass bar designation no.english metric nominal weight mass lbft kgm num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num the engineer will not measure the following weight mass of reinforcing steel if the weight mass has been included in the weight mass of structural members using reinforcing steel weight mass of epoxy coating to calculate the weight mass of epoxycoated reinforcing steel and painting num num weight mass of reinforcing steel placed for the convenience of the contractor that exceeds the plan quantity for reinforcing steel and epoxy coated reinforcing steel .
num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit a reinforcing steel pound kilogram b epoxy coated reinforcing steel pound kilogram if not included in the measurement of the relevant structural steel pay item the department will consider the cost of threaded bars or dowels placed after the installation of precast members to attach members to castinplace concrete to be included in the contract unit price for reinforcing steel .
the department will consider the cost of material for fastening the reinforcement to be included in the contract unit price for reinforcing steel .
the department will consider the cost of authorized additional steel required for splices or reinforcement not required by the contract to be included in the contract unit price for reinforcing steel and epoxy coated reinforcing steel .
section num painting num description a .
general this work consists of preparing surfaces applying and curing paint and protecting the work facilities vehicles public and environment from damage .
b. references definitions and abbreviations comprehensive environmental response compensation and liability act cercla .
cercla is commonly referred to as superfund .
code of federal regulations cfr .
to obtain a copy contact superintendent of documents general printing office washington d.c. num telephone num num comply with the cfr including but not limited to the following titles num cfr num occupational safety and health standards num cfr num safety and health regulations for construction num cfr num lead num cfr num app .
b reference method for the determination of suspended particulate matter in the atmosphere highvolume method num cfr num app .
j reference method for determination of particulate matter as pmnum in the atmosphere num painting num num cfr num national primary and secondary ambient air quality standards for particulate matter num cfr num app .
g reference method for the determination of lead in suspended particulate matter collected from ambient air num cfrnum national primary and secondary ambient air quality standards for lead num cfr num identification and listing of hazardous waste num crf num standard applicable to generations of hazardous waste num cfr num standards applicable to transporters of hazardous waste num cfr num land disposal restrictions num cfr num national oil and hazardous substances pollution num cfr num designation reportable quantities and notification num cfr num hazardous materials tables hazardous materials communications requirements and emergency response information requirements num cfr num shippers general requirements for shipments and packaging and num cfr num shipping container specifications .
chain of custody form .
a form to identify environmental paint and waste samples .
includes signatures and dates from the time of sampling through transportation receipt at the laboratory and testing .
deleading .
the removal and elimination of leadbased paint or leadbased paint contaminated materials .
hazardous waste .
when waste samples from toxicity characteristics leaching procedure tclp tests contain the listed elements with quantities meeting or exceeding the concentration limits specified in table num the department will consider this material as hazardous waste .
other materials such as chemical strippers solvents or thinners can make a waste hazardous as defined in num cfr num .
table num concentration of hazardous elements hazardous elements maximum concentration ppm arsenic num barium a num cadmium a num chromium a num lead a num mercury num selenium num silver num a elements found some paints .
some abrasives contain arsenic or other hazardous elements .
high efficiency particulate air hepa filters .
a filter that removes at least num percent of particles with a diameter of at least num microns .
manifest .
the shipping document u.s. epa environmental protection agency form num and if necessary u.s. epa form numa continuation sheet .
painting num num manifest document number .
the u.s. epa twelvedigit identification number assigned to the generator and a unique fivedigit document number that the generator assigns to the manifest for recording and reporting .
oklahoma administrative code oac numhazardous waste management oklahoma administrative code oac num management of solid waste specifically subchapter num .
occupational safety and health administration osha oklahoma department of environmental quality deq permissible exposure limit pel .
employee exposure without regard to respirator use to an airborne concentration in micrograms per cubic meter of air μgm³ calculated as an num hr timeweighted average twa .
the pel for lead is num μgm³ as an num hr twa .
if an employee works for longer than num hr in a given day adjust the pel in accordance with the following equation t pel apel num where apel adjusted permissible exposure limit pel permissible exposure limit and t time worked in the day hours .
product data sheet pds .
the manufacturers published recommendations for use properties and characteristics .
resource conservation and recovery act rcra .
reportable release of lead .
a discharge of at least num lb num kgof lead into the atmosphere water or soil within a num hr period in accordance with num cfr num num cfr num num cfr num and num cfr num or cercla .
representative sample .
a sample exhibiting average properties of the material being sampled .
the society for protective coatings sspc .
formerly steel structures painting council .
direct inquiries to the following address sspc num numth street pittsburgh pa num telephone num num referenced sspc standards guides and specifications sspcsp num solvent cleaning sspcsp num hand tool cleaning sspcsp num power tool cleaning sspcsp numnace num nearwhite blast cleaning sspcsp num power tool cleaning to bare metal sspcsp numnace num surface preparation and cleaning of steel and other hard materials by high and ultrahigh pressure water jetting prior to recoating sspcsp num commercial grade power tool cleaning num painting num sspc abnum mineral and slag abrasives sspc abnum specification for cleanliness of recycled ferrous metallic abrasives sspc abnum newly manufactured or remanufactured steel abrasives sspcvis num guide and reference photographs for steel surfaces prepared by dry abrasive blast cleaning sspcvis num standard method of evaluating degree of rusting on painted steel surfaces sspcvis num visual standard for power and handtool cleaned steel sspcvis numnace vis num guide and reference photographs for steel surfaces prepared by wet abrasive blast cleaning sspctu num conducting ambient air soil and water sampling during surface preparation and paint disturbance activities sspc guide num a guide for safety in paint application sspc guide num guide to selecting and specifying dust collectors and sspc guide num guide for containing debris generated during paint removal operations describes methods of paint removal containment systems and procedures for preventing emissions from escaping the work area and for assessing emissions control .
use the following class definitions from table num .
table num sspc guide num containment classes class definition numa abrasive blastcleaning containment that consists of airimpenetrable walls with rigid or flexible framing fully sealed joints resealable or overlapping entryways forced or natural air flow negative pressure verified visually and exhaust air filtration .
numa abrasive blastcleaning containment that consists of walls with rigid or flexible framing full or partially sealed joints open seam entryway forced or natural airflow and exhaust air filtration .
numa abrasive blastcleaning containment that consists of airpenetrable walls with flexible framing open seams and entryways and natural airflow .
numw wet preparation method containment that consists of waterimpermeable walls and floors with rigid or flexible framing fully sealed joints overlapping entryways and natural airflow .
numw wet preparation method containment that consists of waterimpermeable walls and floors with minimal framing partially sealed joints open seam entryways and natural airflow .
numc chemical stripping containment that consists of waterimpermeable and chemical resistant walls and floors with rigid or flexible framing fully sealed joints overlapping entryways and natural airflow .
numc chemical stripping containment that consists of waterimpermeable and chemicalresistant walls and floors with minimal framing partially sealed joints open seam entryways and natural airflow .
painting num num table num sspc guide num containment classes class definition nump hand or power tool cleaning containment that consists of airimpenetrable or airpenetrable walls rigid or flexible framing fully sealed joints overlapping or open entryway and natural airflow .
nump hand or power tool cleaning containment that consists of airpenetrable walls with minimal framing partially sealed joints open seam entryways and natural air flow .
subtitle c landfill .
a landfill for disposing hazardous waste in accordance with oac num hazardous waste management regulations incorporating num cfr num and subtitle c of the rcra .
subtitle d landfill .
a landfill for disposing nonhazardous waste in accordance with oac num solid waste management regulations .
toxicity characteristic leaching procedure tclp test .
epa method num in sw num test methods for evaluating solid wastes .
total suspended particulate tsp .
term used in the collection of airborne particles using highvolume ambient air samples .
filters are typically analyzed for lead num cfr num appendix b and appendix g. treatment .
a process designed to change the physical chemical or biological characteristics or composition of any hazardous waste to neutralize or make nonhazardous .
waste generator .
the contractor and the department are waste generators or cogenerators when hazardous paint is removed .
under cogenerator status both parties are permanently responsible for the waste and resource conservation and recovery act rcra compliance .
water booms .
long narrow tubes less than num ft num mm in diameter that are linked together to create a floating containment wall on water .
num materials provide paint in accordance with section num paint for structural steel .
num equipment provide surface preparation and coating application equipment .
include mixing equipment for paint system components and pot agitation for zincrich coatings as the manufacturer specifies .
provide calibrated coating inspection instruments for quality control measurements .
provide compressed air for abrasive blast cleaning conventional spray application or blowing down surfaces .
ensure compressed air used for abrasive blast cleaning conventional spray application or blowing down surfaces does not contain oil moisture black spots and wet spots when tested in accordance with astm d num .
provide equipment to recycle abrasives when the area to be painted is more than num ft² num m² .
num painting num num construction methods a .
general requirements num contractor qualifications if the contract requires sspcqp num certification standard procedure for evaluating qualifications of contractors to remove hazardous paint from industrial structures submit a current sspcqp num certificate category a for abrasive blasting water blasting or water jetting and category c for chemical stripping or power tool cleaning .
refer to table num for definitions of the categories .
submit sspc certificates while submitting the proposal including a statement that removal technique will be consistent with the sspcqp num certification category .
work with personnel in accordance with sspc qpnum and sspc qpnum standard procedure for evaluation of qualifications of painting contractors .
the engineer will not require sspc certifications for projects with painting areas less than num ft² num m² .
refer to subsection num.bnum paint systems for definitions of paint system categories .
table num sspcqp num certification categories category type of work a abrasive blasting waterblasting and waterjetting within containments in accordance with class numa class numa or class numw of sspc guide num .
c chemical stripping and power toolcleaning within containment in accordance with class numc or class nump of sspc guide num .
num submittal requirements the engineer does not require a work plan if the contract requires painting an area smaller than num ft² num m² but regulatory agencies may require written plans and programs .
a work plan at least num calendar days before beginning surface preparation submit a written plan to the engineer for review and acceptance that details the methods of conducting and inspecting the work and of protecting the environment public adjacent property and workers .
make the plan available to state and federal agencies .
num material safety data sheet msds and product data sheet pds include the following in the work plan if required by the contract the msds for cleaning and painting products and the pds for the coatings and abrasives .
submit the msds for chemical solutions of any cleaning agents to the engineer to obtain approval before using any chemical solutions .
num paint removal and painting plan include the following in the work plan if required by the contract methods for removing paint and applying the new coat painting num num methods for chloride removal stripe coats inhibitors and weld and edge preparation certification from the abrasive supplier that the abrasives are in accordance with sspcabnum sspcabnum or sspcabnum a copy of the paint manufacturers written statement approving the cleaning method abrasive and additives and a description of the cleaning method .
num chemical strippers obtain permission from the engineer to use chemical stripping materials .
num quality control qc include the following in the work plan as appropriate written qc procedures for surface preparation and paint application copies of documentation forms used for qc and qualifications of personnel responsible for qc .
num containment design include the following in the work plan if required by the contract surface preparation methods containment design for surface preparation and cleanup activities data calculations and assumptions for the containment and ventilation system design methods that verify air flow characteristics and negative pressure within containment plan for staging installing moving and removing the containment methods of attachment provisions for moving the containment in inclement weather provisions for moving the containment out of navigation lanes if working over active waterways plans for containing debris in the event of an unintended spill plans for maintaining existing equipment and facilities including lighting and when the containment design includes suspended platforms or scaffolding for support provide calculations showing the design is in accordance with the osha scaffold standards num cfr num .
if the length of the span required by the contract for containment exceeds num ft num m or consists of a truss structure provide an evaluation of loads and stresses to the bridge which includes additional loads from the containment system dead and wind loads erection loads blast waste loads worker and equipment live loads plus normal bridge loads .
perform computations in accordance with the aashto lrfd bridge design specifications .
ensure professional engineers registered in oklahoma stamp the drawings .
notify agencies including the coast guard corps of engineers and railroad of rightofways containment clearances and project restrictions .
num painting num num waste management plan include the following in the waste management plan types of waste generated by cleaning and painting description of the following waste procedures sampling and testing including how sampling is representative collecting handling treating storing and transporting treating and disposing documentation clearancetesting after project completion proposed onsite storage location the following company information for the waste transporter and disposal facilities name address contact name and phone number for the waste transporter and disposal facility epa identification number for large and small quantity generator projects licenses permits and certifications .
num waste disposal documentation before transporting hazardous waste submit the following to the engineer a complete oklahoma deq land protection division disposal plan application for large quantity generator projects laboratory test results waste classification statement and hazardous waste manifests .
list the cogenerators on the waste manifest .
sign the manifest at the time of transportation .
perform and document the handling disposal and notifications as required by the contract .
provide nonhazardous waste manifests to document quantity and disposal .
num worker protection plan submit to the engineer a worker protection plan that proposes safety measures to protect workers from site hazards in accordance with osha .
for sites with lead submit a sitespecific lead compliance program in accordance with num cfr num .
include descriptions of the following in the worker protection plan hygiene facilities employee training painting num num design operation maintenance of engineering controls demarcation of regulated areas medical surveillance and measures to reduce exposure to lead and other hazardous materials .
num environmental compliance plan include the following in the environmental compliance plan methods to ensure ambient air soil and watersediment quality a report of hazardous materials hazardous waste or both released calibration records monitoring methods and locations testing frequency laboratory for analysis datarecording methods and locations where soil samples will be taken in accordance with numanumanum soil sampling .
numlaboratory services for environmental and waste analysis use a laboratory certified by the oklahoma deq .
provide the name address phone number contact person and certifications for the laboratories .
for metals analysis use an american industrial hygiene association aiha accredited laboratory for worker monitoring which participates in the aiha environmental lead laboratory accreditation program ellap or epa national lead laboratory accreditation program nllap .
provide documentation of the contract required laboratory certifications .
numcertification provide a written certification stating that methods of waste management storage treatment and disposal or both are legal and conform to federal state and local regulations and the contract .
numdocumentation record samples waste types and quantities airborne emissions and batch numbers of coating .
include dates and the name of the person recording the information .
make these logs available to the engineer .
numreporting report ambient air monitoring within num hr after testing .
report other samples on the laboratory results within num days after test submission .
include the following the laboratory report including qaqc verification a table of results chain of custody forms distribution num painting num identification for test results that exceed specified or regulatory limits and corrective measures taken .
numpainting structural steel inform the engineer in writing at least one week before beginning field cleaning and painting .
numschedule submit a schedule for the project .
include key tasks such as rigging and erecting containment surface preparation waste collection and sampling primer application intermediate and topcoat containment movement removing containment waste transportation and final inspection .
update the schedule every num days or if requested by the engineer .
bdepartment acceptance department acceptance of the submittals does not imply approval .
conduct the work in accordance with federal state or city regulations and protect the health and safety of workers inspectors and the public .
provide scaffolding in accordance with num cfr num for inspection of surface preparation profile chloride content mill thickness and other items as determined by the engineer .
stop work to correct procedures that do not yield contract performance requirements .
num protection of public property and workers a general maintain containment systems and ground covers to prevent the escape of debris including paint chips .
if spills or releases occur immediately shut down the emissionsproducing operations clean up the debris and take corrective actions to prevent similar releases from occurring .
collect debris from the ground by hand and hepa vacuuming .
use water booms boats with skimmers or other means to remove debris that falls into the water .
provide ground covers at any location where debris is stored transferred or released .
ensure the work site is clear of visible surface preparation or paint debris at the end of each work day .
at project completion clean the project ground and water and the surrounding areas of paint chips paint removal media fuel construction materials litter and debris even if the material was a preexisting condition .
painting num num bprotection requirements for cleaning existing steel bridges comply with the following requirements for projects involving cleaning steel bridges num soil sampling collect the prejob and postjob soil samples in the engineers presence in accordance with sspcguide num subsection num method esoil analysis for toxic metals .
provide the engineer with splits of the samples and a chain of custody form .
submit test results from a deqcertified laboratory within two weeks of collection .
clean the soils if the geometric mean of the postjob soil test results exceeds num ppm or two standard deviations whichever is greater higher than the geometric mean of the prejob soil test results .
num airborne emissions monitoring while removing the paint monitor the air in accordance with table num airborne emissions monitoring and sspc tunum .
the department does not require ambient air monitoring for category r projects with a surface area less than num ft² num m² except in the presence of hazardous materials .
when hazardous materials are present complete category r projects in accordance with visible emissions level num for project situation num .
table num airborne emissions monitoring project situation methods required num .
project located within num ft num m or two times the bridge height whichever is greater of inhabited buildings or areas frequented by the public .
method a visible emissions level num and ambient method b air monitoring for pmnum method d tsplead in lieu of pmnum in the presence of lead paint .
num .
projects involving hazardous materials located beyond num ft num m or two times the bridge height whichever is greater for inhabited buildings or areas frequented by the public .
method a visible emissions level num .
num .
projects involving nonhazardous materials and located beyond num ft num m or two times the height of the bridge which ever is greater from inhabited buildings or areas frequented by the public .
method a visible emissions level num .
for method a monitoring the department defines the boundary of the emissions as the edge of the containment system and around dust collectors abrasive recycling equipment and any areas where waste is handled .
discontinue operations and correct the problem if emissions exceed the num painting num cumulative duration limits specified in section num guide num over each hour period .
for level num emissions do not exceed num percent of the work day e.g .
five minutes in an eight hour work day .
for method b pmnum monitoring discontinue operations and correct the problem if emissions exceed num μgm³ over a num hr period num cfr num appendix b .
use an adjusted daily average ada if calculating in accordance with sspc formulas in guide num as directed by the engineer .
for method d monitoring discontinue operations and correct the problem if emissions exceed num μgm³ in a num hr period or a daily allowance of num μgm³ tsplead num cfr num over an num hr average work shift .
use an ada if calculating in accordance with sspc formulas in guide num as directed by the engineer .
report pmnum and tsplead test results within num hr of sampling for the first week of operation and as directed by the engineer .
num containment requirements during cleaning operations contain waste all solid or liquid waste within the work area .
keep different waste streams separate .
consider the waste from cleaning existing paint to be hazardous until approved tclp testing indicates otherwise .
design and implement a containment system for the work area in accordance with sspc class numa class numw class numc class nump open power tool or class nump vacuum shrouded power tool or vacuum blasting for hazardous materials and sspc class numa nonrural class numa ruralclass numw class numc or class nump for nonhazardous materials .
for vacuum blasting maintain continuous contact between the blasting head and the blast surface .
if dust is visible discontinue vacuum blasting and correct the problem .
equip cleaning power tools with hepa filters .
for vacuum blasting and power tool cleaning provide an equipment manufacturer representative at the start of work to ensure correct equipment use .
have the representative write a letter addressing observations about equipment use and provide a copy to the engineer within num calendar days .
maintain at least class nump containment for vacuum blasting to control unintentional releases related to worker fatigue .
obtain written permission from the engineer before using chemical strippers .
num worker safety and health refer to subsection num public convenience and safety and subsection num responsibility for damage claims .
comply with num cfr num .
provide each worker on the project site with a copy of working with lead in the construction industry osha num .
ensure the workers familiarize themselves with its contents .
arrange for a certified industrial hygienist cih to review blood lead level test results of each worker on the project site before during and after deleading operations and corrective actions taken .
use a clinical painting num num laboratory improvement amendments clia certified laboratory to test blood and submit the lab name certification and location to the engineer .
report blood lead levels to oklahoma state department of health lead poisoning prevention program num n.e .
numth street oklahoma city ok num monitor worker exposure using personal air monitors in accordance with num cfr num for lead or num cfr num for other hazardous materials .
provide respiratory protection commensurate with measured levels of airborne lead or other airborne contaminants based on presumed exposure levels until test results verify actual worker exposure .
num work area signs during surface cleaning in areas with hazardous materials post signs in the work area with boundaries at the osha action level num μgm³ for lead which read as follows warning lead work area poison from this point on no smoking or eating authorized personnel only num waste sampling and testing at the beginning of blasting operations test one sample to characterize the waste as either hazardous or nonhazardous .
collect at least four representative samples of each waste stream containing portions from the top middle and bottom of the container .
collect samples large enough to split each into three equal parts from num g to num g. supply the testing laboratory one part and the engineer with two of the three parts .
document the transfer with chainofcustody forms .
retain the remaining part until the test results have been obtained and it is clear that a dispute resolution will not be required .
conduct at least four tclp tests for collected debris from all other waste streams generated .
collect at least two representative samples and perform two separate tclp tests for debris taken from dust collectors .
test for the hazardous elements specified in section num description .
alternately in lieu of testing the collected blast debris the contractor may deem the blast waste to be hazardous based on knowledge of process kop .
num waste storage store waste in separate leakproof closed containers drums lined rolloff boxes or both for each waste stream in accordance with epa requirements and state administrative code .
for waste from dust collectors add the label from dust collectors .
apply the following label to the containers num painting num hazardous waste .
federal law prohibits improper disposal .
if found contact the nearest police public safety authority or the u. s. environmental protection agency .
proper d.o.t .
shipping name u nor na________________________________________ generator information name_____________________________________________ address____________________________________________ _____________ city_____________________________ state zip________ epa id no._______________________ waste no.____________ accumulation_____________________ manifest_________ start date________________________ document no.____ handle with care contains hazardous or toxic wastes .
warning contents lead paint residue tare wt .
__________________________ date collected______________________ location___________________________ container no.______________________ to prevent vandalism store waste containers on the project site in a storage area secured by an num ft num m tall gated and locked chain link fence or an enclosed locked storage container .
place impenetrable tarpaulins on the ground .
place drums on pallets no more than two drums deep or two drums high .
place the storage area within the rightofway as the engineer approves .
obtain written approval from the engineer and oklahoma deq before storing waste outside of the rightofway or away from the project site .
place the storage area where water will not pond and away from a flood plain .
num waste treatment the contractor may use proprietary additives to pretreat abrasives .
if proposing to treat the waste onsite after generation use an approved wap .
incinerate combustible solid waste including solvents and paints at an epaapproved state permitted tsd or both .
obtain written approval from the engineer and oklahoma deq before using nonhazardous blast debris as feedstock for cement kilns .
num transportation and disposal transport the hazardous collected debris including solvent paint waste in accordance with num cfr num for hazardous waste and num cfr for hazardous material .
painting num num numdisposal submit a proposed treatment storage and disposal tsd facility to the engineer for approval .
use a state of oklahoma treatment storage and disposal tsd facility for waste disposal .
dispose of waste at a deqpermitted subtitle c landfill for hazardous waste stabilization or subtitle d for nonhazardous waste .
dispose of all waste within num days of generation and before the final inspection .
num protection of the work provide tarps screens covers and other protective devices to prevent damage to the work .
prevent dust oil grease and other harmful materials from contaminating freshlypainted surfaces .
protect the work from paint splatters splashes and smirches .
repair damaged painted surfaces with materials and thicknesses equal to the damaged coat at no additional cost to the department .
if traffic causes dust sprinkle the adjacent roadbed and shoulders with water or dust palliative as directed by the engineer .
when painting operations are complete and contaminating foreign materials are eliminated clean the surfaces of dust grease and other foreign materials without damaging the surfaces .
num color use contrasting colors for succeeding application of paint coats .
the engineer will not allow fieldtinting .
provide color samples as required by the contract and obtain the engineers approval before applying paint .
unless otherwise shown on the plans provide a light gray topcoat color in accordance with federal standard no .
numanum .
for weathering steel unless otherwise shown on the plans provide a dark brown topcoat color in accordance with federal standard no .
numa num .
b. painting steel structures clean surfaces before painting .
place protective coverings over exposed surfaces before blastcleaning near machinery seal bearings journals motors and moving parts .
num surface preparation a new steel or existing steel stripped of paint install covers to protect surfaces from cleaning agents and coatings .
use solvents to remove any areas that contain asphalt cement oil grease or diesel fuel deposits in accordance with sspcsp num solvent cleaning prior to blast cleaning .
num abrasive blasting method when the area of an existing bridge to be painted exceeds num ft² num m² use recycled abrasives in accordance with numb.numc of this specification .
for paint areas less than num ft² num m² the use of recycled abrasives is optional .
after the initial cleaning remove remaining dirt mill scale rust paint and other foreign material from exposed surfaces in accordance with sspcsp num nearwhite blast cleaning .
clean in accordance with sspcvis num .
conduct final abrasive blastcleaning when the steel surface temperature reaches at least num f num c above the dew point .
num painting num blastclean surfaces with clean abrasive mineral grit or steel grit with gradation that can produce a dense uniform anchor pattern .
use automated blasting equipment with steel abrasives that have at least num percent steel grit .
num wet abrasive blastcleaning method use sspcvis numnace vis num to determine if the surfaces are near white e.g .
c wabnum .
obtain written approval from the engineer and the coating manufacturer for light flash rusting before coating .
num chloride testing after blastcleaning provide access to the engineer in accordance with section num for chloride testing at areas designated by the engineer such as beam ends .
if the chloride content exceeds num μgcm² continue cleaning to obtain a chloride level less than num μgcm² before painting .
if watercleaning use low pressure watercleaning lpwc in accordance with sspcsp numnace num .
obtain the engineers approval before using soluble salt cleaning aids or additives .
provide at least class numw containment to collect water paint chips and solids as specified in sspc guide num .
consider waste hazardous until approved tclp testing indicates otherwise .
testing performed by cotton swab method is unacceptable for dispute resolution .
num anchor profile after blastcleaning provide access at locations designated by the engineer in accordance with section num inspection of work for checking anchor profile heights .
if anchor profile heights are not in the range from num mil to num mil num mm to num mm or at least the height that the coating manufacturers product data sheet specifies continue surface preparation until the engineer determines that the profiles are the correct heights .
apply primer only after verifying the anchor profile ranges are within the contract requirements .
on the day of cleaning remove dirt dust and debris from the surface by brushing blowing with clean dry air or vacuuming and apply the first coat of paint .
repeat blastcleaning if the surfaces rust or become contaminated before painting .
use hepavacuums to clean surfaces of lead paint except when inside containment with operating dust collectors .
the department will allow the use of oilfree compressed air to remove secondary dust not generated by the blasting operation .
bexisting steel with paint to remain the engineer will determine the degree of surface corrosion present in accordance with sspcvis num .
clean and prepare surfaces in accordance with sspcsp num sspcsp num sp num sp num and sp num based on the percentage of visible rust .
clean num in num mm beyond damaged areas .
feather edges of old paint to make a smooth transition .
if using tools clean in accordance with sspcvis num .
for less than num percent visible rust and deteriorated paint use tool cleaning methods in accordance with sspcsp num and sp num to remove dirt loose mill scale loose rust and loose paint .
clean small areas with pinhole corrosion stone damage from traffic or minor scratches .
painting num num for more than num percent visible rust and deteriorated paint use the sspc sp num blastcleaning methods specified in subsection num.bnuma new steel or existing steel stripped of paint to remove visible mill scale rust paint oxides corrosion products and other foreign matter .
if using power tools clean in accordance with sspcsp num power tool cleaning to bare metal .
prepare new structural steel used in repair applications in accordance with sspcsp num .
on the day of cleaning remove dirt dust and other contaminants from the surface in accordance with sspcsp num and by blowing brushing or in the presence of lead hepa vacuuming .
spot paint areas cleaned after the first coat .
if the surfaces cleaned by spnum or spnum show rust clean them again before painting .
c abrasives and pretreatments use abrasives free from oil moisture and hazardous and corrosive substances such as chlorides sulfates and salts in accordance with sspcab num for expendable abrasives sspcab num for metallic abrasives and sspcab num for recycled abrasives .
obtain the engineers and paint manufacturers approval before using pretreatment additives or inhibitors .
use abrasives with no more than num percent free silica .
for vacuum blasters use aluminum oxide grit to achieve the profile in accordance with subsection num.bnuma new steel or existing steel stripped of paint .
num paint systems provide paint systems in accordance with section num paint for structural steel categorized as follows table num paint system application category application paint system n new structure .
shopapplied primer .
fieldapplied intermediate and topcoats .
izeu e existing structure with all existing paint removed .
fieldapplied coats .
izeu ozeu a or scmcu o existing structure with existing sound paint overcoating .
fieldapplied coats .
scmcu r repair of existing structure .
fieldapplied coats .
application area limited to repair area as required by the contract .
scmcu or an approved performance class num paint system a the department will evaluate systems on a casebycase basis pending acceptance .
b since inorganic zinc does not readily stick to itself the paint manufacturer should be contacted for repair procedures when the millage is too low .
if the plans do not specify a paint system use a category n or category e paint system .
for category o and category r applications verify the compatibility of the paint system with the existing system in accordance with the following num painting num apply the proposed system to the topcoat and primer .
at least num hr after application verify that the system shows no signs of lifting bleeding blistering wrinkling cracking and flaking .
perform adhesion tests in accordance with astm d num method a or astm d num .
for astm d num the engineer will accept numa ratings or better .
for astm d num the engineer will accept adhesion strengths greater than num psi num kpa unless the paint manufacturer specifies greater strengths .
immediately notify the engineer if the adhesion tests fail at the interface of the existing system and substrate or between the existing top coat and primer .
test for compatibility at least num weeks before ordering paint .
provide a written certification and test results to the engineer to verify compatibility .
num weather conditions paint when metal surfaces are cool and dry enough to prevent blisters porous film or separation of the vehicle from the pigment .
apply paint in the following conditions thoroughly dry paint surface ambient air temperatures and surface temperatures from num f to num f num c to num c a surface temperature at least num f num c above the dew point a humidity of num percent or less for moisture cure paints a humidity of at least num percent or as specified by the paint manufacturer in writing and no predictions of rain fog or ambient air temperature below num f num c during the drying period .
as an alternative provide enclosures capable of maintaining the above conditions .
ventilate the enclosures to prevent hazardous conditions .
num film thickness limit thickness of each application so the paint film will dry uniformly .
immediately after painting use an engineer approved wet film paint thickness gauge to verify the application rate of each coat adjusted for volatile content .
ensure the dry film thickness of each coat and total thickness of the finished product is in accordance with section num paint for structural steel .
measure dry coating thickness after each paint application in accordance with sspcpanum measurement of dry paint thickness with magnetic gauges .
for quality assurance purposes provide access to the engineer in accordance with section num inspection of work for testing paint film thickness at locations specified by the engineer .
table num dry film thickness requirements categories n e o coat izeu ozeu scmcu thickness mils μm mils μm mils μm primer num num μm num num μm num num μm intermediate num num μm num num μm num num μm painting num num table num dry film thickness requirements categories n e o coat izeu ozeu scmcu top num num μm num num μm num num μm total num num μm num num μm num num μm note thickness of each coat must be within num mils num μm .
num application of paints a general mix and apply the paint in accordance with the manufacturers instruction data sheet and this specification whichever is more restrictive .
use mechanical mixers .
take precautions when mixing systems that cure by reacting with air or moisture .
before and during application mix the paint to blendin the pigment and vehicle .
use pot agitation for inorganic zinc and zincrich organic coatings as the manufacturer specifies .
continue mixing during paint application .
the department will not allow thinning of paints formulated ready for application .
use tarpaulins screens covers or shields to protect surroundings from paint .
apply paint with a brush spray or roller as specified by the manufacturer .
prevent buildup runs sags skips holidays and thin areas in the paint film .
brushout runs and sags before drying .
use round ovalshaped brushes or flat brushes no wider than num½ in num mm with enough bristle body and length to uniformly spread the paint .
brush out the paint during application .
use airless or conventional spray equipment with traps filters or separators to exclude oil and water from the compressed air .
verify compressed air cleanliness in accordance with astm d num .
use rollers only on flat even surfaces .
use rollers that do not leave a stippled texture .
use sheepskin daubers bottle brushes or other approved methods to paint surfaces inaccessible for painting by brush roller and spray .
when spotpainting scrape off old paint that lifts after the first application .
repaint the area before the next application .
cure each application of paint .
correct skips holidays thin areas and deficiencies before the next application .
before erection coat new structures and replacement steel with the primer .
pressurewash after erection and before applying the field coats .
use power tools to reclean surfaces with damaged or deteriorating coating or exposed unpainted surfaces .
spotcoat with the primer to the contract required thickness .
for the category o paint system spot coat bare steel with primer to the contract required thickness .
bapplication of zincrich primers apply zincrich primers by spray methods within num hr of completing the surface preparation .
on areas inaccessible for spray use a brush or daubers as the manufacturer specifies .
num painting num use mechanical mixers .
take precautions if coating systems that cure by reacting with air or moisture .
strain multi component primers through a metal num mesh screen or a double layer of cheesecloth while pouring into the spray pot .
alternatively strain immediately before pouring .
apply the primer with an agitating spray pot unless the manufacturer recommends otherwise .
ensure the agitator or stirring rod reaches within num in num mm of the spray pot bottom and moves continuously during primer application .
keep the primer well mixed .
use spray equipment with the pot pump and atomization pressures needed to produce a coating in accordance with the more restrictive of the coating manufacturers published data sheet or zinc paint in accordance with section num paint for structural steel .
if using conventional spray provide a hose from the pot to the nozzle no greater than num ft num m long .
spray no more than num ft num m above or below the pot if applying inorganic zinc .
if mudcracking occurs in areas with inorganic zinc primer blastclean back to soundly bonded primer and recoat using approved methods to obtain the contract required thickness specified for the original coat .
obtain the engineers approval before using sspcsp num power tool cleaning to bare metal instead of blastcleaning small areas .
before applying additional coats ensure primer coats and intermediate coats are cured and dry .
clean paint surfaces of dust dirt salt and other deleterious materials prior to applying any paint .
cure inorganic zinc primer for num hr at a humidity of at least num percent or in accordance with the manufacturers published data .
provide continuous misting during the curing process when the humidity falls below num percent .
start the misting operation when the inorganic zinc is dry to the touch .
before applying the intermediate coat test the cure of the inorganic zinc primer in accordance with astm d num standard test method for measuring mek resistance of ethyl silicate zinc rich primers by solvent rub .
provide a resistance of num as specified in astm dnum table num scale for resistance rating .
test in the presence of the engineer .
wash the cured primer with water if using shopprimed steel the steel contains dirt or the primer is exposed for more than num weeks .
c installation of stripe coats and caulking materials required for category e and o paint application caulk locations shown on the plans or as required by the engineer including seams at joints plates seams and field splices where water may collect .
do not apply caulking to pack rust .
use a product compatible with the coating system and as recommended by the coating manufacturer .
provide msds and pds to the engineer and materials divisions .
after applying the primer and before applying the intermediate coat brush apply a stripe coat of the intermediate coat to sharp edges corners bolt heads and caulked seams and joints .
extend the stripe coat num in num mm from the sharp edge or corner .
apply a penetrating stripe coat of high ratio copolymerized calcium sulfonate recommended by the manufacturer between plates exhibiting packrust rust stain or corrosion .
before applying calcium painting num num painting sulfonate blow dry the area with pack rust using dry compressed air .
wipe off any excess calcium sulfonate .
num painting galvanized surfaces before painting wash the surface with a mineral spirit solvent to remove oil grease and contaminants in accordance with sspcsp num .
apply the intermediate and final coats of the contract required paint system .
num labeling stencil the bridge number paint types of all coats manufacturer name contractor name and date of completion inside the exterior girder on the southwest corner of the bridge .
provide a font height of num in num mm .
num method of measurement vacant num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit a painting existing structures lump sum b collection and handling of waste lump sum for new structural steel the department will consider the cost of cleaning painting caulking enclosures and related work to be included in the contract unit price for the relevant structural steel pay item .
the department will pay for the painting of existing steel structures as painting existing structures unless otherwise required by the contract .
the department will consider the cost of painting caulking enclosures providing access and related work to be included in the contract unit price for painting existing structures .
the department requires paint material certifications for final payment .
the department will consider the cost of cleaning containment stabilization incineration transportation and disposal of waste sampling and testing of soil air and waste materials permits related work and submission of required documentation to be included in the contract unit price for collection and handling of waste .
num repair of concrete bridge decks num section num repair of concrete bridge decks num description this work consists of patching decks repairing decks or both .
num materials provide materials in accordance with the following sections and subsection material section or subsection portland cement concrete num reinforcing steel num early strength concrete for bridge deck patching and overlays num num equipment protect the deck from oil or other harmful material by providing equipment with traps filters drippans or other devices .
use the following types of surface preparation equipment as required by the contract and as directed by the engineer a. handheld blast cleaning equipment provide handheld blast equipment for sandblasting or waterblasting to expose fine and coarse aggregates .
provide waterblasting equipment that delivers at least num gpm num lmin at num psi num mpa .
b. sawing equipment provide saws capable of cutting concrete to depth required by the contract .
c. powerdriven hand tools provide powerdriven hand tools jack hammers and chipping hammers that weigh no more than a nominal num lb num kg .
d. proportioning and mixing equipment for high density concrete provide proportioning and mixing equipment in accordance with subsection num equipment .
provide a rotatingpaddle type construction or stationary concrete mixer .
alternatively use a continuous mixer in conjunction with volumetric proportioning .
e. finishing equipment provide a vibrating screed to finish the deck surface .
for small patches where a vibrating screed is impractical use hand tools to vibrate strikeoff and leave a rough finish .
f. lighting equipment provide lighting for night work in accordance with subsection num.cnumc lighting .
g. pachometer provide a pachometer that can determine that depth size and spacing of reinforcing steel .
repair of concrete bridge decks num num num construction methods a .
general use engineering controls to limit dust in accordance with section num structural concrete .
limit the maximum concrete temperature to num f num c. during bridge deck concrete removal protect traffic under the bridge and adjacent to the work zone .
b .
work plan before starting work submit a work plan to the engineer and allow num days for review .
include descriptions of the following material equipment procedures for placing and removing patches forms labor requirements and anticipated work schedule including traffic control project phasing patching cure times surface preparation and estimated placement time .
begin work after approval of the work plan .
c. deck repairs and patching num general remove existing overlays asphalt unsound concrete and foreign materials from the surface .
use a chain drag or other engineer approved method to locate delaminations in the bridge deck .
before removal obtain the engineers approval for deck removal areas .
remove unsound concrete using equipment in accordance with subsection num.a handheld blast cleaning equipment and subsection num.c powerdriven hand tools .
operate jack hammers at angles num or less from horizontal .
num materials if approved as part of the mix design add fibers .
num patch preparation before making saw cuts use a pachometer or provide measurements where reinforcing steel is exposed to locate the depth of existing reinforcing steel .
provide a sawcut vertical edge around the perimeter of the repair areas .
when the depth of the reinforcing steel is less that num in num mm extend the cut to just above the top of the existing reinforcing steel .
for depths of reinforcing steel that are greater than num in num mm make the saw cut at least num in num mm deep measure from the original deck surface .
do not create patches with reentrant corners .
see figure num for acceptable and unacceptable patch geometries .
ensure the dimensions of a num reentrant corner equal at least num in .
do not cut stretch or damage exposed reinforcing steel .
blast exposed reinforcing steel clean .
replace or repair damaged reinforcing steel lapping new and old reinforcing as required by num repair of concrete bridge decks num the contract .
splice corrosion damaged exposed reinforcing steel if more than num percent of the area of the reinforcing steel section has been lost .
figure num acceptability of patch geometry acceptable unacceptable acceptable d. deck patch classification num class a bridge deck repair class a bridge deck repairs consist of the following removing unsound concrete to the top mat of reinforcing steel by chipping with power hand tools in accordance with subsection num equipment disposing of removed concrete replacing the removed concrete with high density concrete latex modified concrete ves i concrete ves iii concrete or rslmc notifying the engineer before removing concrete below the top mat of reinforcing steel .
num class b bridge deck repair class b bridge deck repairs consist of the following removing unsound concrete from below the top mat of reinforcing steel and from above the bottom mat of reinforcing steel by chipping with hand tools in accordance with subsection num equipment cleaning concrete off the top reinforcing steel mat in the repair area disposing of removed concrete replacing the removed concrete with high density concrete latex modified concrete ves i concrete ves iii concrete or rslmc and notifying the engineer before removing concrete below the middepth level .
remove concrete at least num in num mm below the top mat of reinforcing steel .
num class c bridge deck repair class c bridge deck repairs consist of the following removing unsound concrete for the full depth of the deck leaving the reinforcing steel intact extending the removal to the full depth when removal of unsound concrete reaches the bottom mat of reinforcing steel providing forms in accordance with section num forms falsework and temporary works to place new concrete in the fulldepth opening .
for areas of at least num yd² num m² support forms from the existing superstructure .
for smaller areas use wire tires to suspend the forms from existing repair of concrete bridge decks num num reinforcing bars .
remove forms after completion .
show typical forming details in the work plan submitted to the engineer cleaning existing concrete from reinforcing steel mats in the repair area disposing of removed concrete and replacing the removed volume of concrete with class aa concrete or engineer approved rapid setting concrete .
e. anodes embed galvanic anodes at the perimeter of the patch to protect against corrosion .
use premanufactured anodes containing at least num g of zinc metal in accordance with astm b numa type i .
provide anodes surrounded by a pair of steel tie wires in accordance with bright annealed astm a numa and encased in a highly alkaline cementitious shell with a ph of num or greater .
the department will not allow chlorides or other corrosive materials within the cementitious shell .
tie anodes with integral tie wires to reinforcing steel as follows num installation install galvanic anodes along the perimeter of the repair or interface as shown on the plans .
vary anode spacing with changes in the reinforcing steel density the level of chloride in the structure and the corrosiveness of the local environment .
limit the spacing between the anodes to a maximum of num in num mm .
num clearance provide enough clearance between the anodes and the substrate to allow repair material to encase the anode .
provide at least num in num mm of cover over the tops of the galvanic anodes .
num attachment secure the galvanic anodes close to the patch edge using the anode tie wires .
wrap tie wires around the cleaned reinforcing steel .
twist tie wires to prevent movement .
if the conditions allow place the anode at the intersection between two bars and secure the anode to each clean bar .
if the anode must tie onto a single bar or if using less than num in num mm of concrete cover place the anode beneath the bar and secure it to clean reinforcing steel .
num electrical continuity clean exposed reinforcing steel of foreign material such as rust or mortar to provide an electrical connection and mechanical bond .
measure the electrical connection between anode tie wire and reinforcing steel using a dc resistance ohms with a multimeter .
confirm electrical continuity of the exposed reinforcing steel within the repair area .
if necessary establish electrical continuity with steel tie wire .
the engineer will approve electrical continuity if the dc resistance is less than num ω. f. cold weather practices implement cold weather practices in one or more of the following conditions the air temperature was less than num f num c within num hr of placement .
num repair of concrete bridge decks num the air temperature will be less than num f num c within num hr of placement .
the substrate temperature is less than num f num c during placement .
perform cold weather practices as follows maintain a concrete mix temperature of at least num f num c during placement .
complete placement during the warmest part of the day .
ensure rising air temperature during placement .
place early strength concrete at air and deck temperatures greater than num f num c. g. mixing num class aa and high density concrete provide equipment in accordance with subsection num equipment .
batch and mix concrete in accordance with subsection num.b handling measuring and batching materials and subsection num.c mixing concrete num latex modified concrete proportion and mix latex modified concrete materials in accordance with the following a measurement of materials proportion materials for the mixture with a mobile continuous mixer .
calibrate the proportioning equipment for each material in the presence of the engineer .
always operate the proportioning equipment at the equipment manufacturers recommended speed .
check and verify yields .
bmixing of materials mix materials in accordance with the equipment manufacturers recommendations .
ensure the mixture is uniform in composition and consistency .
proceed with finishing operations steadily completing the final finishing before a plastic surface film forms .
h. placing before placing the patch clean and dry the repair area .
in a continuous operation place type aa ves i ves iii or rslmc in the prepared area .
consolidate the repair concrete using a vibrating screed .
for patch areas with a thickness of at least num in num mm internally vibrate the fresh concrete .
provide a rough finished texture on repair areas for which the contract requires an overlay .
where not placing an overlay place concrete to the existing deck level and match the surface texture of the repair with the existing deck .
within num min of placing the patch cover with insulating blankets that have an r value of at least num .
continuously weigh down the blanket edges to prevent wind from blowing under the blanket .
maintain insulating blankets until the concrete reaches compressive strength or at least num hr which ever is less .
provide insulating blankets year round .
i. curing num overlay substrate patching water cure repairs in accordance with subsection num.fnum water method for num days or until overlay placement .
do not use curing compound if placing overlay .
repair of concrete bridge decks num num num surface patching water cure repairs in accordance with subsection num.fnum water method for num days .
if opening a deck surface to traffic in less than num days cure patches using class aa concrete for at least num hr and patches using ves i ves iii and rslmc until the patch reaches the strength required by the contract .
additionally cure all repair classes in accordance with subsection num.f concrete curing .
j. straightedge testing and surface tolerance performs straightedge testing in accordance with subsection num.inum straightedge testing and surface correction .
after floating and removing excess water and while the concrete is still plastic use a num ft num mm straightedge to test the smoothness of the concrete surface .
lay the straightedge on the repaired pavement parallel to the centerline .
ensure the surface does not vary more than ⅛ in num mm from the lower edge of the straightedge .
ensure the transverse slope of the pavement does not have depressions greater than ⅛ in num mm when tested with the num ft num m straightedge extending from edge to edge in a traffic lane transverse to the centerline .
after curing retest the surface and grind areas higher than ⅛ in num mm above the straightedge bottom .
groove the ground surfaces to have a texture equal to the surrounding surfaces .
k. limitation of operations keep traffic off the finished surface during the curing period required by the contract .
the department will not allow preparation work in areas adjacent to or adjoining new concrete during the curing period required by the contract .
num method of measurement the engineer will measure classes of bridge deck repair before concrete placement .
the engineer will not measure reinforcing steel used to repair existing steel with heavy deck section loss .
num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit square yard square meter square yard square meter square yard square meter num repair of concrete bridge decks num num repair of concrete bridge decks the department will consider the cost of reinforcing steel sawing removals lighting and other incidental items to be included in the contract unit price for class a bridge deck repairs class b bridge deck repairs and class c bridge deck repairs .
class a bridge deck repairs and class b bridge deck repairs will not be measured for payment when hydrodemolition is used .
section num driven foundation piles num description this work consists of providing and driving piles and cutting off or building up foundation piles of the type and dimensions required by the contract .
this work also includes providing test piles performing load tests and providing and placing reinforcing steel concretefilled steel shell piles and pipe piles .
the department defines piles as steel hpiles sheet piles steel shell piles or precast concrete piles .
num materials a .
general provide materials in accordance with the following sections and subsection material section or subsection structural concrete num reinforcing steel for structures num structural steel num steel castings num paint num b .
steel piles provide structural steel in accordance with aashto m num grade num num for steel piling .
if exposed steel piles or steel pile shell piles extend above the ground or water surface and are left exposed in the finished structure i.e .
pile bents prime piles as shown on the plans before driving .
if the required remaining coat surface is accessible the contractor may apply the remaining coats after driving .
recoat splices and damaged areas above the water or ground surface .
cure paint as required by the contract before driving .
c. steel shell piles provide class aa concrete for steel shell piles .
provide steel shells greater than or equal to the thickness required by the contract .
if necessary provide shells of greater thickness to provide sufficient strength and rigidity to permit driving with the equipment selected for use without damage and to prevent distortion caused by soil pressures or from driving adjacent piles .
provide watertight shells to exclude water while placing concrete .
driven foundation piles num num obtain the engineers approval for alternate shell designs before furnishing .
d. precast concrete piles provide class p concrete with a department approved corrosioninhibiting admixture for precast prestressed concrete piles .
e. steel sheet piling for permanent applications provide steel sheet piling in accordance with subsection num structural steel and subsection num.b steel piles .
provide sheet piling walls with the minimum section modulus specified in the plans .
for applications using temporary sheet piling sheet piling used steel may be used provided that it is in good condition as determined by the engineer .
num equipment a .
approval of pile driving equipment provide equipment that drives permanent piles to the depths shown on the plans without causing damage .
provide a pile driving hammer to drive piles to the tip elevations and achieve the ultimate pile capacity without exceeding driving stresses in accordance with subsection num.a.num wave equation .
the engineer will evaluate the pile driving equipment within num calendar days of receiving the information .
the engineer will base approval of pile driving equipment on a wave equation analysis if dynamic load testing is required by the contract ultimate pile capacities exceed num ton num kn using precast or prestressed concrete piles or the contract requires the wave equation analysis .
if not using the wave equation analysis the engineer will base approval on the minimum hammer energy in table num minimum energy for pile hammers .
regardless of the engineers approval drive piles to the bearing and tip elevations required by the contract without causing damage .
to modify or replace the proposed equipment resubmit the revised data for approval .
the engineer will review the revised data within num calendar days .
the engineer will not grant a contract time extension based on the time required for submission review and approval .
num equipment submittal if the contract requires submit a wave equation analysis performed by a pile specialty consultant .
if the contract does not specify either the dynamic load testing or wave equation analysis the engineer will perform the wave equation analysis when necessary .
submit the following pile driving equipment information to the engineer at least num calendar days before driving the piles a general project and structure identification pile driving contractor or subcontractor auxiliary methods of installation and type and use of the equipment .
num driven foundation piles num bhammer manufacturer model type serial number rated energy provide specific energy rates at specific lengths of stroke and modifications .
for diesel hammers include charts specified in subsection num.b.num diesel hammers .
c capblock hammer cushion material thickness area modulus of elasticity e and coefficient of restitution e. dpile cap helmet weight bonnet weight anvil block weight and drivehead weight .
e pile cushion cushion material thickness area modulus of elasticity e and coefficient of restitution e. f pile pile type length in leads weightfoot massmeter wall thickness taper crosssectional area ultimate pile capacity description of splice and tip treatment description .
driven foundation piles num num for wave equation analysis only provide information about the following capblock pile cap and pile cushion .
num wave equation use the hammer efficiencies shown in table num for wave equation analyses .
table num hammer efficiencies hammer type efficiency diesel num air or steam single acting num double acting num gravity hammer num the engineer requires from num hammer blows to num hammer blows per num in num mm indicated by the wave equation at the ultimate pile capacity .
ensure the pile stresses resulting from the wave equation analysis do not exceed the points of impending damage defined as follows for steel and concrete piles a steel piles limit the compressive driving stress to num percent of the yield stress of the pile material .
bconcrete piles limit the tensile and compressive driving stresses in accordance with the following equations afc epv ts epv f cs c .num num where ts tensile driving stress psi mpa cs compressive driving stress psi mpa epv effective prestress value psi mpa cf specified numday compressive strength of concrete psi mpa and a num num .
num minimum hammer energy provide driving equipment with enough energy as rated by the manufacturer to drive piles at a penetration rate of num blows per num ft num mm at the contract required ultimate pile capacity .
if not using the wave equation use table num to determine the minimum hammer energy needed for the ultimate pile capacity .
num driven foundation piles num table num minimum energy for pile hammers pile hammer type minimum rated hammer energy ftlb j diesel num p num p air or steam single or double acting num p num p gravity num p num p note p is the specified ultimate pile capacity ton kn table values are based upon the enr formula for an average penetration rate of num blows per num ft num m b .
pile hammers num diesel hammers a openend diesel hammers equip openend single acting diesel hammers with a device such as rings on the ram or a scale jump stick extending above the ram cylinder that allows visual determination of hammer stroke .
submit a chart from the hammer manufacturer equating stroke and blows per minute for the proposed hammer .
the engineer may approve a speed versus stroke calibration .
bclosedend diesel hammers provide a hammer that attains cylinder lift at the maximum energybounce chamber pressure relationship in the hammer specifications .
submit a chart calibrated to actual hammer performance within num calendar days .
ensure the chart equates bounce chamber pressure to either equivalent energy or stroke for the hammer to be used .
equip hammers with a dial gauge readable at ground level to measure pressure in the bounce chamber .
calibrate the dial gauge to allow for losses in the gauge hose .
to verify the dial gauge accuracy during driving ensure cylinder lift occurs when bounce chamber pressure matches the maximum energy specified in the hammer specifications .
num air or steam hammers provide plant and equipment for steam and air hammers that maintain the volume and pressure specified by the hammer manufacturer .
equip the hammer with accurate and accessible pressure gauges .
provide a hammer with striking parts that weigh at least one third of the combined weight of the driving head and pile and totals at least num lb num kg .
num gravity hammers the department will not allow the use of a gravity hammer to drive concrete piles or piles with a contract required ultimate capacity of more than num ton num kn .
provide a hammer with a ram weighing from num lb to num lb numkg to num kg .
limit the drop height to num ft num m. ensure the ram weight exceeds the combined weight of the drive head and pile .
provide hammer guides to ensure concentric impact on the drive head .
driven foundation piles num num num nonimpact hammers submit a written proposal to the engineer for approval to use nonimpact hammers .
num additional equipment or methods if using a hammer in accordance with the minimum above requirements does not obtain the required penetration the engineer may require the contractor to provide a hammer of greater energy or when allowed resort to supplemental methods .
obtain the engineers approval for supplemental methods .
c. driving appurtenances num hammer cushion equip impact pile driving equipment except gravity hammers with a hammer cushion thick enough to prevent damage to the hammer or pile and ensure uniform driving .
make hammer cushions from durable manufactured material in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
the department will not allow the use of wood wire rope or asbestos hammer cushions .
place a striker plate as recommended by the manufacturer on the hammer cushion to ensure uniform compression of the cushion material .
inspect the hammer cushion in the engineers presence when beginning pile driving at each structure or after each num hr of pile driving whichever is less .
replace the cushion if the thickness reduces by more than num percent of the original cushion thickness .
num pile drive head for impact hammers provide drive heads that distribute the hammer blow to the pile head .
align the drive head axially with the hammer and pile .
ensure the leads guide the drive head .
ensure that the drive head does not freeswing .
fit the drive head around the pile head to prevent torsional force transfers during driving .
maintain proper alignment of hammer and pile .
squarely cut steel piling heads .
using a drive head hold the longitudinal axis of the pile in line with the hammer axis .
for precast concrete and prestressed concrete piles make the pile head perpendicular to the longitudinal axis of the pile to prevent eccentric impacts from the drive head .
to prevent damaging special types of piles provide driving heads mandrels or other devices in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
num pile cushion provide a new pile cushion for each concrete pile to prevent damage during driving .
ensure that pile cushions distribute the hammer blow throughout the crosssection of the pile .
if using plywood place at least num in num mm of plywood before driving .
replace the pile cushion if driving burns or compresses the cushion by more than onehalf the original thickness .
num driven foundation piles num num num leads while driving support the piles in line and position the piles with leads that allow the hammer to move freely .
maintain hammer and pile axial alignment to ensure concentric impact .
provide leads that do not require a follower and allow proper alignment of battered piles .
num followers obtain written approval from the engineer before using a follower .
drive the full length of the first pile in each bent or substructure unit and every subsequent tenth pile without a follower to verify that adequate pile length develops the contract required ultimate pile capacity .
provide a follower that drives the piles to the contract required penetration and length .
maintain the alignment of the follower and pile during driving .
in each substructure unit check the final position and alignment of the first two piles installed with followers .
verify that the piles are within location tolerances before installing additional piles .
num jetting obtain written approval from the engineer before using jetting .
if jetting is not specified but the engineer approves in writing determine the number of jets and the volume and water pressure at the jet nozzles that freely erodes the material adjacent to the pile without affecting the lateral stability of the final inplace pile .
repair damage caused by jetting at no additional cost to the department .
if required by the contract provide jetting equipment that delivers a consistent pressure of at least num psi num mpa at two ¾ in num mm jet nozzles .
maintain the lateral stability of the final inplace pile .
remove jet pipes when the pile tip reaches at least num ft num m above the prescribed tip elevation .
drive the pile to the contract required ultimate pile capacity with an impact hammer .
control treat and dispose of jet water in an approved manner .
num construction methods a .
manufacture of piles num precast concrete piles a forms complete formwork in accordance with section num forms falsework and temporary works and section num prestressed concrete bridge members .
provide access for vibration and consolidation of the concrete in the forms .
bcasting cast concrete in accordance with section num structural concrete and section num reinforcing steel for structures .
place the concrete so it binds with the reinforcement .
avoid the formation of stone pockets honeycombs or other defects .
driven foundation piles num num continuously place and compact the concrete .
overfill the forms screed off surplus concrete and finish the top surfaces to an even texture .
c finish finish exposed portions of piling as required by the contract .
do not finish other piling unless otherwise required by the contract .
dcuring and protection cure concrete piles in accordance with section num structural concrete .
when the piles set remove the forms .
stack the piles in a curing pile and separate them with wood spacing blocks .
allow the piles to age at least num days before driving .
in cold weather allow piles to cure longer as directed by the engineer .
cure concrete piles for use in high chloride or sulfate soils for at least num days before driving .
protect concrete from freezing until the compressive strength reaches at least num percent of the numday compressive strength required by the contract .
e prestressing prestress concrete piles in accordance with section num prestressed concrete bridge members .
f storage and handling avoid damage to piles when removing forms and when curing storing transporting and handling precast concrete piles .
transport and handle concrete piles in accordance with aashto standard specifications for highway bridges and subsection num.g storage inspection and transportation .
when raising a concrete pile suspend it at a minimum at the points shown on the plans .
if suspension points are not illustrated in the plans provide the engineer with the location of proposed lifting points for the various lengths required for the project .
for a threepoint pickup use ropes or cables supported over pulleys to equalize the supporting forces .
place stored piles on skids made of timber or other suitable materials .
at a minimum place the skids at the pickup points .
the engineer will reject cracked or damaged piles .
num castinplace concrete piles a inspection of metal shells before placing concrete in the driven shells provide light for the inspection .
bplacing concrete place concrete after driving within a radius of num ft num m or halt driving until the pile concrete within that radius cures for at least num days .
provide dense homogenous concrete for castinplace piles .
continuously place concrete for each pile .
direct the flow of concrete down the center of the pile to consolidate the concrete by impact .
vibrate concrete from at least num ft num m below the ground surface to the top of the castinplace pile .
remove accumulated water before placing concrete .
num driven foundation piles num after the concrete hardens cut back the top surface to remove laitance and to expose aggregate in accordance with subsection num.d.num bonding .
b .
working drawings for sheet piling provide working drawings and design calculations for permanent steel sheet piling walls .
provide only design calculations for temporary sheet piling walls .
submit drawings in accordance with subsection num plans and working drawings and include the following existing ground elevations and soil properties .
design calculations proving that the design satisfies the aashto lrfd specification design parameters including global stability and soil analysis details of elements required for the construction of the system including complete material specifications show the sequence of construction .
c. preparation for driving num site work a excavation drive piles after excavating .
remove material forced up between the piles to the elevation shown on the plans before placing concrete for the foundation .
bpreboring to facilitate driving if the contract requires prebore holes at pile locations to the depths required by the contract .
seat installed piles into the endbearing strata .
use engineer approved methods to make prebored holes smaller than the diameter or diagonal of the pile crosssection .
ensure the holes allow penetration of the pile to the contract required depth .
increase the hole diameter to the smallest functional dimension if subsurface obstructions appear .
after driving fill space around the pile with sand other approved material or materials specified in the contract .
unless otherwise required by the contract do not use a spud or punch .
the department defines a spud as a short strong driven member removed to make a hole for inserting a pile .
dispose of drilling material as approved by the engineer .
the department may require temporary or permanent casings for preboring even not specifically shown on the plans .
the department will not separately measure temporary or permanent casings for preboring for payment .
protect the carrying capacity of piles and adjacent structures .
if preboring disturbs the loadcarrying capacities of previously installed piles or structures restore the ultimate capacity of piles and structures as required by the contract .
the department considers preboring for contractor convienience as incidental to the cost of work and will not measure it separately for payment .
c predrilled holes in embankments if the depth of a new embankment reaches more than num ft num m prebore or spud through it before pile driving .
make the hole diameter at least num in num mm larger than the greatest dimension of the pile crosssection .
after driving the pile fill the space around the pile with dry sand or pea gravel .
dispose of drilling material as approved by the engineer .
driven foundation piles num num num preparation of piling in addition to squaring up pile heads before driving further prepare piles as follows a pointing point steel piles as the contract requires .
weld in accordance with section num structural steel .
the engineer will not require the use of a lowstress stencil to create permanent identification marks adjacent to the welds .
obtain approval from the engineer if substituting pile shoes for pointing steel piles or using them during hard driving .
bpile shoes make pile shoes from cast steel in accordance with subsection num steel castings and use them at the contract required locations .
weld to the pile in accordance with section num structural steel .
the engineer will not require the use of a lowstress stencil to create permanent identification marks adjacent to the welds .
d. driving num general drive piling to point bearing on solid foundation material at the elevation shown on the plans .
continue driving to obtain the contract required ultimate capacity .
drive abutment pile through compacted fill .
if shown on the plans do not drive piling for abutments until the removal of embankment surcharge .
do not drive piles after obtaining practical refusal .
splice piles that do not obtain the ultimate capacity at the length shown on the plans .
drive with an impact hammer to reach the specified ultimate pile capacity .
ensure the expected driving energy of the hammer and other driving equipment is maintained for each pile throughout driving .
if using the wave equation to determine bearing resistance the department considers penetration when the wave equation resistance criterion is achieved within num ft num m of the tip elevation shown on the plans .
drive piles that do not achieve the contract required resistance within these limits to the penetration determined by the engineer .
place individual piles in groups starting from the center and proceeding outward in both directions or starting at the outside row and proceeding progressively across the group .
redrive piles that move more than ¼ in num mm upward during the driving of adjacent piles .
make the heads of piles perpendicular to the longitudinal axis of the pile .
when pile driving do not damage the completed work .
num test piles the engineers order list will include the pile lengths anticipated for the finished structure .
increase the contract required pile lengths to suit operational methods at no additional cost to the department .
when the contract requires provide and drive test piles to the lengths locations and depths shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
make test piles num driven foundation piles num longer than the estimated length of permanent piles to provide for varying soil conditions .
prepare for driving in accordance with subsection num.b preparation for driving .
drive test piles with the same equipment to be used for permanent piles .
drive test piles to the contract required ultimate capacity at the estimated tip elevation .
allow test piles that do not attain the ultimate capacity at num in num mm above the estimated tip elevation to set up for num hr before redriving .
warm the hammer before redriving by applying at least num blows to another pile .
if redriving does not achieve the ultimate capacity required by the contract drive at least a portion of the remaining test pile length and repeat the set up and redrive procedure .
splice and continue driving to obtain the contract required ultimate pile capacity .
ensure test piles used for the completed structure meet the contract requirements for permanent piles .
remove test piles not incorporated in the completed structure to at least num ft num m below finished grade .
num accuracy of driving drive piles so the axial alignment falls within num from the vertical or the batter required by the contract .
keep the top of the pile horizontal within num in num mm of the location shown on the plans for bent caps and within num in num mm of the location shown on the plans for piles capped below finished ground .
place final pile at least num in num mm away from cap faces .
the engineer will halt driving to check the pile alignment .
if the engineer can not internally inspect piles after installation check the alignment before driving the final num ft num m. the department will not allow laterally pulling piles splicing to correct misalignment or splicing a properly aligned section on a misaligned pile .
correct piles that have been driven improperly driven out of the location shown on the plans misaligned or driven below the contract required cut off elevation .
replace damaged piles .
obtain approval from the engineer for the proposed correcting or repairing methods for deficiencies .
num steel piles provide steel piles with the fewest splices possible in accordance with table num .
table num steel pile splices plan length ft m maximum number of splices allowed to make plan length per pile num num num num num num num num num num num num num table num does not limit the number of splices in extensions .
use cutoff lengths of steel piles for extensions .
driven foundation piles num num protect the piles from dirt and damage during loading transporting unloading storing and handling .
ensure piles do not exceed the camber and sweep of mill tolerance .
the department considers damaged steel piles unsatisfactory unless the bearing capacity equals num percent of the contract required ultimate capacity determined by load tests .
perform load tests at no additional cost to the department .
num prestressed concrete piles support concrete piles at the points shown on the plans or at quarter points during moving operations .
do not bend the pile or break the edges when raising or transporting concrete piles .
use a pile cushion to protect the concrete pile heads in accordance with subsection num.c.num pile cushion .
the engineer will not accept concrete piles with visible defects that will affect strength or long term performance .
num concrete filled pipe or steel shell piles provide and handle steel shells or pipes in accordance with subsection num.c.num prestressed concrete piles .
place cutting shoes for shells or pipes inside or outside the shell .
use highcarbon structural steel with a machined ledge for shell bearing or cast steel with a ledge designed for attachment with a simple weld .
provide for inspection and concrete placement of castinplace concrete piles in accordance with subsection num.a.num castinplace concrete piles .
the department will not allow driving a pile shell or pipe after filling with concrete .
replace broken bent or kinked shells .
num steel sheet piling walls a permanent steel sheet piling walls drive and cut off steel sheet piling at the pile tip elevation shown on the plans and in accordance with subsection num.d driving .
brace the steel sheet piling with waling strips when specified in the plans .
if the plans require painting paint in accordance with section num painting using a category n paint system .
btemporary sheet piling provide temporary steel sheet piling when shown on the plans or as needed for phased construction .
remove and dispose of temporary steel sheet piling when no longer needed .
e. determination of bearing capacity num general use table num engineering newsrecord formulas to determine the bearing resistance of the inplace pile unless the wave equation is required by the contract .
if required use dynamic or static load tests to verify bearing resistance of piles .
num driven foundation piles num num practical refusal the department defines practical refusal as four consecutive sets of num blows that penetrate no more than ½ in num mm per set .
discontinue driving before reaching practical refusal if driving is causing damage to the pile .
num engineering newsrecord formula method use table num to determine bearing resistance using the engineering newsrecord enr formula method .
table num engineering newsrecord formulas pile hammer type bearing resistance ftlb j diesel numesnum enumsnum air or steam single or double acting numesnum enumsnum gravity numesnum enumsnum note e energy produced by the hammer per blow in footpounds joules .
values based on actual hammer stoke or bounce chamber pressure observed double acting diesel hammer .
s average penetration in inches mm per blow for the last num blows to num blows for gravity hammers and the last num blows to num blows for other hammers .
apply the formulas in table num under the following conditions the hammer has a free fall gravity and single acting hammers the head of the pile is free from damages penetration is quick and uniform there is no appreciable rebound of the hammer and a follower is not used .
measure the penetration per blow while driving with a warm hammer operated at full energy after a pile set period as directed by the engineer .
if using water jets in connection with driving use table num to determine the bearing resistance after withdrawing the jets .
num wave equation method for wave equation analysis use the soil pile and drive equipment properties to determine bearing resistance required by the contract .
reduce bearing resistance to num percent of its calculated value except when wave equation analysis was calibrated to the results of a dynamic pile test .
apply safety factors to bearing resistances calculated by the wave equation as the contract requires .
num dynamic load tests provide a qualified pile specialty consultant with at least num years experience in dynamic loadtesting and analysis to perform the dynamic load test the signal matching analysis sma or case pile wave analysis program capwap and the wave equation analysis including the initial wave analysis for the equipment listed on the submittal .
submit the specialty consultants resume for approval by the engineer .
place the shelter within num ft num m of the test location .
provide a floor at least num ft² num m² and a ceiling at least num½ ft num m high .
maintain the inside temperature from num f to num f num c to num c. driven foundation piles num num provide equipment and perform dynamic load tests in accordance with astm d num and under the engineers supervision .
place dynamic load test piles horizontally and away from other piles .
drill holes for mounting instruments near the pile head .
mount the instruments and measure the wave speed .
place the designated pile in the leads .
provide safe access for attachment of measuring equipment to the pile .
provide an electrical power supply for the test equipment .
if using field generators provide meters to monitor power voltage and frequency .
do not use the enr formula or practical refusal to determine the pile bearing resistance .
perform dynamic load tests on engineer selected piles .
perform a sma or capwap at the end of driving on the first test pile at pilesupported elements to adjust the assumed driving parameters .
wait for sma or capwap results and adjustments before driving the remaining piles .
attach the sma or capwap instrument and start collecting data before driving the last section of pile .
drive the pile deep enough so the dynamic test equipment indicates achievement of the contract required ultimate pile capacity .
maintain stresses in the pile below the values specified in subsection num.a.num wave equation by reducing the driving energy .
reduce the driving energy using additional cushions or reduce the energy output of the hammer .
if nonaxial driving is indicated immediately realign the driving system .
do not redrive piles into bedrock after reaching plan bearing capacity and specified tip elevation .
for piles not driven in bedrock redrive each dynamic load test pile with instrumentation attached at least num hr after the initial driving .
warm the hammer before redriving by applying at least num blows to another pile .
redrive the dynamic load test pile to a maximum penetration of num in num mm or a maximum of num blows whichever occurs first .
use sma or capwap to verify the assumptions used in the initially submitted wave equation analysis in accordance with subsection num.a approval of pile driving equipment .
analyze one blow from the original driving and one blow from the redriving for each test pile .
perform additional wave equation analyses with adjustments based on the sma or capwap results .
provide a graph showing blow count versus ultimate capacity .
for openended diesel hammers provide a graph of the blow count versus stroke for the ultimate capacity .
provide the driving stresses transferred energy and pile capacity as a function of depth for each dynamic load test .
based on the results of the dynamic loadtesting sma or capwap analyses and wave equation analysis the engineer may approve the order list production driving criteria and provide the required cutoff elevations or specify additional pile penetration and testing .
the engineer will provide information within num calendar days after receiving the order list and specified test data for the driven test piles .
submit a complete driving record for each pile to the engineer within num weeks of the completion of the pile load tests for review by the departments bridge division .
num driven foundation piles num num static load tests when the contract requires static load tests use the quick load compression test method for static load tests in accordance with astm d num .
submit drawings of the proposed loading apparatus for approval in accordance with the following provide a loading system that applies num percent of the ultimate pile capacity or num ton num kn whichever is less .
construct the apparatus to gradually place increments of load without vibrating the test pile .
drive tension piles at the location of permanent piles .
the department will not allow the use of tapered piles in their permanent locations as tension piles .
take the test to plunging failure or to the capacity of the loading system .
the department defines the safe axial pile loads as num percent of the failure load .
the department defines failure pile load as the load that produces a settlement at pile head failure in accordance with the following equations for piles with diameters or diagonal widths num in num mm or less .num num d a s s f for piles with diameters or diagonal widths greater than num in num mm num d s s f where f s settlement at failure in mm d pile diameter or diagonal width in mm s elastic deformation of total unsupported pile length in mm and a num num determine top elevation of the test pile immediately after driving and before load testing to check for heave .
wait at least num calendar days after driving an anchor or the load test piles before starting the load test .
before testing redrive or jack to the original elevation those piles that heave more than ¼ in num mm .
after static testing remove test or anchor piling not included in the finished structure .
remove the excess piling to at least num ft num m below the bottom of the footing or the finished ground elevation .
based on the results of the static loadtesting the engineer may approve the order list and production driving equipment and provide the required cutoff elevations or specify additional tests .
the engineer will provide this information within num calendar days of receiving the order list and contract required test data for the test piles driven .
f. splices align and connect pile sections so that the spliced pile has a straight axis .
num steel piles submit a welder certification for each welder .
use welders certified for structural welding in accordance with section num structural steel .
the driven foundation piles num num engineer will not require the use of a lowstress stencil to create permanent identification marks adjacent to the welds .
before welding a surface make it smooth uniform and free from detrimental material .
the engineer will allow oxygen cutting and carbonarc gouging chipping or grinding for joint preparation .
except for inspection requirements weld in accordance with ansiaashtoaws dnum bridge welding code .
weld the entire pile crosssection using prequalified aws groove weld butt joints .
use the arc method of welding for splicing .
perform welding to remove visual evidence of cracks lack of fusion undercutting excessive piping porosity or inadequate size .
alternatively use manufactured splices in place of full penetration groove butt welds unless otherwise shown on the plans .
ensure splices for steel shell piles are watertight .
the engineer will allow the use of an approved cast steel pipe splicers .
num concrete pile splices and extensions ageneral the department will not allow splicing of concrete piles .
extend concrete piles after driving .
do not drive extended concrete piles .
bprestressed piles submit drawings of proposed extensions for the engineers approval .
use dowels or other mechanical means to splice precast concrete or precast prestressed concrete piles .
ensure the splice develops strengths in compression tension and bending at least as strong as the pile .
include reinforcing steel bars in the pile head for splicing to the extension bars .
g. pile cutoffs cut off the tops of permanent piles and pile casings at the elevations shown on the plans .
cut embedded piles clean and straight parallel to the bottom face of the structural member .
prevent section loss in the final cutoff elevation .
prevent damage to holes required for lifting or pile testing .
dispose of cutoff piling lengths .
h. defective piles correct piles driven beyond the contract required limits and piles with defects .
approved methods of correction include at least one of the following use pile at a reduced capacity install additional piles repair damaged piles replace damaged piles .
do not force displaced piles into the position shown on the plans .
provide remedial materials and work at no additional cost to the department .
the engineer will accept piles with a reduced capacity and with no other remedial work at a reduced price in accordance with subsection num conformity with plans and specifications .
num driven foundation piles num num method of measurement a .
general for pay items piles furnished and piles driven the engineer will measure individual pile lengths to the nearest hundredth of a foot meter .
the engineer will round the overall total for each pile type to the nearest hundredth of a foot meter .
the engineer will not measure remedial piling work .
b. piles furnished the engineer will measure each pile type provided pile lengths and stockpiled pile lengths required by the contract as the piles furnished pay item .
the engineer will measure quantities of piles furnished by the total plan length with approved increases for extensions as follows the department defines the total plan length as the sum of planned pile lengths for a pile type as shown on the plans or directed by the engineer .
for concrete piles the engineer will add provided extensions that do not exceed the length directed in writing by the engineer .
for steel piles the piles furnished quantity will equal the piles driven quantity if the asbuilt piles driven quantity exceeds the total plan length .
c. piles driven the engineer will measure the length of piles driven as piles driven .
d. splices for steel piling the department will not measure steel piling splices required to achieve plan length and allowed by table num for payment .
the department will include the cost of all splices required to achieve plan length and allowed by table num in the unit price bid for piles driven .
one steel piling splice on an individual pile will be measured for payment for piling extensions beyond plan length .
meet the following conditions before the department measures the steel piling splice for payment the plan length on an individual pile has been driven the required bearing capacity for an individual pile has not been achieved at the plan length and the splice is produced after condition num and num have been met .
e. pilot holes the department will measure preboring for pilot holes when specified on the plans or in the contract by the linear foot meter from the top of existing groundline at the center of the pilot hole to the final point elevation of the hole as defined in the plans to a specified point elevation designated minimum penetration into specified soilrock classifications or as authorized by the engineer .
the department will not measure additional length resulting from temporary earthen fills placed by the contractor or unapproved additional depth of the pilot hole for payment .
the department will not separately measure or pay for pilot holes required for the contractors convenience .
the department will pay for pilot holes required for the contractors convenience in the contract unit bid price for other items in the contract .
driven foundation piles num num driven foundation piles the department will not separately measure or pay for temporary or permanent casings for pilot holes .
the department will pay for temporary or permanent casings for pilot holes in the contract unit bid price for other items in the contract .
num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit a piles furnished linear foot meter b piles driven linear foot meter c test piles furnished linear foot meter d test piles driven linear foot meter e pile load test static each f pile load test dynamic each g metal pile shoes each h sheet piling furnished square yard square meter i sheet piling driven square yard square meter j temporary sheet piling lump sum k pilot holes linear foot meter l pile splice nonbiddable each the department will consider the cost of providing and delivering piles including steel shells for castinplace driven piles to the project and providing and placing concrete and reinforcing steel for castinplace concrete piles to be included in the contract unit price for piles furnished .
for calculating progress estimates the department will consider concrete piles num percent complete if cast as required by the contract .
the department will pay this item on the progress estimate at num percent of the contract unit price or prices based on the total linear quantity cast .
the department will consider the cost of driving and cutting off piles to be included in the contract unit price for piles driven .
the department will consider the cost of load tests to be included in the contract unit price for the relevant pile load test pay item .
the department will pay for each accepted steel pile splice at the contract price for num ft num m of piles driven .
the department will not pay additionally for increased footing dimensions due to outofposition piles .
when temporary sheet piling is not specified for payment in the plans the department will consider it incidental and will pay for it in other items of work .
for each size of pile in the bid schedule the price bid for furnishing may not exceed num of the combined price bid for furnishing and driving .
the department will pay for each accepted splice by type of pile for all piling sizes of that type at the following rates compensation rate per splice piling size in mm rate per splice steel hpile num steel pipe pile num concrete pile buildup num num penetrating water repellent treatment num section num penetrating water repellent treatment num description this work consists of treating concrete surfaces with a penetrating water repellent treatment solution .
num materials provide penetrating water repellent treatment solution in accordance with subsection num penetrating water repellent for treatment of concrete surfaces .
num equipment a .
general provide equipment in accordance with subsection num methods and equipment and the treatment solution manufacturers recommendations .
b .
surface preparation use at least one of the following types of equipment for surface preparation num sandblasting provide a compressed air pressure sandblaster to clean concrete surfaces as required by the contract .
num shotblasting provide a portable machine that uses a recyclable steel shot blast technique to clean horizontal concrete surfaces .
num hot water pressure washers provide a hot water pressure system that cleans concrete surfaces as required by the contract with water at least num f num c and a nozzle pressure of num psi num mpa .
num hydroblast washer provide a high pressure cold water washer unit using num psi num mpa nozzle pressures to clean concrete surfaces as required by the contract .
num steam cleaning provide a steam jet that uses water num f num c under an operating pressure of num psi num mpa to prepare concrete surfaces as required by the contract .
c. application provide low pressure airless spray equipment with an application pressure from num psi to num psi num kpa to num kpa .
penetrating water repellent treatment num num num construction methods a .
treatment num general employ personnel certified by the treatment solution manufacturer to clean the concrete surface and apply the penetrating water repellent solution .
follow the manufacturers recommendations for surface preparation and application .
before starting work provide the engineer with the following information treatment solution including brand name manufacturers name and a copy of the manufacturers unabridged application procedures equipment surface preparation methods application methods weather limitations and treatment solution manufacturers certified personnel num surface preparation clean concrete surfaces before applying the penetrating water repellent treatment solution .
remove all foreign materials from the surface .
the department will allow the use of pretreatment cleaning agents before cleaning with water .
use solvents and hand tools to remove bonded materials detrimental to concrete surface treatment .
the department will allow the addition of detergents to cleaning water in proportions of num percent or less by weight to reduce the surface tension of the cleaning water .
during cleaning do not remove or alter the existing concrete surface finish or expose the coarse aggregate .
provide a uniform surface color .
after cleaning with water remove excess moisture that may delay surface drying or inhibit surface penetration of the repellent treatment solution .
num application a preapplication requirements allow the concrete to cure for at least num days before applying surface treatment .
after rain or water cleaning allow concrete surfaces to dry for at least num hr before applying penetrating water repellent treatment solution .
for formed surfaces apply penetrating water repellent treatment after applying class num through class num concrete surface finishes and before applying a class num paint finish .
refer to subsection num.g finishing formed concrete surfaces for definitions of surface finish classes .
clean contaminated concrete surfaces before applying the penetrating water repellent treatment .
binspection allow the engineer to inspect the work at least num day before the application of penetrating water repellent treatment .
the engineer will use the fugitive dye in the solution to gauge the uniformity of application .
the department will require retreatment in areas with inadequate coverage .
num penetrating water repellent treatment num c application rate use the penetrating water repellent treatment solution as supplied by the manufacturer .
the department will not allow dilution or alteration of the solution .
spray a flood coat of the solution onto concrete surfaces as required by the contract .
adjust the application rate for vertical tined grooved or roughened surfaces .
dweather limitations apply the penetrating water repellent treatment solution in accordance with table num acceptable weather conditions during application and the manufacturers recommendations whichever is more restrictive .
table num acceptable weather conditions during application weather condition acceptable range temperature air or concrete surface above num f num c and within the manufacturers recommended application temperature range wind speed below num mph num kmhr precipitation none e seasonal limitations comply with the manufacturers seasonal limitations .
f traffic keep traffic off treated surfaces until the solution dries .
b .
control of materials use penetrating water repellent treatment solution in unopened containers with numbered seals and the manufacturers label .
ensure the manufacturer marks the containers with the following information manufacturers name and address product name date of manufacture expiration date and lot identification number .
protect materials in the original unopened containers in a storage facility that provides safe and secure storage .
c. sampling and testing of bridge decks and approaches after the concrete surface treatment the engineer will determine the number and size of sample lots in accordance with the following determine the number of lots by dividing the surface area of the bridge deck and approach slabs in square feet square meter by num ft² num m² .
round to the nearest whole number ensuring at least two lots per structure bridge deck and approach slabs .
divide the surface area of the bridge deck and approach slab into lots of equal surface area .
penetrating water repellent treatment num num ensure the width of each lot equals the width of the deck or slab .
determine the length of each lot by dividing the surface area of the lot by its width .
take two core samples of treated concrete for testing from each lot of treated surface locations within the lot area selected randomly by the engineer .
take additional samples as directed by the engineer .
before coring locate rebar in the bridge deck and approach slabs to avoid rebar during coring .
make the cores num in num mm in diameter by num in num mm in depth .
core the concrete in the engineers presence and submit the cores to the engineer .
the engineer will test the cores for moisture absorption and depth of treatment penetration in accordance with subsection num penetrating water repellent for treatment of concrete surfaces .
the engineer will evaluate bridge deck and approach slab treatment for acceptance and payment .
test the surface treatment independently with one core per lot to determine the adequacy of the work .
the department will not use these independent results for acceptance or payment .
d. acceptance num concrete surfaces other than bridge deck and approach slabs the department will base the acceptance of penetrating water repellent application for concrete surfaces other than bridge decks and approach slabs on two visual inspections by the engineer once after surface preparation and once after treatment .
the engineer will accept surfaces cleaned and treated as required by the contract .
num bridge decks and approach slab surfaces the department will base the acceptance of penetrating water repellent application for bridge deck and approach slab treatment on absorption and penetration test results .
the engineer will adjust payment for each lot by calculating a pay factor for absorption and penetration and a combined pay factor .
a absorption pay factor the engineer will determine the absorption pay factor for each lot using the following equations if a num .num num pfa if num a num num .num num a pfa if a num .num num pfa where a pf absorption pay factor and a percentage of absorption using test results from ohd lnum .
bpenetration pay factor the engineer will determine the penetration pay factor for each lot using the following equations if d num in num mm .num num pfp num drilled shaft foundations num num if num in d num in .num num num .num num d pfp num mm d num mm num num .num num d pfp if num in d num in num pfp d .num num num mm d num mm num num pfp d if d num in num mm .num num pfp where p pf penetration pay factor and d depth of penetration in inches millimeters using test results from ohd lnum .
c combined pay factor the engineer will determine the combined pay factor for each lot using the following equation p a pf pf pf where a pf absorption pay factor p pf penetration pay factor and pf combined pay factor the engineer will multiply the contract unit price by the combined pay factor to determine payment for each lot .
if the combined pay factor for any lot on a structure is less than num the department will reduce the incentive portion that in excess of num of the overall pay factors for all lots on the structure by num percent .
e. core hole repair repair core holes with a cement mortar consisting of portland cement concrete sand water and acrylic polymer binder .
proportion the cement mortar in accordance with the manufacturer recommendations of the acrylic polymer binder .
submit mix design for approval by the engineer .
place mortar the day the cores are taken .
treat the patch surface with treatment solution after curing .
num method of measurement vacant num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit a water repellent visually inspected square yard square meter b water repellent performance tested square yard square meter drilled shaft foundations num num section num drilled shaft foundations num description this work consists of constructing drilled shafts and providing and placing reinforcing steel and concrete .
num materials a .
general use materials in accordance with the following sections material section structural concrete num reinforcing steel for structures num b .
concrete provide and modify class aa concrete as follows limit the maximum aggregate size to ¾ in num mm ensure that watercement ratio is num or lower use a high range water reducing admixture to achieve num in to num in num mm to num mm of slump at the placement start .
ensure at least num in num mm of slump exists at the completion of placement and casing or reinforcement alignment and maintain the concrete temperature below num f num c during placement .
c. casings for exterior casings provide smooth clean watertight steel casings that can withstand handling driving driving stresses and pressures from the concrete and surrounding earth .
provide permanent casing with the dimensions specified by the american pipe institute tolerances for regular steel pipe .
if only a single casing is used in a shaft the casing is considered an exterior casing .
for permanent exterior casings use steel in accordance with aashto m num grade num astm a numm grade num unless otherwise specified by the contract .
weld permanent exterior casings in accordance with section num structural steel .
the department defines permanent exterior casing diameters shown on the plans as outside diameters .
when the contract requires permanent exterior casings or if the electing to provide a permanent exterior casing ensure that a registered professional engineer in the state of oklahoma stamps and designs the design and calculations for these casings .
submit permanent casings and design calculations to the engineer .
for permanent interior casings use round corrugated galvanized steel pipe with num in num in num mm num mm corrugations in accordance with aashto m num .
ensure the pipe gauge stays round and can withstand the concrete pressure .
num drilled shaft foundations num num equipment vacant num construction methods a .
contractor qualifications use personnel experienced in constructing drilled shafts .
submit an installation plan or work plan that includes the following details before constructing drilled shafts list of personnel experienced in constructing drilled shafts including resumes of project experiences and documentation that verifies the information concrete mix design including results of concrete trial mix and tests for slump loss over time .
include procedures for introducing admixtures during mixing operations including set retarders list of proposed equipment to be used including cranes drills augers bailing buckets final cleaning equipment desanding equipment slurry pumps core sampling equipment tremies and concrete pumps list types of casings to be used by the contractor in accordance with subsection num.c casings .
include diameters and thicknesses for all permanent temporary and surface casings details of shaft excavation methods and procedures for maintaining horizontal and vertical alignment of the excavation when the slurry method is used include details of the methods to mix circulate desand and dispose of the slurry details of methods to clean the shaft excavation and use or disposal of the excavated materials placement of reinforcing steel including support and centering methods required to minimize lateral movement of the steel cage .
use concrete rollers except concrete sleds are acceptable in lieu of the rollers when casing is used down to the rock line and concrete placement including proposed operational procedures for tremie and pumping methods .
include procedure that will be used to verify the outlet end is at least num ft into the fluid concrete .
revise and resubmit the installation plan if it does not produce contract required results .
submit requests for changing the top of shaft elevations with the installation plan .
b .
trial drilled shafts if the contract requires trial drilled shafts construct them adjacent to the permanent shafts before constructing the permanent drilled shafts .
demonstrate that the methods and equipment can construct the contract required drilled shafts .
construct the trial shaft to the size and tip elevation of the deepest shaft shown on the plans .
to monitor excavation stability and groundwater seepage leave completed excavation open for at least num hr before concreting .
clean the excavation and fill the hole completely with mix design concrete .
remove the concrete num ft num m below the finished grade .
the engineer does not require reinforcing steel in trial drilled shafts .
drilled shaft foundations num num if the engineer determines that trial drilled shaft is unsatisfactory modify and resubmit the installation plan and drill a new trial shaft .
the engineer will not allow changes to the installation plan without resubmission .
c. drilled shafts num hole excavation excavate holes in accordance with the installation plan .
before drilling excavate for structure footings supported on drilled shafts and construct embankments and fills .
place the drilled shaft horizontally at the top of the shaft elevation within num in num mm of the position shown on the plans .
ensure the vertical shaft alignment does not vary by more than num percent of shaft depth .
ensure the battered shaft alignment does not vary by more than num percent of shaft depth .
use excavation equipment and methods that provide a shaft bottom normal to the axis of the shaft within num percent of the shaft diameter .
measurement of the shaft bottom tolerance will be left to the discretion of the engineer .
use excavation equipment that provides a drilled shaft diameter larger than or equal to the plan diameter minus num in num mm .
excavate below the elevation shown on the plans if the load bearing material does not satisfy plan requirements .
take soil samples or rock cores as shown on the plans to determine the character of the material directly below the shaft excavation .
immediately notify the engineer of deviations in subsurface conditions that may change the shaft depth .
before placing concrete check dimensions and alignment of shaft excavations in the presence of the engineer .
the engineer will measure final shaft depth after final cleaning .
if the sidewall of the hole softens due to excavation methods swells due to delays in concreting or degrades due to slurry cake buildup overream the sidewall from ½ in to num in num mm to num mm to sound material .
immediately before placing concrete clean the hole so num percent of each hole bottom has less than ½ in num mm of sediment .
ensure the remaining num percent of the hole has no greater than num½ in num mm of sediment or debris .
for dry holes reduce the water depth to num in num mm or less before placing concrete .
use at least one of the following methods for excavation a dry method use the dry construction method at sites where the engineer can visually inspect the shaft before concrete placement .
for the dry method drill the shaft remove accumulated water remove loose material from the excavation place the reinforcing cage and concrete the shaft in dry conditions .
if caving sloughing or swelling conditions exist or if depth of groundwater seepage exceeds num in num mm discontinue the dry construction method and use an alternative method approved by the engineer .
num drilled shaft foundations num bwet method use the wet construction method or a casing construction method for shafts that do not meet the requirements for dry construction .
for the wet method use water or slurry to maintain the stability of the hole while advancing the excavation to final depth placing the reinforcing cage and concreting the shaft .
the wet method involves the following work desanding and cleaning the slurry final cleaning of the excavation placing the shaft concrete with a tremie or concrete pump beginning at the shaft bottom providing temporary surface casings to aid shaft alignment and positioning and providing temporary surface casings to prevent sloughing of the top of the shaft excavation .
refer to subsection num.c.num slurry for slurry requirements .
c casing methods num general the department will not allow casing to the bottom of the shaft .
discontinue the casing at the top of the founding stratum as shown on the plans .
excavate below the casing using the dry or wet method .
to provide design frictional load capacity excavate into the founding stratum to the deepest length or depth shown on the plans .
install casing in accordance with subsection num.c.num exterior casings .
num temporary casing method if unable to use the dry or wet methods use the temporary casing construction method .
for temporary casing use the wet method to advance the excavation through caving material into a impervious formation set a casing complete excavation place the reinforcing cage and concrete the shaft while removing the casing .
alternatively drive or drill the casing into the impervious formation then excavate .
num permanent casing method use the permanent casing construction method if shown on the plans or where drilled shafts are in open water .
for the permanent casing method advance the excavation through caving material by driving or drilling a permanent casing to the contract required depth or into a nearly impervious formation whichever is deepest .
excavate to the final depth place the reinforcing cage and concrete the shaft .
if full penetration can not be attained during casing installation excavate within the embedded portion of the casing .
drill a pilot hole if necessary .
ensure continuous casing from the top of the shaft to the elevation shown on the plans .
if the drilled shafts are in drilled shaft foundations num num open water extend casings from above the water elevation into the ground to protect the shaft concrete from the water during concrete placement and curing .
num double casing method use the double casing construction method if the contract requires or as an alternative for the temporary casing method in the presence of severe groundwater or unstable soil conditions .
make the temporary exterior casing larger than the contract required shaft diameter and set a permanent interior casing into the top of the founding stratum after excavation completion .
supply the interior casing with a permanent inner diameter equal to the shaft diameter shown on the plans .
use a temporary exterior casing with an inner diameter at least num in num mm larger than the interior casing .
after placing the exterior casing complete the excavation as shown on the plans .
set the interior casing into the top of the founding stratum and brace it at the top .
remove the temporary casing after filling interior casing with concrete .
add concrete to maintain top of shaft elevation during removal .
after the concrete initially sets do not adjust the interior casing position .
dobstructions the department defines an obstruction as unexpected manmade materials through which excavation can not advance .
the department does not consider removal of tools lost in the excavation obstructions .
removal of naturallyoccurring material regardless of difficult or removal method is not considered an obstruction .
remove obstructions encountered during excavation .
notify the engineer in advance of the proposed obstruction removal method .
include a cost estimate for excess costs in accordance with subsection num differing site conditions for obstruction removal compensation .
use blasting methods if approved by the engineer .
num slurry before introducing it into the shaft hydrate the slurry by premixing the material with fresh water in accordance with the slurry manufacturers instructions .
provide slurry tanks with the capacity for slurry circulation storage and treatment .
the department will not allow the use of excavated slurry pits .
use either mineral bentonite or attapulgite or polymer slurry .
provide desanding equipment to limit slurry sand content at any point in the bore hole .
ensure slurry sand content is less than num percent by volume for mineral slurry and less than num percent for polymer slurry .
the engineer does not require desanding to set temporary casings .
during drilling maintain a slurry surface in the shaft at least num ft num m above the highest expected water table elevation and at a level that prevents the hole from caving .
when there is a sudden loss of slurry from the hole stop drilling and take corrective action to prevent slurry loss .
prevent the slurry from setting up in the shaft .
if the slurry construction method fails to produce the contract required results stop and use an alternative method approved by the engineer .
num drilled shaft foundations num when the excavation reaches the elevation shown on the plans and clean allow at least num min for polymer slurry to stand undisturbed .
clean the excavation base with a submersible pump or air lift .
maintain the density viscosity and ph of the slurry during shaft excavation in accordance with table num for mineral slurry and table num for polymer slurry .
table num acceptable range of mineral slurry property method at the time of slurry introduction in hole at time of concreting density a density balance lbft³ kgm³ num num num num num num num num viscosity marsh cone sqt sl num num num num num num num num ph ph paper or meter num num num num note perform tests when slurry temperature are above num f num c. a density values are for fresh water .
increase density values num lbft³ num kgm³ for salt water .
table num acceptable range of polymer slurry property method at the time of slurry introduction in hole at time of concreting density a density balance lbft³ kgm³ num num num num num num num num viscosity marsh cone sqt sl num num num num num num num num ph ph paper or meter num num num num note perform tests when slurry temperature are above num f num c. a density values are for fresh water .
increase density values num lbft³ num kgm³ for salt water take slurry samples using an engineer approved sampling tool .
extract slurry samples from the base of the shaft and from num ft num m above the shaft base .
perform four sets of tests during the first num hr of slurry use .
when the results are acceptable and consistent perform one test set for every num hr of slurry use .
make corrections if the test results indicate unacceptable slurry samples .
place concrete when the resampling and retesting indicate acceptable values .
provide reports of tests signed by an authorized representative after completion of each drilled shaft .
dispose of slurry at approved locations .
num exterior casings ensure casings produce a positive seal that prevents water or other material from piping into or out of the hole .
if substituting a casing with a longer or larger diameter casing through caving soils stabilize the excavation with slurry or backfill before installing the new casing .
consider subsurface exterior casings as temporary unless designated in the contract as permanent casing .
remove temporary casing before completing placement of concrete in cased drilled shaft .
while removing casing from the hole maintain at least num ft num m of fresh concrete in the casing above the surrounding drilled shaft foundations num num level of water or slurry .
ensure the excess concrete within the casing displaces fluid trapped behind the casing upward and discharges it at the ground surface without contaminating or displacing the shaft concrete .
the department defines defects in the drilled shaft as temporary casings that are bound or fouled during shaft construction and can not be practically removed as determined by the engineer .
extend casings above the surface to keep the excavation clean through concrete placement .
cut the casing off of permanent casings at the elevation shown on the plans and leave in place after concrete placement .
num reinforcing steel cages for drilled shafts a general place the reinforcing steel cage as a unit after the shaft excavation is approved by the engineer and before concrete placement .
tie reinforcing steel lap splices together using wire .
if the concrete is not placed immediately after the cage installation remove the cage and verify the integrity of the excavated area and ensure loose material is removed from the bottom of the hole .
tie and support the reinforcing steel to keep it within the contract required tolerances .
tie spacing devices at least at fifth points around the cage perimeter or one per num in num mm of shaft diameter .
space them at intervals no greater than num ft num m along the length of the cage .
place spacers within num in num mm of the top and bottom of the shaft .
use spacers that equal the shaft concrete in quality and durability .
during concrete placement provide positive support from the top for the reinforcing steel cage .
support the cage concentrically to prevent racking and distortion .
maintain the top of the reinforcing steel cage no greater than num in num mm above and no greater than num in num mm below the contract required position .
make corrections if the reinforcing steel cage is not maintained in that position .
do not construct additional shafts until the method of reinforcing steel cage support has been approved by the engineer .
provide additional reinforcing steel if conditions require shafts longer than shown on the plans .
baccess tubes for crosshole sonic logging provide crosshole sonic logging csl testing access tubes for drilled shafts if the contract requires .
use access tubes with num in num mm inner diameters that are made of schedule num steel pipe .
provide tubes including pipe joints with a round regular internal diameter that allows a num in num mm diameter source and receiver probes to pass unobstructed .
make the tubes and joints watertight and corrosion free with clean surfaces that allow a good bond between the concrete and the tubes .
install access tubes to the full depth of each shaft for csl testing equipment .
unless otherwise required by the contract install the number of access tubes in each drill shaft in accordance with table num .
num drilled shaft foundations num table num minimum number of access tubes per drilled shaft planned shaft diameter ft m minimum number of access tubes dnum dnum num num d num num d num num num d num num d num num num d num num d num num num d num num d num num num d num num d num num num d num num d num num fit tubes with a watertight shoe on the bottom and a removable cap on the top .
attach the tubes to the interior of the reinforcement cage in a regular symmetric pattern equally spaced around the perimeter of the cage .
install the tubes parallel to each other and vertical .
start the tubes from the shaft bottom and end at least num ft num m above the shaft top .
if the shaft top is subsurface extend the tubes at least num ft num m above the ground water surface or both .
avoid damaging the tubes during reinforcement installation operations in the drilled shaft hole .
before concrete placement fill the access tubes with clean water and cap the tube tops .
after concrete placement avoid breaking the bond between the access tubes and the concrete .
num concrete for drilled shafts place concrete after completing excavation and placing the reinforcing steel cage .
complete concreting in a shaft and remove the temporary casing within num hr of beginning concrete placement .
the department will not allow retempering concrete that has developed an initial set .
before placing concrete in a wet hole allow water to seek its natural hydraulic head .
using a tremie or concrete pump place concrete in one continuous operation from the bottom to the top of the shaft .
place concrete until acceptance quality concrete reaches the top of the shaft .
for a dry shaft overflow the top with num ft num mm of concrete .
for a wet shaft overflow the top with num ft num m of concrete .
continue overflow of concrete in shafts until uncontaminated concrete is evident .
before initial concrete sets consolidate the top num ft num m of the shaft using engineer approved vibratory equipment .
finish the top of the shaft from num in num mm lower to num in num mm higher than the elevation shown on the plans .
in wet holes consolidate after removing water above the concrete surface .
place the discharge end of a tremie or concrete pump at the shaft base elevation .
keep the discharge end immersed at least num ft num m below the surface of the fluid concrete .
maintain a positive head of concrete in the tremie or pump during concrete placement .
if the discharge end is removed from the fluid concrete column during the concrete placement and concrete is discharged above the rising concrete surface into displaced water remove the reinforcing cage and concrete complete sidewall removal as directed by the engineer and reconstruct the shaft .
if the top of the shaft is above ground form the shaft from the top to at least num ft num m below finished ground .
if the top of the shaft is below ground use a drilled shaft foundations num num temporary oversize surface casing to control material caving into the freshly placed concrete .
the engineer will sample concrete for acceptance at the point of discharge into the tremie or concrete pump hopper .
cure exposed concrete surfaces in accordance with section num structural concrete .
a tremies the department defines tremies as tubes that discharge concrete at the shaft base .
use watertight tremies to place concrete in wet or dry holes .
ensure the bottom of the tremie can be sealed and charged with concrete in the dry and then opened in place at the bottom of the shaft .
the department will not allow the use of tremies containing aluminum parts that will come in contact with concrete .
ensure that the tremie can be lowered rapidly to retard or stop the flow of concrete .
provide a tremie with an inner diameter from num in to num in num mm to num mm clean and smooth surfaces and a wall that prevents crimping or sharp bends .
fit the top with a hopper .
construct the discharge end of the tremie to allow free radial concrete flow during placement .
bconcrete pumps use pumped concrete placement in wet or dry holes .
use at least num in num mm diameter discharge tubes with watertight joints .
place the discharge tube at the shaft base elevation .
for wet holes use pumps with a device at the end of the discharge tube to seal out water while the tube fills with concrete .
if a plug is used remove it from the hole .
alternatively use a plug of engineer approved material that will prevent a defect in the shaft .
num application of construction loads if the contract requires nondestructive testing ndt the shaft must pass ndt before application of any loads or proceeding with the construction of the pier .
if the contract does not require ndt or the ndt passes the tests allow concrete in the shaft to reach at least num percent of the specified strength before application of loads .
determine strengths from test cylinders cured at the work site under similar environmental conditions in accordance with section num portland cement concrete .
num nondestructive testing of drilled shafts a general if the contract requires provide csl testing to check the integrity of concrete drilled shafts .
if the contract requires csl access tubes but csl testing was not specified and the engineer observes a construction problem during shaft construction the department will conduct csl testing .
if access tubes are not required by the contract or installed the engineer may require full depth coring to determine the soundness of a drilled shaft in accordance with subsection num.c.num.g core drilling of drilled shaft concrete .
num drilled shaft foundations num bndt consultant if the contract requires csl testing provide an experienced nondestructive testing ndt consultant .
submit resumes of the consulting personnel for engineer approval before testing .
perform csl testing and analysis under the supervision of a registered professional engineer .
ensure the consultant has at least num year of experience in field testing and analyzing csl testing .
c testing schedule wait at least num hr after placing concrete in a shaft before csl testing .
after concrete placement finish csl testing within num calendar days for steel access tubes .
dcsl test equipment use csl test equipment that can perform the following functions display individual csl records .
record csl data .
analyze receiver responses .
print csl logs .
test in num in num mm inside diameter id access tubes .
generate an ultrasonic voltage pulse to excite the source with a synchronized triggering system to start the recording system .
measure and record the depths of csl probes at the time signals are recorded .
filter and amplify signals .
e csl logging procedures test perimeter tube pairs and major diagonal tube pairs .
if a possible defect is indicated conduct csl testing between additional pairs of tubes as specified by the ndt consultant .
perform csl tests with the source and receiver probes in the same horizontal plane unless tests indicate potential defects .
to further evaluate a questionable zone conduct angled tests consisting of the source and receiver vertically offset in the access tubes .
make csl measurements at depth intervals of num in num mm .
pull the probes starting from the bottom of the tubes over a depthmeasuring device .
remove slack from the cables before pulling to provide accurate depth measurements .
report indicated defects to the engineer and conduct further tests to evaluate the extent of the defects .
f csl testing results within num hr of csl testing provide the engineer with a preliminary report .
within num working days of testing provide two copies of the final csl testing report sealed by the professional engineer supervising the testing .
in the final report include the csl logs with analyses of the initial pulse arrival time versus depth and pulse energy or amplitude versus depth .
present a csl log for each tube pair tested with defect zones indicated on the logs and discussed in the test report .
include the following in the report a summary of the csl test results that covers drilled shaft identification drilled shaft foundations num num test date shaft age at time of csl testing drilled shaft diameter number of csl tubes tested test length average compression velocity and defect descriptions .
include the following in the defect description of the report the csl tube number depth below concrete top percent concrete wave speed reduction and recommended concrete condition rating .
the engineer will evaluate the csl test results and determine the acceptability of the drilled shaft construction .
g core drilling of drilled shaft concrete if the engineer determines a drilled shaft unacceptable the engineer may require continuous coring of the shaft using an nw size core barrel in accordance with astm dnum .
the engineer will specify the number depth and location of cores .
submit the methods and equipment for coring and grouting to the engineer for approval before coring .
place the cores in a crate and mark the shaft depth at each core recovery interval .
submit the cores and a log for recovered cores .
when the engineer determines that the quality of the concrete in the shaft represented by the core samples is acceptable construct above the drilled shaft .
the drilled shaft will be considered defective if the engineer determines that the quality of the concrete in a drilled shaft is unacceptable .
habandoning csl access tubes after completing csl testing and obtaining the engineers approval to continue construction above the shafts dewater and portland cement grout the access tubes in the drilled shafts .
submit the grout mix design and grouting method for the engineers approval .
num defective shafts correct defective shafts as required by the contract .
submit a plan for correction to the engineer .
corrective action may consist of but not limited to the following remove the shaft concrete and deepen the shaft to compensate for loss of frictional capacity in the cased zone if temporary casing can not be removed .
provide straddle shafts to compensate for capacity loss .
provide a replacement shaft .
num method of measurement the engineer will measure the length of drilled shafts and trial drilled shafts from the shaft base to the top of shaft .
the engineer will base measurements on elevations num drilled shaft foundations num num drilled shaft foundations shown on the plans or approved by the engineer .
the engineer will not measure corrective work or miscellaneous items such as soil samples and rock cores required by the contract rebar splices permanent casings lost tools and equipment overreamed excavation surface excavation and backfill overflow concrete and concrete placed outside the neat lines of the shaft .
the engineer will measure csl access tubes if shown on the plans .
if required by the contract the engineer will measure csl testing per drilled shaft tested .
the engineer will not measure tests for determining the extent of defects .
the engineer will not make reductions in drilled shaft measurements due to obstructions .
num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit a drilled shafts linear foot meter b trial drilled shafts linear foot meter c crosshole sonic logging d csl access tubes e obstructions the department will pay for the following under a supplemental agreement approved obstructions nondestructive testing directed by the engineer that reveals no structural defects and contractor soil sampling or rock coring directed by the engineer that reveals no structural defects .
the department will not pay for the following nondestructive testing directed by the engineer that reveals structural defects requiring corrective action contractor soil sampling or rock coring directed by the engineer that reveals structural defects requiring corrective action and tube lengths in excess of the length shown on the plans or otherwise approved by the engineer .
the department will consider the cost of abandoning csl access tubes to be included in the contract unit price for csl access tubes .
each posttensioning num num section num posttensioning num description a .
general posttensioning work consists of stressing concrete by furnishing placing and tensioning of posttensioning steel in accordance with details shown in the contract documents and as specified in these specifications .
this work consists of providing and installing any appurtenant items necessary for the particular stressing system to be used including but not limited to ducts anchorage assemblies and grout used for pressure grouting ducts .
b. definitions anchorage assembly .
an assembly of various hardware components that secures the end of a tendon after stressing transferring the tendon force into the concrete .
anticipated set .
the wedge set in the design calculation of posttensioning forces at the time of load transfer .
bar .
coarsely threaded high strength steel bars from ⅝ in to num¾ in num mm to num mm in diameter .
bearing plate .
transfers the tendon force directly into a structure or the ground .
bleed .
excess flow of water in or out of new grout .
coupler .
transfers the prestressing force between partial length posttensioning tendons .
duct .
conduit that accommodates posttensioning steel and provides a space for the grout that protects the steel .
family of systems .
groups of posttensioning tendon assemblies that use common anchorage devices and design .
fluidity .
measure of time in seconds for a quantity of grout to pass through a flow cone .
grout .
mixture of cementitious materials and water with or without mineral additives or admixtures proportioned to a consistency that can be pumped without segregation into the duct around the posttensioning steel .
grout cap .
contains the grout and forms a protective cover sealing the posttensioning steel at the anchorage .
inlet .
tubing or duct used to inject the grout into the duct .
outlet .
tubing or duct that allows air water grout and bleed water to escape from the duct .
permanent stress and permanent force .
stress and force remaining in the posttensioning steel after losses induced by the posttensioning system .
num posttensioning num num posttensioning .
method of stressing in which tendon tensioning occurs after the concrete reaches the strength required by the contract .
prestressing steel .
steel element of a posttensioning tendon elongated and anchored to provide a permanent prestressing force .
posttensioning scheme or layout .
pattern size and locations of posttensioning tendons specified by the designer .
posttensioning system .
an assembly of tendons of a size and type required by the contract that meets the system pressure testing specifications .
internal and external systems are independent of one another .
pressure rating .
maximum estimated pressure that water in a duct or duct component can continuously exert without failure working pressure .
set also anchor set or wedge set .
total movement of a point on the strand just behind the anchoring wedges during load transfers from the jack to the anchorages .
set movement is the sum of the wedge slippage with respect to the anchorage head and the elastic deformation of the anchor components .
for bars set is the total movement of a point on the bar just behind the anchor nut at transfer and is the sum of bar slippage and the elastic deformation of the anchorage components .
strand .
highstrength steel wires wound together .
strands have six outer wires helically wound around a single straight wire of a similar diameter .
tendon .
at least one posttensioning steel element and anchorage assembly that impart stressing forces to a structural member or the ground .
tendon size .
number of individual strands of a certain diameter or the bar diameter .
tendon type .
location of the tendon relative to the internal or external concrete shape .
thixotropic .
property of a material that enables it to stiffen in a short time while at rest but to acquire a lower viscosity when mechanically agitated .
wedge plate .
hardware that holds the wedges of a multistrand tendon and transfers the tendon force to the anchorage assembly .
wedge .
conicallyshaped device that anchors the strand in the wedge plate .
num materials provide materials in accordance with the following subsections material subsection posttensioning steel wire num bars for posttensioning num water num posttensioning grout num epoxy resin and adhesives num magnesium ammonium phosphate concrete num elastomeric coating system num posttensioning num num a .
certification of posttensioning systems provide posttensioning systems approved by the departments materials division through certified test reports from an independent laboratory and submitted by the manufacturer .
ensure the manufacturer tests plastic components at a certified independent laboratory accredited by the geosynthetic accreditation institute gai or the american association for laboratory accreditation aala .
the department will allow an independent laboratory outside the us to certify test reports if the departments materials division approves of the lab .
if modifying or replacing posttensioning components retest the system .
provide the engineer with certification confirming that the plastic from the duct sample complies with the contract required cell class stresscrack rating and the antioxidant amount in accordance with subsection num.g duct and pipe .
ensure the system components are stamped with the suppliers name trademark model number and catalog designation size .
provide posttensioning systems developed and tested for bar systems internal corrugated duct and external smooth duct applications with standard tendons containing num num num num num and num strands .
provide standard tendon sizes consisting of num in num mm diameter strands .
b. posttensioning system provide a posttensioning system to the engineer for approval .
the department will not allow substitution of components within an approved system .
store materials in a weatherproof building or container .
provide tendons enclosed in anchorages and ducts .
the department will not allow systems that transfer prestressing force by bonding the strand directly to concrete .
the engineer will allow embedded anchors for bars .
the engineer will not allow systems that use formed ungrouted voids .
c. posttensioning anchorages test the anchorages while unbonded to ensure they develop at least num percent of the ultimate tensile strength of the posttensioning steel without exceeding the anticipated set .
design anchorages so the average concrete bearing stress is in accordance with aashto lrfd bridge design specifications .
test and provide written certification that confirms anchorages at least meet testing specifications in aashto lrfd bridge construction specifications .
galvanize the anchorage body in accordance with astm a num .
the engineer will not require galvanizing for other anchorage components .
provide ferrous metal to construct the bearing surface and wedge plate .
bolt a vented permanent fiber reinforced plastic groutcap to the anchorages .
provide wedge plates with centering lugs or shoulders to align them with the bearing plate .
cast anchorages with grout outlets for inspection from the anchorage top or front .
construct grout outlets to facilitate drilling using a straight bit .
provide an endoscope to allow the engineer to inspect behind the anchor plate .
alternatively construct num posttensioning num anchorages to facilitate inspection from the top and front or fabricate two anchorages to provide two inspection entry locations .
d. bar couplers provide couplers in accordance with aashto lrfd bridge design specifications and bridge construction specifications .
test and provide written certification that shows that the couplers are in accordance with aashto lrfd bridge construction specifications .
the engineer must approve the use and location of bar couplers for permanent applications .
e. inlets outlets valves and plugs provide permanent grout inlets outlets and threaded plugs of astm a num type num stainless steel nylon or polyolefin .
ensure nylon products have a cell class of spanum .
ensure products made from polyolefin contain antioxidants with an oxidation induction time oit of at least num min in accordance with astm d num .
test the remolded finished polyolefin material for stress crack resistance in accordance with astm f num .
use an applied stress of num psi num mpa with a failure time of at least num hr .
provide inlets and outlets equipped with pressure rated mechanical shutoff valves or plugs .
ensure inlets outlets valves and plugs are rated for a pressure of at least num psi num mpa .
provide inlets and outlets with an inside diameter of at least ¾ in num mm for strand and ⅜ in num mm for single bar tendons and fourstrand duct .
provide dual mechanical shutoff valves when vertically grouting .
f. permanent grout caps provide permanent grout caps made from fiberreinforced polymer or astm a num type numl stainless steel .
ensure the resins in the fiberreinforced polymer are nylon acrylonitrite butadiene styrene abs or polyester .
seal the cap with oring seals or precision fitted flat gaskets placed against the bearing plate .
place a grout vent on the top of the cap .
provide grout caps with a pressure rating of at least num psi num mpa .
provide astm a num type numl stainless steel bolts to attach the cap to the anchorage .
provide certified test reports of the steel chemical analysis if using stainless steel grout caps .
g. duct and pipe num general provide plastic duct steel pipe or both .
provide airtight and watertight connectors connections and posttensioning hardware components that pass the pressure test .
provide smooth plastic duct in posttensioning systems for external tendons .
provide corrugated plastic duct in posttensioning systems for internal .
num duct or pipe minimum diameter provide duct with an internal diameter at least ½ in num mm larger than the outside diameter of the posttensioning bar .
for posttensioning bars with couplers provide duct ½ in num mm longer than the outside diameter of the coupler .
for multistrand tendons provide ducts with a crosssectional area at least two and onehalf times larger than the crosssectional area of the posttensioning steel .
posttensioning num num num connection tolerance between pipe and duct directly connect steel pipe and plastic duct if the outside diameters vary by less than num in num mm .
use a reducer to fit steel pipes and plastic ducts with diameters outside the tolerances required by the contract .
num steel pipes use galvanized schedule num steel pipes where shown on the plans and in deviation blocks .
equip steel pipes in the tendon anchorage zones with shear transfer devices as shown on the plans .
num corrugated plastic duct the department will not allow the use of ducts manufactured from recycled material .
manufacture ducts using seamless fabrication methods .
provide corrugated duct manufactured from uncolored unfilled polypropylene in accordance with astm d num .
provide polypropylene with a cell classification range from ppnumbnum to ppnumbnum .
provide white duct with antioxidants with an oit of at least num min in accordance with astm d num .
provide duct with a nonyellowing light stabilizer .
use table num to determine the minimum duct thickness .
table num duct dimensions duct shape duct diameter in mm duct thickness in mm flat any size num num round num num num num round num num num num round num num num num round num num num num round num num num num round num num num num round num num num num round num num num num num testing requirements for corrugated plastic duct provide duct system components and accessories in accordance with chapter num article num through article num of international federation of structural concrete fib technical report bulletin num corrugated plastic ducts for internal bonded posttensioning .
modify the requirements in fib technical report bulletin num as follows conduct the lateral load resistance test fib num without using a duct stiffener plate .
use a load of num lbf num n for all sizes ensure the wear resistance of the duct fib num is at least num in num mm for ducts no greater than num in num mm in diameter and at least num in num mm for ducts greater than num in num mm in diameter ensure the bond behavior of the duct fib num achieves num percent guaranteed ultimate tensile strength guts in a maximum length of num duct diameters .
num posttensioning num num minimum bending radius for corrugated plastic duct ensure the manufacturer establishes the minimumbending radius for the duct through testing .
the test consists of modifying a duct wear test in accordance with chapter num article num of fib technical report bulletin num corrugated plastic ducts for internal bonded posttensioning .
provide identical test and wear test apparatus with clamp forces that are a function of the number of strands in the duct .
modify the procedure as follows do not move the sample along the strand to simulate wear .
ensure the test lasts num days .
when the test period is complete remove the duct .
ensure the wall thickness along the strand path is at least num in num mm for ducts with diameters no greater than num in num mm diameter and at least num in num mm for ducts with diameters greater than num in num mm .
num corrugated duct connections and fittings make splices joints couplings and connections to anchorages using devices and methods that produce a smooth interior alignment .
design airtight connections and fittings .
the department will not allow the use of duct tape to join or repair duct connections .
construct connections and fittings from polyolefin materials containing antioxidant stabilizers in accordance with subsection num.e inlets outlets valves and plugs .
num smooth duct provide smooth duct manufactured from num percent virgin polyethylene resin in accordance with astm d num .
provide polyethylene resin with a cell class of at least numc .
provide resin containing antioxidants with an oit of num min in accordance with astm d num .
manufacture duct with a num dimension ratio dr in accordance with astm d num or astm f num for the manufacturing process used .
provide smooth duct with a pressure rating of num psi num mpa .
provide duct manufactured in accordance with astm d num or astm f num .
numexternal duct connections heat weld to make splices between sections of plastic duct in accordance with the duct manufacturers instructions .
alternatively provide mechanical couplers as required by the contract .
provide connections with a pressure rating of at least num psi num mpa produce a smooth interior alignment and connect without lips or kinks .
make connections between embedded steel pipe and plastic duct using a mechanical coupler or a circular sleeve made of ethylene propylene deine monomer epdm .
provide epdm with a pressure rating of at least num psi num mpa and num percent quality retention in accordance with astm d num ozone chamber exposure method b .
provide epdm sleeves with a wall thickness of at least ⅜ in num mm and reinforced with at least four sheets of plypolyester reinforcement .
use a ⅜ in num mm wide powerseated band and type num stainless steel clamps on the boot posttensioning num num ends to seal against grout leakage .
install the band with a seating force from num lbf to num lbf num n to num n. numcorrugated ferrous metal ducts the department will not allow the use of corrugated ferrous metal ducts .
numshipping and storage of ducts provide ducts with end caps to seal the ducts from contamination .
ship the ducts in capped and covered bundles .
protect ducts against ultraviolet degradation crushing excessive bending dirt and corrosive elements during transportation storage and handling .
before incorporating the ducts into the bridge component keep the end caps in place .
store ducts on a raised platform in a dry location protected from the sun and covered to prevent contamination .
ensure ducts are clean before using .
wash the ducts to remove contamination if necessary .
numflush water num lbgal num kgl slack lime calcium hydroxide or quicklime calcium oxide .
h. mechanical couplers and heat shrink sleeve requirements construct mechanical couplers with stainless steel plastic or both .
to construct plastic couplers provide plastic resins for plastic ducts as required by the contract .
make metallic components using astm a num type num stainless steel .
provide and install heat shrink plastic sleeves sized for the coupled duct .
ensure the sleeves consist of an irradiated and crosslinked highdensity polyethylene backing for external applications and lineardensity polyethylene for internal applications .
provide heat shrink sleeves with an adhesive layer that withstands num f num c in accordance with table num table num heat shrink sleeve specifications minimum requirements property test method internal application external application minimum fully recovered thickness num mil num mm num mil num mm peel strength astm d num num pli num n num pli num n softening point astm e num num f num c num f num c lap shear din num num m num psi num kpa num psi num kpa tensile strength astm d num num psi num mpa num psi num mpa hardness astm d num num shore d num shore d water absorption astm d num num num color yellow black install heat shrink sleeves in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
i .
system test requirements for each family of posttensioning systems assemble systems and test the pressure required by the contract .
test the largest and smallest assemblies from each family .
include plastictosteel pipe connections and segment duct couplers .
num external duct systems for external ducts test the following num posttensioning num the anchorage and its connection to the duct or pipe as required by the contract for internal duct systems .
the grout cap to anchorage fit .
the duct and pipe assembly by maintaining a pressure of num psi num mpa in the system for num hr .
after conditioning ensure the assembly sustains a num psi num mpa internal pressure for num min without losing more than num psi num kpa .
num internal duct systems provide an internal duct system assembly in accordance with chapter num article num stage num and stage num testing of the fib technical report bulletin num corrugated plastic ducts for internal bonded posttensioning .
for tests in precast segmental construction include one duct coupler for use at the segment joint .
test the coupler by casting the coupler into a twopart concrete test block using match cast techniques .
provide blocks at least num in num in num in num mm num mm num mm .
after the concrete hardens separate the blocks and clean bondbreaker materials from the surface .
using an external apparatus clamp the blocks together and maintain num psi num kpa pressure on the block crosssection throughout the test .
do not apply epoxy during this portion of the test .
when the test is complete pressurize the duct to num psi num kpa and lockoff the outside air source .
ensure the assembly loses no more than num psi num kpa .
separate the duct coupler blocks from the duct system .
remove the clamping device and place a num in num mm layer of epoxy on the face of both blocks .
clamp the blocks together with a pressure of num psi num kpa .
maintain the pressure on the block crosssection for num hr .
demolish the blocks after removing the clamp .
ensure the coupler ducts are intact epoxy free and do not show signs of failure .
test the grout cap to anchorage seal as required by the contract .
the department requires one test for systems that use the same anchorages and caps as external systems .
num grout provide grouts in accordance with subsection num posttensioning grout .
select the posttensioning grout based on use .
mix grout with potable water in accordance with subsection num water .
maintain grout fluidity in accordance with the grout manufacturers recommendations .
test the fluidity using a flow cone .
submit to the engineer a copy of the manufacturers grout qc data sheet for the lot numbers and shipments sent to the job site .
require the supplier to retest and recertify materials sent from the manufacturer more than num months before use .
store grout in a dry location near the bridge site .
if stored in the open place grout on a raised platform with waterproof covering .
do not store grout onsite for longer than one month .
num posttensioning steel test posttensioning strand and bar in accordance with subsection num posttensioning steel wire .
posttensioning num num j .
testing by the contractor num tendon modulus of elasticity test if the contract requires or the engineer directs perform a tendon modulus of elasticity test .
to determine modulus of elasticity bench test two samples of each tendon size before stressing the initial tendon .
for this test ensure the bench length between anchorages is at least num ft num m and the tendon duct is at least num in num mm clear of the tendon .
stress the tendon at an anchor assembly with a load cell at the dead end .
tension the test specimen to num percent of ultimate in ten increments .
then detention from num percent to zero in ten decrements .
for each increment and decrement record the gauge pressure elongations and load cell force .
note the elongations of the tendon at the ends and the central num ft num m. measure the elongation to within num in num mm .
correct the elongations for the actual anchorage set of the dead end .
calculate the modulus as follows dl a l p e where e modulus of elasticity p force in tendon poundforce newton l distance between wedges and dead end wedges or length in center num ft num m of tendon feet meter a cross sectional area of the tendon square inch square millimeter and dl strand elongation for load p. submit revisions to the engineer if the bench test varies from the modulus of elasticity on the shop drawings or working drawings by more than num percent .
if the elongations of the tendons do not meet the contract required tolerances the engineer may require additional tendon modulus of elasticity tests .
if the source of post tensioning steel changes during the project the engineer will require additional test series or substantiation from previous projects .
ensure the number of tests does not exceed two per source .
submit the test apparatus and methods to the engineer .
conduct tests in the engineers presence .
num in place friction test for tendons longer than num ft num m test at least one tendon in tendon group that performs the same function .
the department defines functional tendon groups as cantilever tendons continuity tendons draped external tendons or continuous profiled tendons passing through at least one span .
ensure the selected tendon represents the size and length of the tendon group .
the engineer will not require the inplace friction test on projects with straight tendons in flat or precast voided slabs .
stress the tendon at an anchor assembly with a load cell or a second certified jack at the assembly dead end .
stress to num percent of ultimate tendon strength in eight increments .
at each increment record the gauge pressure elongations and num posttensioning num num load cell force .
compensate for wedge seating in the live and dead end friction in the anchorages wedge plates and jack .
for long tendons requiring multiple jack pulls and intermediate temporary anchoring keep an account of the elongation at the jacking end .
if the elongations fall outside the num percent range of the calculated elongations investigate and make detailed recalculations to ensure the final tendon forces are as shown on the plans .
in reconciling theoretical and actual elongations do not vary the friction and wobble coefficients by more than num percent .
as the engineer approves correct or compensate for duct misalignment that causes elongation at no additional cost to the department .
the engineer will require one successful friction test for each tendon group .
the engineer may specify additional friction tests if forces and elongations are irreconcilable during stressing operations .
submit the test apparatus types and test methods to the engineer .
conduct tests in the engineers presence .
num tests reports required submit two copies of the test report for the tendon modulus of elasticity test to the engineer at least num days before installing the tendon .
submit two copies of the test report for the in place friction test to the engineer within num weeks of installation of the test tendon .
num application of test results reevaluate the theoretical elongations shown on the shop drawings or working drawings using the test results for tendon modulus of elasticity and in place friction .
submit revisions to the engineer .
num equipment a. stressing equipment use equipment provided by the supplier of the posttensioning system .
num stressing jacks and gauges equip the jacks with a pressure gauge .
provide a pressure gauge with a dial at least num in num mm in diameter .
num calibration of jacks and gauges calibrate the jacks and gauges as a unit .
ensure the calibration consists of three test cycles with the cylinder extension of the jack in various positions .
at each pressure increment average the forces from the test cycle .
calibrate the equipment in the same configuration intended for the project .
ensure the posttensioning supplier or an independent laboratory initially calibrates jacks and gauges .
use load cells calibrated within the past num months to calibrate stressing equipment .
for jack and gauge units provide certified calibration charts and curves to the engineer before the start of stressing and every num months thereafter or as directed by the engineer .
posttensioning num num use a master gauge to calibrate equipment after the initial calibration .
give the engineer the master gauge in a waterproof container to protect the calibration gauge during shipment .
provide a quickattach hydraulic manifold for the master gauge .
the engineer will keep the master gauge for the project duration .
recalibrate using a load cell after any jack repair .
b. grouting equipment provide grouting equipment consisting of watermeasuring devices a highspeed shear colloidal mixer a storage hopper and a pump with connecting hoses valves and pressure gauges .
provide pumping equipment that can completely fill the posttensioning duct system uninterrupted at a uniform rate within num min in accordance with subsection num.hnum grout operations .
provide vacuum grouting equipment before starting grouting operations .
num mixer storage hopper provide a highspeed shear colloidal mixer to continuously mix and produce a homogeneous stable grout free of lumps and undispersed cement .
provide colloidal grout machinery with a charging and holding tank .
provide a blending tank equipped with a high shear colloidal mixer .
keep the holding tank agitated and at least partially full during the pumping to prevent drawing air into the posttensioning duct .
add water during the initial mix using a flow meter or calibrated water reservoir with a measuring accuracy within num percent of the total water volume .
num grout pumping equipment provide positive displacement type pumping equipment that can circulate the grout between operations and maintain pressure on grouted ducts .
fit the ducts with a valve that does not lose pressure when closed .
provide a continuous flow of grout that maintains a discharge pressure of at least num psi num mpa .
provide pumps with seals that prevent foreign substances from entering and loss of grout or water .
ensure the capacity achieves an optimal grouting rate .
place a pressure gauge with a scale reading in increments of no greater than num psi num kpa at the duct inlet .
if using hoses longer than num ft num m place one gauge at the pump and one gauge at the inlet .
provide grout hoses with a diameter and rated pressure capacity compatible with the pump output .
num vacuum grouting equipment during grouting operations provide the following for vacuum grouting equipment at the job site volumeter for measuring void volume vacuum pump with a capacity of at least num cfm num cmm and equipped with a flowmeter that measures the amount of injected grout manual colloidal mixers dissolvers or both for voids less than num ft³ num l and standard colloidal mixers for voids at least num ft³ num l. num posttensioning num num num standby equipment during grouting operations provide a standby grout mixer and pump .
num construction methods a .
qualifications perform posttensioning field operations under the supervision of a posttensioning and with a grouting technician with at least three years experience and is an asbi certified grouting technician holder .
for segmental construction ensure the supervisor and one grouting technician are asbi certified grouting technician holders .
b .
shop drawings submit shop drawings and work plans in accordance with subsection num plans and working drawings .
include details about the following posttensioning systems tendon geometry and locations shown on the plans in accordance with the limitations of the engineer approved posttensioning system inlets outlets high point outlet inspection anchorage inspection permanent grout caps protection system materials application limits and method and spacing of duct supports .
c. protection of posttensioning steel num shipping handling and storage protect posttensioning steel against damage and corrosion .
the engineer will reject damaged posttensioning steel .
inspect reels that contain broken wires and discard damaged strands .
provide bright and uniformly colored wire with no foreign matter or surface pitting .
package posttensioning steel in containers to protect them from damage and corrosion during shipping and storage .
place a corrosion inhibitor in the package or in carrier type packaging material .
provide a corrosion inhibitor with no deleterious effect on the steel the concrete or the steeltoconcrete bond strength .
provide corrosion inhibitor carrier packaging .
replace damaged packaging .
ensure the shipping package clearly states that the package contains highstrength posttensioning steel the handling care and information about the corrosion inhibitor .
designate low relaxation strands in accordance with astm a num .
the engineer will reject undesignated strands .
num during installation in the structure the engineer will not consider light corrosion cause for rejection of the posttensioning steel but will reject any stands with pits or second loss .
posttensioning num num d. placing ducts num general fasten posttensioning anchorages ducts inlet pipes outlet pipes miscellaneous hardware reinforcing bars and embedments where shown on the plans shop drawings working drawings .
minimize the use of duct splices in constructing tendons .
num ducts fasten internal ducts at intervals no greater than num in num mm for steel pipes num in num mm for round plastic duct and num in num mm for flat ducts .
ensure straight external tendon ducts between internal duct connections at anchorages diaphragms and deviation saddles .
support external tendon ducts at intermediate locations as shown on the plans or shop drawings .
ensure smooth and continuous alignments with no lips kinks or dents .
check and repair ducts before placing concrete .
seal duct ends anchorage connections splices inlets and outlets after installation and until grouting completion .
use a plumbers plug to seal anchorage and duct terminations .
install inlets and outlets with plugs or valves in the closed position .
leave low point outlets open .
the department will not allow the use of duct tape .
num splices and joints the engineer will consider splices joints couplings inlets outlets and valves part of the posttensioning system .
use shrinksleeve material to repair ducts .
the department will not allow the use of duct tape to repair or seal duct .
num location of grout inlets and outlets equip grout inlets and outlets with positive shutoff devices .
place grout inlets and outlets in the following positions or as shown on the plans or shop drawings at the top of the tendon anchorage at the top of the grout cap at the duct high points if the vertical distance between the highest and lowest point is more than num in num m at num ft num m past duct high points on the down stream side opposite the grouting direction at low points and at major changes in the cross section of the duct .
extend grout tubes out of the concrete so valves can close .
num tolerances ensure posttensioning ducts are within the tolerances specified in table num otherwise ensure tendons are within ¼ in num mm of the position required by the contract .
num posttensioning num table num duct position tolerances tolerances vertical position in mm lateral position in mm horizontal tendons in slabs or in slab regions of larger members ¼ num ½ num longitudinal draped superstructure tendons in webs tendon over supports or in middle third of span ¼ num ¼ num tendon in middle half of web depth ½ num ½ num longitudinal generally horizontal superstructure tendons in top or bottom of member ¼ num ¼ num horizontal tendons in substructures and foundations ½ num ½ num vertical tendons in webs longitudinal num num transverse ¼ num vertical tendons in pier shafts ½ num ¼ num ensure tendon path entrance and exit angles at anchorages concrete faces or both are within num num percent of the contract required angle .
ensure smooth transitions .
make angle changes at duct joints no greater than num num percent .
unless otherwise directed by the engineer place anchorages laterally within ¼ in num mm and along the tendon within num in num mm of the positions shown on the plans .
maintain minimum coverage of ducts .
center anchorage confinement reinforcement around the duct in spirals multiple ushaped bars or links .
ensure anchorage reinforcement starts within ½ in num mm of the main anchor plate back .
if the reinforcement conflicts with posttensioning duct positions adjust the reinforcement locally as approved by the engineer .
num internal duct pressure test for tests in precast segmental construction include one duct coupler for use at the segment joint .
test the coupler by casting the coupler into a twopart concrete test block using match cast techniques .
provide blocks at least num in num in num in num mm num mm num mm .
after the concrete hardens separate the blocks and clean bondbreaker materials from the surface .
using an external apparatus clamp the blocks together and maintain num psi num kpa pressure on the block crosssection throughout the test .
do not apply epoxy during this portion of the test .
before casting concrete pressuretest internal ducts except longitudinal ducts in segments of box girders .
seal the duct and test with compressed air to determine if the duct connections are tight .
pressurize the duct to num psi num kpa and lockoff the outside air source .
record the pressure loss for num min .
if the duct loses more than num psi num kpa repair the leaks as approved by the engineer .
separate the duct coupler blocks from the duct system .
remove the clamping device and place a num in num mm layer of epoxy on the face of both blocks .
posttensioning num num clamp the blocks together with a pressure of num psi num kpa .
maintain the pressure on the block crosssection for num hr .
demolish the blocks after removing the clamp .
ensure the coupler ducts are intact epoxy free and do not show signs of failure .
e. placing concrete num precautions place and consolidate concrete without damaging or displacing posttensioning ducts anchorage assemblies splices and connections reinforcement or embedments .
fabricate duct splices to prevent duct kinks during concrete placement .
use mandrels to maintain duct alignment and shape .
num proving of posttensioning ducts after concrete placement to ensure clear undamaged ducts that can accept posttensioning tendons pass a torpedo through the duct .
use a torpedo with the same crosssection as the duct and ¼ in num mm smaller than the duct dimensions .
perform torpedo test in the presence of the engineer .
do not make deductions to the torpedo dimensions for tolerances .
for straight ducts use a torpedo at least num ft num m long .
for curved ducts determine the torpedo length so when both ends touch the outermost wall of the duct the torpedo clears the innermost wall by ¼ in num mm .
ensure the torpedo passes through the duct without excessive effort or mechanical assistance .
unless a repair clears the duct the engineer will reject ducts if torpedoes can not pass .
num problems and remedies the engineer will reject deficient ducts .
make duct repairs as approved by the engineer .
f. installing tendons do not install permanent tendons if grouting operations can not be completed in num calendar days .
blow oilfree compressed air through the duct to remove excess water .
push or pull posttensioning strands through the ducts to make a tendon .
prevent the strands from snagging on lips or joints .
roundoff or cap the ends of pushed strands .
ensure a mechanical device does not rotate the strand during the posttensioning strand installation .
alternatively assemble strands to form the tendon .
pull the tendon through the duct using a special steel wire sock .
the department will not allow welding the strand ends together .
round the end of the preassembled tendon .
cut strands using an abrasive saw .
the department will not allow flamecutting .
install permanent tendons after testing as required by the contract except for tendons tested for the in place friction test .
g. posttensioning operations num general apply posttensioning forces after concrete attains the contract required compressive strength determined by cylinder tests .
stress and grout ducts in the presence of the departments materials engineer .
num posttensioning num num stressing tendons tension posttensioning steel with hydraulic jacks to the posttensioning force shown on the plans or shop drawings .
the department will not allow the use of monostrand jacks to stress tendons with at least five strands .
a maximum stress at jacking ensure the maximum temporary jacking stress in the posttensioning steel is no greater than num percent of its contract required ultimate tensile strength .
elongate without overstressing tendons .
binitial and permanent stresses anchor the posttensioning steel at initial stresses that maintain permanent stresses shown on the plans or shop drawings .
unless the departments bridge engineer reviews and the engineer approves otherwise ensure the initial stress after anchor set is no greater than num percent of the contract required posttensioning steel ultimate tensile strength .
c stressing sequence unless otherwise shown on the plans stress permanent posttensioning tendons from both ends .
apply the force at one end then the other or at both ends simultaneously .
the engineer will allow single end stressing in accordance with the following space limitations prohibit double end stressing .
the calculated elongation of the posttensioning steel at the second end is ½ in num mm or less and wedges are powerseated .
apply single end stressing at alternate ends of paired adjacent posttensioning tendons to produce a symmetrical force distribution as shown on the plans .
for construction in stages if tendons require stressing before others install and stress them as shown on the plans the shop drawings or as the engineer approves .
num strand elongations and agreement with forces ensure measurable tendon forces and posttensioning tendon elongation .
measure elongations to the nearest num in num mm .
for the required tendon force ensure an observed elongation within num percent of the theoretical elongation .
check the operation and correct variations as approved by the engineer before continuing .
do not overstress the tendon to achieve the theoretical elongation .
if elongations at the contract required force are outside the tolerances the engineer may require additional tests for tendon modulus of elasticity inplace friction or both in accordance with subsection num.knum tendon modulus of elasticity test and subsection num.knum in place friction test .
num friction submit calculations and show a tendon force diagram after friction wobble and anchor set losses .
base the calculations on the expected coefficients and values for posttensioning num num the posttensioning system .
show these coefficients and values on the shop drawings .
if the actual friction varies from the expected friction revise posttensioning operations so the tendon force equals the final tendon force shown on the plans .
when reducing friction lubricate with graphite as reviewed by the departments materials engineer and approved by the engineer .
use limetreated potable water to flush lubricants from the duct after stressing .
blow dry with oilfree air .
num wire failures in posttensioning tendons the engineer may accept multistrand posttensioning tendons with failed wires under the following conditions the completed structure has a final posttensioning force of at least num percent of the design total .
for segmental construction with members posttensioned together across a common joint face the posttensioning force across a mating joint is at least num percent of the posttensioning specified for that mating joint .
a tendon has no more than a num percent crosssectional area reduction due to wire failure .
the engineer may waive the conditions for acceptance of failed multistrand tendons if proposed alternative means of restoring the lost posttensioning forces are accepted by the engineer .
num cutting of posttensioning steel cut posttensioning steel with an abrasive saw from ¾ in to num½ in num mm to num mm away from the anchoring device .
the department will not allow flame cutting .
num record of stressing operations keep a record of the following posttensioning operations for installed tendons project number and job piece number names of the contractor and subcontractor tendon location size and type date tendon was first installed in ducts reel number for strands and heat number for bars tendon crosssectional area modulus of elasticity date stressed and jack and gauge numbers per tendon end including the following required jacking force gauge pressures elongations theoretical and actual anchor sets anticipated and actual stressing sequence i.e .
tendons to be stressed before and after stressing mode one end two ends simultaneous witnesses to stressing operation contractor and inspector and date grouted .
num posttensioning num record other relevant information .
provide the departments materials engineer and the engineer with a copy of stressing and grouting operations .
num duct pressure field test after stressing and before grouting internal or external tendons install grout caps inlets and outlets .
test the tendons with compressed air to determine if duct connections need repairs .
pressurize the tendons to num psi num kpa and lockoff the outside air source .
record pressure loss for num min .
if the duct loses more than num psi num kpa repair leaking connections as reviewed by the departments materials engineer and approved by the engineer .
num tendon protection within num hr of stressing install grout caps and seal other tendon openings .
if the engineer delays tendon acceptance seal tendon openings and temporarily weatherproof the anchorage open ends .
if tendon contamination occurs replace the tendon .
h. grouting operations num grouting operations plan at least num weeks before scheduled grouting operations submit a grouting operations plan to the engineer for review by the departments materials engineer and approval by the engineer .
the departments materials engineer must review and the engineer must approve the plan in writing before permanent structure grouting begins .
ensure the plan addresses the following grouting crew and supervisor names and proof of training grouting certification material types quantities and brands for grouting including certifications equipment types capacity in relation to demand and working condition backup equipment and spare parts general grouting procedure duct pressure test and repair procedures method to control the flow rate in ducts theoretical grout volume calculations mixing and pumping procedures grouting direction sequence of inlet and outlet pipe procedures for handling blockages and procedures for postgrouting repair .
before beginning grouting operations meet with the grouting crew and the departments materials engineer .
discuss the grouting operation plan testing corrective procedures and other relevant issues .
num grout inlets and outlets ensure airtight and dirtfree connections from the grout pump hose to inlets .
inspect valves to ensure they open and close properly .
posttensioning num num num supplies before beginning grouting operations provide water and compressed air to clear and test the ducts mix the grout and pump it .
where water is unavailable through the public water system provide a water storage tank .
num grouting a general the department will not allow grout flushing .
complete grouting operation within num calendar days of posttensioning steel installation in the duct .
if it is not complete in num days the engineer will stop the work and instruct the removal of tendons .
every day before beginning grouting operations test the accuracy of the volumemeasuring component of the vacuum grouting equipment .
use water or grout for testing .
use standard testing devices with num gal num l and num gal num l volumes with a num oz num l or less accuracy .
perform one test with each device .
ensure the results verify the accuracy of the void volumemeasuring component within num percent of the test volume .
verify the accuracy of the vacuum grouting equipment volume component within num percent of the test volume .
test in the presence of the departments materials engineer .
grout tendons in accordance with the grouting operation plan .
grout empty ducts .
btemperature limitations ensure the grout temperature does not exceed num f num c at the grout inlet .
for grouting repairs ensure the grout temperature does not exceed num f num c at the grout inlet .
use chilled water precooled bagged material or both to maintain the temperature below the specified level .
the engineer will not allow grouting operations when the ambient temperature is num f num c or less .
check the temperature hourly .
c mixing and pumping mix the grout with metered water to produce a homogeneous grout .
continuously agitate the grout until grouting completion .
dgrout production test during grouting operations maintain the grout fluidity as recommended by the grout manufacturer .
use the target fluidity rate established by the manufacturers representative and based on weather conditions .
determine grout fluidity using test methods in accordance with subsection num posttensioning grout .
perform fluidity tests for grouted tendons .
maintain the water to cementitious ratio .
use grout that tests within the contract required flow rates .
at the beginning of daily grouting operations perform a wick induced bleed test in accordance with subsection num posttensioning grout .
if zero bleed is not achieved at the end of the contract required time period delay grouting tendons until operations are adjusted and testing shows that the grout meets this requirement .
num posttensioning num num grout operations open grout outlets before beginning grouting operations .
grout tendons in accordance with the grouting operations plan .
pump grout at a rate from num ftmin to num ftmin num mmin to num mmin .
conduct normal grouting operations at a pressure range from num psi to num psi num kpa to num kpa measured at the grout inlet .
ensure the pumping pressure does not exceed num psi num mpa at the inlet .
use groutpumping methods that fill the ducts and encase the steel .
before closing the outlet ensure grout flows from the first and subsequent outlets until residual water or entrapped air is removed .
pump grout through the duct and continuously discharge it at the anchorage and grout cap outlets .
continue pumping until free water and air are discharged and the grout consistency coming out is the same as the grout consistency going in .
close the anchorage outlet and discharge at least num gal num l of grout from the grout cap into a clean receptacle .
close the grout cap .
after uncontaminated uniform discharge begins immediately perform a fluidity test on tendons .
use the flow cone on the grout discharged from the anchorage outlet .
ensure the measured grout efflux time is at least the efflux time measured at the pump or in accordance with subsection num posttensioning grout .
alternatively check the grout fluidity using the wet density in subsection num posttensioning grout .
ensure the measured density falls within the values in subsection num posttensioning grout .
ensure the density at the final outlet is greater than or equal to the grout density at the inlet .
if the engineer deems the grout fluidity unacceptable discharge additional grout from the anchorage outlet and test until grout achieves fluidity .
discard grout used for fluidity tests .
after bleeding and sealing outlets elevate the grout pressure to num psi num kpa .
seal the inlet valve and wait num min to detect leaks .
fix leaks as reviewed by the departments materials engineer and approved by the engineer .
if no leaks are present bleed the pressure to num psi num kpa .
wait at least num min for entrapped air to flow to the high points increase the pressure and discharge grout at highpoint outlets to eliminate entrapped air or water .
lock num psi num kpa in the tendon .
if the grouting pressure exceeds the maximum permitted by the contract close the inlet and pump the grout at the next recently closed or readytoclose outlet .
maintain the oneway flow .
do not pump grout into a succeeding outlet from which grout has not flowed .
fit the outlet or inlet with a positive shutoff and pressure gauge for pumping .
stop operations if tendon grouting completion can not occur using the planned methods approved by the engineer .
wait num hr then fill the tendon with grout in accordance with subsection num.h.num postgrouting operations and inspection .
num vertical grouting for vertical tendons provide a standpipe at the upper end of the tendon to store bleed water and grout .
maintain the grout level above the posttensioning plate and the highest point of the upper anchorage .
ensure bleed water rises only into the standpipe .
posttensioning num num discharge grout and check grout fluidity in accordance with subsection num.hnum grout operations .
as grouting is completed add grout to the standpipe to maintain the level at the highest point in the upper anchorage .
after the grout hardens remove the standpipe .
in the presence of the departments materials engineer use an endoscope or probe to visually inspect for voids .
fill voids in the duct using the volumetric measuring vacuum grouting process .
for vertical tendons longer than num ft num m or if the grouting pressure exceeds the contract required pumping pressure pump the grout at increasingly higher outlets that were recently closed or are ready to be closed .
maintain the oneway flow of grout .
before using an outlet for pumping allow the grout to flow from each outlet until the air and water disappear .
num construction traffic and operations causing vibrations during grouting and for num hr after completion eliminate vibrations from any sources such as moving vehicles jack hammers compressors generators pile driving soil compaction within num ft num m of the ends of the grouted spans .
num postgrouting operations and inspection allow the grout to cure from num hr to num hr before removing inlets and outlets .
perform inspections within num hr of removal .
after the grout cures remove outlets at anchorages and high points along the tendon .
drill and inspect high points along the tendon including the inlets or outlets located at the anchorages .
depending on the grout inlet geometry the engineer may specify drilling to penetrate the inner surface of the trumpet or duct .
use drilling equipment that automatically shutsoff when it encounters steel .
unless sounding indicates that grout caps have voids do not drill into caps .
inspect with endoscopes or probes in the engineers presence .
within num hr of completing the inspections fill duct and anchorage voids using the volumetric measuring vacuum grouting process .
seal and repair anchorage inlet and outlet voids from inspection drilling in accordance with subsection num.inum repair of grout inlets and outlets .
backfill with epoxy using an injection tube that extends to the bottom of the holes .
post grouting inspection of tendons shorter than num ft num m may use the following for the first num tendons inspect outlets at anchors and tendon high points by drilling and probing .
if an inspection location contains a defect test until num consecutive tendons have no voids .
when no defects are present reduce the inspection frequency to every other tendon .
if a defect is found inspect the last five tendons grouted .
restart the cycle of num percent tendon inspection .
if tendongrouting operations stop before filling the tendon drill into the duct and explore the voids with an endoscope .
the engineer will not allow probing .
install grout inlets and fill the voids with volumetric measuring vacuum grouting equipment .
num grouting report within num hr of the completion of each grouting operation sign a grouting report and submit to the engineer for review by the departments materials engineer and approval by the engineer .
num posttensioning num report the theoretical quantity of grout compared to the quantity of grout used to fill the duct .
notify the engineer and the departments materials engineer of shortages or overages .
include the following information in the report tendon identification date grouted number of days from tendon installation to grouting grout type injection end and applied grouting pressure ratio of actual to theoretical grout quantity and summary of problems and corrective action .
i .
forming and repairs of holes and blockouts num repair of lifting and access holes repair holes with magnesium ammonium phosphate concrete in accordance with subsection num magnesium ammonium phosphate concrete for concrete repair .
within num hr before casting the concrete mechanically clean and roughen the mating concrete surfaces to remove laitance and expose the small aggregate .
blast using grit or water with a nozzle pressure of at least num psi num mpa .
flush the surface with water and blow dry .
mix place and cure the material in accordance with the manufactures recommendations .
when deck grooving is complete coat the repaired holes blockouts and num in num mm outside the repair perimeter with methyl methacrylate .
apply and remove excess material as recommended by the manufacturer .
as an alternate repair material use a type j epoxy grout compound in accordance with subsection num epoxy resin and other adhesives for general use with concrete .
num repair of grout inlets and outlets use vacuum grouting to repair voids and blockages in accordance with subsection num.h.num grout operations .
place threaded plastic caps in inlet and outlet locations shown on the plans .
repair inlets and outlets as shown on the plans using an epoxy grout .
repair cracks in accordance with section num structural concrete repair by sealing and injection .
repair spalls using type hepoxy in accordance with subsection num epoxy resin and other adhesives for general use with concrete .
prepare the surface as recommended by the manufacturer .
j .
protection of posttensioning anchorages within num days of completing the grouting protect the posttensioning bar and tendon anchorages as shown on the plans .
the contractor may delay the elastomeric coating application up to num days after grouting .
use plastic or stainless steel threaded caps to plug grout inlets and outlets .
use a type j epoxy grout compound in accordance with subsection num epoxy resin and other adhesives for general use with concrete to construct pourbacks at anchorages .
remove laitance grease curing compounds surface treatments coatings and oil posttensioning num num posttensioning num by grit or waterblasting with a nozzle pressure of at least num psi num mpa .
flush the surface with water and blowdry .
ensure clean surfaces and no standing water .
for disputes use aci num for substrate testing and develop at least num psi num mpa tension .
mix and apply epoxy in accordance with the manufacturers current standard technical guidelines .
construct pourbacks in leakproof forms creating neat lines .
pump the epoxy grout for proper installation .
construct forms to maintain a liquid head and ensure contact with the concrete surface .
use vents so air can escape and ensure forms are completely filled .
coat the pourbacks and grout cap surfaces with an elastomeric coating system in accordance with subsection num elastomeric coating system .
cover these surfaces with a thickness from num mil to num mil num mm to num mm .
ensure concrete grout caps and other substrates are structurally sound clean and dry .
allow concrete to cure at least num days .
remove laitance grease curing compounds surface treatments coatings and oil by grit or waterblasting with a nozzle pressure of at least num psi num mpa to establish the anchor pattern .
blow the surface with compressed air to remove dust or water .
for elastomericcoated pourbacks receiving a contract required coating apply primer approved by the manufacturer over the elastomeric coating before applying the coating .
construct a num ft num ft num m num m concrete test block with a similar texture to the surfaces for coating .
coat a vertical face with the contract required elastomeric coating system .
determine the number of coats necessary for a coating thickness from num mil to num mil num mm to num mmwithout runs and drips .
mix and apply elastomeric coating in accordance with the manufacturers current standard technical specifications .
the department prefers spraying but will allow rolling .
ensure the coating manufacturer representative supervises the elastomeric coating application on the test block .
ensure personnel that apply the coatings have at least num years of experience with similar polyurethane systems .
submit credentials to the engineer .
num method of measurement the engineer will measure concrete for posttensioned castinplace concrete structures in accordance with section num structural concrete .
the engineer will measure reinforcing steel for posttensioned castinplace concrete structures in accordance with section num reinforcing steel for structures .
the following are prestressing steel unit weights table num posttensioning steel unit weights posttensioning system in mm weight per unit length lbft kgm ½ num diameter num wire strand num num num num diameter num wire strand num num num num high strength deformed bar num num num¼ num high strength deformed bar num num num⅜ num high strength deformed bar num num num¾ num high strength deformed bar num num num posttensioning num posttensioning num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit posttensioning lump sum the department will consider the following to be included in the contract unit price for posttensioning calibration of jacks and gauges providing installing stressing and grouting temporary and permanent posttensioning tendons anchorage assemblies hardware ducts grout and grouting testing and reports anchorage protection vents inlets outlets epoxy repairs friction control lubricants flushing lubricants or contaminants from the ducts and endoscope inspection of duct work and grouting .
structural concrete repair by sealing and injection num num section num structural concrete repair by sealing and injection num description this work consists of restoring the structural integrity of portland cement concrete pcc structures by injecting and sealing cracks delaminations and hollow planes with an epoxy resin system .
num materials a. injection ports provide injection ports such as tubes fittings or pressure plates for the epoxy resin system under injection pressures of num psi num mpa .
provide a seal for each injection port .
b .
crack sealer provide a sealing compound specified by the epoxy resin manufacturer to seal cracks in concrete and to anchor the injection ports .
c. pressure plates the department will allow the use of pressure plates instead of sealing compound as approved by the engineer .
provide clear plastic pressure plates that cover the entire crack .
d. epoxy resin system provide an epoxy resin system in accordance with subsection num.a general type d. num equipment provide a pressure pot hand pump caulking device injection machine or other device to inject the epoxy resin .
provide a special pressure fitting on the injector to prevent leaks when injecting the epoxy resin through the ¼ in num mm holes in the pressure plates .
drill the injection ports using equipment with a vacuum system to prevent dust from compacting into the cracks and laminations .
num construction methods a .
preparation clean the surfaces adjacent to cracks of efflorescence deteriorated concrete and other surface debris detrimental to the adhesion of the surface sealing epoxy compound .
clean the interior surfaces of the cracks with air under sufficient pressure to remove loose materials entrapped within the crack including efflorescence .
when sealing cracks underwater use appropriate cleaning methods as approved by the engineer .
after cleaning drill injection port holes using a swivel drill chuck and hollow drill bits including a vacuum attachment which will remove dust and debris num structural concrete repair by sealing and injection num num structural concrete repair by sealing and injection generated during drilling .
determine the spacing of the injection ports holes by the size of the crack and the depth of the crack in the concrete substrate .
generally space the injection ports from num in to num in num mm to num mm apart .
space the entry ports so material can travel between them .
drill the holes to a minimum depth of ⅝ in num mm .
insert the injection ports in the drilled holes approximately ½ in num mm allowing for a small reservoir below the injection port .
apply a quicksetting seal around the injection ports to prevent resin loss .
the engineer may approve sealing with a clear plastic plate .
prevent defacement of the concrete surface .
b. epoxy resin injection inject the epoxy in accordance with the epoxy manufacturers instructions .
determine the actual injection procedures and pressures in field trials based on crack widths and depth into the substrate and sufficiency of the results .
start at the lower port .
continue pumping until sighting the resin at the port directly above or adjacent to the injection port .
if material is sighted at an adjacent port move the nozzle to the port showing resin and seal the previous injection port .
continue this procedure to completely fill the crack .
on wide cracks the department will allow simultaneous pumping of two or more ports .
c. clean up clean concrete surface areas of excess epoxy materials and injection ports after completing the epoxy injection work .
clean in a manner which will not damage the concrete by scraping light sand blasting grinding use of solvents or any other appropriate method approved by the engineer .
clean excess materials so that no epoxy material or injection ports extend beyond the plane surface of the concrete .
num method of measurement vacant num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit a preparation of cracks above water linear foot meter b preparation of cracks below water linear foot meter c epoxy resin above water gallon liter d epoxy resin below water gallon liter pneumatically applied mortar num num section num pneumatically applied mortar num description this work consists of providing and placing pneumatically applied mortar to construct portions of structures repair concrete structures texture concrete surfaces encase structural steel members line ditches and channels and pave slopes .
this work includes preparing surfaces to receive mortar and providing and placing reinforcing steel and anchors for reinforcement .
num materials a .
general provide materials in accordance with the following subsections material subsection fine aggregate num course aggregate num water num portland cement num bar steel reinforcement billet steel num welded steel wire fabric num in combinations of fine and coarse aggregates use no more than num percent coarse aggregate .
provide coarse aggregate in accordance with subsection num course aggregate with gradation in accordance with aashto m num no .
num or no .
num .
the department will allow the reuse of clean cementcovered fine aggregate recovered rebound .
limit the use to no more than num percent of the total fine aggregate .
b. anchor studs if placing mortar against existing concrete or rock provide anchor studs with at least ¼ in num mm diameter expansion hook bolts placed in drilled holes to support reinforcing wire fabric or bars .
ensure individual bolts can resist a pullout force of num lbf num n. obtain the engineers approval before using driven steel studs .
use driven steel studs with a diameter of at least ⅛ in num mm and a length of at least num in num mm .
num equipment for driven studs provide equipment that uses an explosive as the driving force and can insert the stud or pin to a depth capable of sustaining the num lbf num n pullout force without damaging the concrete .
num pneumatically applied mortar num num construction methods a. proportioning submit the mix design to the engineer for approval before beginning the work .
unless otherwise required by the contract include a cementtoaggregate ratio based on dry loose volumes .
ensure at least onepart cement to three and onehalf parts aggregate for concrete structures and steel members and at least onepart cement to five parts aggregate for ditches channels and slopes .
use minimal water content to provide workability of the mix .
adjust the water content so the mix adheres and will not sag or fall from vertical surfaces or separate in horizontal surfaces .
b. mixing use the dry or wet mix process .
use a paddle or drumtype mixer designed for pneumatic application to uniformly mix the materials before charging the placing equipment .
the department will allow transit mix equipment and methods in the wet mix process .
c. surface preparation num earth if placing pneumatically applied mortar against earth grade the area as required by the contract .
compact the area with moisture to provide a firm foundation and to prevent the mortar from losing moisture .
remove free surface water after compaction .
if the contract requires provide joints side forms headers and shooting strips for backing or paneling .
use ground or gauging wires to establish thicknesses surface planes and finish lines .
num forms if placing mortar against forms provide forms in accordance with section num forms falsework and temporary works .
num concrete or rock if placing mortar against concrete or rock chipaway deteriorated and loose material with pneumatic or hand tools .
cut square or slightly undercut shoulders num in num mm deep along the perimeter of repair areas .
sandblast the surface to clean rust from exposed steel and to produce a clean rough surface .
keep the surface wet for at least num hr .
allow the surface to dry just before applying the mortar .
d. installation num placement of reinforcing steel install reinforcing steel in accordance with section num reinforcing steel for structures .
place reinforcing steel in new construction as required by the contract .
secure reinforcing steel to prevent displacement .
for repair work support reinforcing steel with anchor studs installed in the existing masonry unless the engineer approves the existing reinforcing steel .
space anchors no more than num in num mm centertocenter on overhead surfaces num in num mm centertocenter on vertical surfaces and num in num mm centertocenter on top of horizontal surfaces .
use at least three anchors in each patch area .
neumatically applied mortar num num notify the engineer before installing anchor studs .
place studs in locations that will prevent damage to the prestressing tendons or conduits embedded in the concrete .
in repair work areas where the mortar thickness exceeds num½ in num mm reinforce with a single mat of either num in num in num mm num mm of wnum wnum or num in num in num mm num mm of wnum wnum welded wire fabric unless otherwise required by the contract .
where the mortar thickness exceeds num in num mm reinforce each num in num mm layer of mortar thickness placed with a mat of wire fabric .
encase each mat of welded wire fabric in mortar and allow it to set before installing the next layer of mortar .
place fabric no closer than ½ in num mm to the prepared masonry surface .
place fabric parallel to and at least num in num mm away from the finished surface .
prebend fabric to fit around corners and into reentrant angles .
num placement of mortar at the engineers request submit employee credentials .
apply the mortar with pneumatic equipment that sprays the mix onto the surface at a velocity high enough to produce a compacted homogeneous mass .
use an air compressor and delivery hose lines to provide a pressure of at least num psi num kpa for num in num mm nozzles .
maintain the velocity of the material as determined by job conditions to minimize rebound .
supply water to the nozzle at a uniform pressure of at least num psi num kpa greater than the air pressure .
apply mortar with minimal water content to prevent cracking from shrinkage .
unless otherwise required by the contract or approved by the engineer use shooting strips to make square corners straight lines and a plane surface of mortar .
place the strips to minimize rebound trapping .
at the end of each workday or when stopping to place construction joints taper the mortar to a thin edge .
before placing an adjacent section clean and wet the construction joint in accordance with subsection num.c surface preparation .
hold the nozzle from num ft to num ft num m to num m away from the working surface .
direct the stream at right angles to the surface .
apply enough mortar layers to obtain the thickness shown on the plans .
obtain the engineers approval before applying mortar layers more than num in num mm thick on vertical and overhead surfaces .
place layers without causing sag or decreasing the bond of the preceding coat .
allow sufficient time between successive layers in sloping vertical or overhanging work for the initial set to develop .
while the initial set develops clean the surface of laitance .
remove rebound and loose sand before placing new mortar layers to prevent them from embedding in the mortar .
apply materials within num min of mixing unless otherwise approved by the engineer .
after curing and before the final acceptance sound repaired areas .
replace unsound and cracked areas .
a weather limitations apply pneumatically placed mortar on surfaces from num f to num f num c to num c when the ambient temperature is not anticipated to drop below num f num c within num hr after placement .
num neumatically applied mortar num num neumatically applied mortar suspend mortar application during high winds or rain .
bprotection of adjacent work protect adjacent facilities from damage or discoloration by overspray dust or rebound .
immediately clean contacted areas by scraping brushing or washing .
num finishing after completing mortar placement cut off high spots with a sharp trowel or screed to a true plane determined by shooting strips the original masonry surface or as directed by the engineer .
if using cutting screeds lightly apply the screed without disturbing the mortar and work the screed in an upward direction on vertical surfaces .
unless otherwise required by the contract give the finished mortar surface a final flash coat of ¼ in num mm of mortar .
create a uniform appearance on exposed surfaces .
num curing and protecting cure pneumatically placed mortar in accordance with subsection num.fnum water method .
if the engineer determines that the water method is not practical cure pneumatically placed mortar in accordance with subsection num.fnum liquid membrane curing compound method .
if using subsection num.fnum cure for at least num hr .
protect the mortar from freezing during the curing period in accordance with subsection num.b protection of concrete from environmental conditions .
num method of measurement vacant num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit pneumatically placed mortar square yard square meter concrete surface repair by sealing num num section num concrete surface repair by sealing num description a .
general this work consists of sealing bridge decks and approach slabs and filling and rebonding cracks .
b. definitions acrylic resins .
thermoplastics thermosetting polymers copolymers of acrylic acid methacrylic acid esters of these acids or acrylonitrile used to produce synthetic rubbers and lightweight plastics .
density .
mass per unit volume of a material .
bulk cure .
time required for the methacrylate monomer to harden and form a polymer .
epoxy penetrant .
a low viscosity two component epoxyresin bonding system for application to portlandcement concrete .
flash point .
lowest temperature at which a material gives off explosive or ignitable vapors .
high molecular weight methacrylate hmwm .
nonfuming monomer with a low viscosity low volatility low initial shrinkage and high flash point .
member of the acrylic family of monomers and polymers .
initiators .
chemicals that start polymerization .
monomers .
liquid molecules that a catalyst reaction converts into solid polymers .
promoters .
chemicals used with initiators to accelerate polymerization .
resin .
natural or synthetic solid or semisolid organic material of indefinite and often high molecular weight with the tendency to flow under stress .
shelf life .
maximum interval during which a material may be stored and remain in a usable and safe condition .
surface cure .
amount of time required after placement before the hmwm treated concrete is free from surface liquid or tackiness .
vapor pressure .
component of atmospheric pressure caused by vapor expressed in inches centimeters or millimeters of height of a column of mercury .
measures the volatility and depletion rate of monomers .
viscosity .
resistance to flow by gases or liquids subjected to shear stress .
working time .
elapsed time after mixing methacrylate monomer with catalyst before solution viscosity increases .
depends on the temperature and the amount of initiators and promoters used .
varies with the manufacturers monomer system .
num materials the department will allow the use of either hmwm or epoxy resin to seal the cracks .
num concrete surface repair by sealing num a .
materials for hmwm num monomer materials provide hmwm with low volatility which does not evaporate in accordance with subsection numbnum type k monomer materials for hmwm .
num storage of hmwm materials store initiators and promoters separately to prevent a violent reaction or explosion .
before shipping obtain a material safety data sheet msds for each material with information about the following safe practices for storage handling and disposal explosive and combustion characteristics health hazards and the manufacturers recommended fire fighting techniques .
post safety and handling information at storage areas and at the job site .
provide a copy to the engineer .
a monomers store monomers in shaded areas away from the initiator storage area .
provide storage areas ventilated to prevent the hazardous buildup of vapors .
binitiators store initiators in temperatures num f num c or less and away from the monomer and promoter storage areas .
c promoters store promoters in temperatures num f num c or less and away from the initiator storage area .
num safety provisions for hmwm train personnel to safely handle materials in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
wear impervious protective gloves and splashproof goggles while applying the hmwm .
when handling solvent for cleaning and flushing minimize personal and environmental hazards as the engineer approves .
provide an eye wash facility and a soap and water wash station at the job site .
inform workmen of the following hmwm monomer will soften gum rubber soled shoes and clothing or leather saturated with the hmwm monomer will harden and become brittle .
b .
materials for epoxy resin provide epoxy resin in accordance with subsection numbnum type l materials for epoxyresin .
c. fine aggregate sand for hmwm epoxy penetrants or both provide sand with a maximum moisture content of onehalf of the percent absorption of the aggregate .
provide sand free of dirt and other organic materials and in accordance with the gradations in table num .
concrete surface repair by sealing num num table num fine aggregate gradations sieve size percent retained maximum no .
num num mm num num no .
num num mm num num no .
num num µm num num no .
num num µm num num the gradations in table num allow commercially available blast sands of no .
num num mmnum µm or no .
num num mmnum µm .
the engineer may approve alternate gradations .
num equipment vacant num construction methods a .
general submit to the engineer a work plan including surface preparation techniques materials and the installation procedures .
for flood coats ensure a technical representative from the manufacturer is on the site during the sealer application .
cure new concrete for at least num days before applying sealers .
allow quick set concrete patches to cure for at least num hr before abrasiveblasting .
for cracks or joints that extend to the bottom of the bridge deck seal the bottom of the deck .
the department will not allow the use of sealers for patching decks .
place sealers in good weather when rain or falling temperatures are not forecast and when traffic can be diverted for the manufacturer recommended curing time .
b .
surface preparation hmwm epoxy penetrant or both abrasively blast and remove traces of asphalt or petroleum excess grout and concrete curing agents .
ensure dry surfaces before applying sealers .
allow the surface to dry for at least num hr after rain .
clean surfaces and cracks using compressed dry and oilfree air with an air pressure of at least num psi num kpa .
c. application of hmwm epoxy penetrant or both apply sealers to clean dry surfaces when the surface temperature reaches from num f to num f num c to num c. place the sealers and mix components in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations or as directed by the engineer .
to initiate polymerization catalyze the hmwm monomers with a metallic drier and peroxide .
to improve skid resistance broadcast sand into the sealer by hand or with a machine before the sealer hardens on the treated area .
apply the sand at a uniform coverage rate from num lbyd² to num lbyd² num gm² to num gm² .
for hmwm place the sand as the monomer begins to gel .
resume traffic when the engineer determines the surface is tackfree and the sand resists brushing by foot .
num concrete surface repair by sealing num num the department will allow a slight oil to remain on the surface for several hours .
d. sealing individual cracks seal cracks by placing sealer in the surface cracks and not on the entire deck .
use a crack comparator aid to visually determine crack size .
unless otherwise directed by the engineer or technical representative use sand to fill cracks wider than num in num mm before placing the hmwm .
mask across the crack in num ft num m or num ft num m intervals .
if necessary apply sealer several times to fill the crack .
place tape num in num mm on both sides of the crack .
e. flood coats applied to the entire deck sweep squeegee pour or spray the area so the sealers can flow into the cracks .
after the sealer fills the cracks sweep excess from tining before the material begins to gel .
ensure sealer does not plug the tined surface of the bridge deck .
num method of measurement the engineer will measure along chords num ft num m long and will include crack repairs within num in num mm of the chord .
the engineer will not measure gallons of sealant resin for flood coats .
num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit a sealer crack preparation linear foot meter b sealer resin gallon liter c deck area sealed flood coats square yard square meter num chapter num incidental construction section page no .
num riprap num num gabions and revetment mattresses num num steel jetty bank protectionnum num integral curb combined curb and gutter asphalt curbing and header curbing num num concrete or asphalt sidewalks driveways dividing strips and tactile warning devices num num manholes drop or curb inlets and junction boxesnum num adjustment of existing structures num num drainage conduits num num wick drains and strip drains num num sanitary sewer pipe conduits num num water pipe and fittingsnum num removal of buildings structures and obstructionsnum num removal of underground storage tanks num num pipe railing and miscellaneous pipe worknum num guardrail and end treatmentsnum num fencesnum num removal and storage or reconstruction of fencing and guardrailnum num monumentsnum num concrete longitudinal barriernum num hightension cable barrier num num mailboxesnum num field office or laboratorynum num mobilizationnum num construction stakingnum riprap num num section num riprap num description this work consists of providing and placing riprap for slope protection .
the department defines the following types of riprap type i plain type ia plain with filter blanket type ii special plain type iia special plain with filter blanket type iii laid up or type iv grouted .
num materials provide the following materials in accordance with the following subsections material subsection portland cement num fine aggregate num filter fabric num stone for riprap num filter blanket num num equipment vacant num construction methods a .
general shape and dress slopes ditches and protected areas to the lines and grades shown on the plans .
if the contract requires type iii or type iv riprap compact the base in accordance with subsection num construction methods before placing the riprap .
b. filter blanket place the filter blanket in one or two layers as shown on the plans .
if material is stockpiled at the job site follow the procedures in accordance with subsection num storage and handling of material .
uniformly spread each layer of filter blanket on the prepared base .
if the blanket is damaged during placement repair or replace before proceeding at no additional cost to the department .
finish the filter blanket to an even surface free of mounds and windrows .
c. filter fabric place filter fabric on a slope that is uniform smooth and free of debris that may damage the filter fabric .
lay the material without stretching it .
overlap adjacent strips at least num ft num m and in accordance with subsection num.d filter fabric placement .
support the num riprap num riprap fabric to maintain its position .
the resident engineer must approve of the methods for fabric support and securing .
replace or repair damaged or displaced filter fabric at no additional cost to the department .
during shipment and storage keep the fabric wrapped in a heavyduty covering to protect the filter fabric from the following temperatures greater than num f num c direct sunlight ultraviolet rays mud dirt dust and debris .
cover or protect the filter fabric within num days of placement .
replace filter fabric uncovered or unprotected after num days at no additional cost to the department .
d. types i ia ii and iia prepare the areas to be protected before placing the riprap or filter blanket and riprap .
dump the plain riprap and the special plain riprap over the area shown on the plans and grade the area to uniformly distribute the smaller stone .
place the riprap by hand or machine to achieve the lines and thickness shown on the plans .
e. type iii excavate the riprap foundation below the scour line or to the elevations shown on the plans .
obtain the resident engineers approval of the footing excavation before placing the stone or concrete riprap .
place and work spalls into the spaces between stones .
finish the riprap surface even and tight .
remove points of stones that project beyond the finished riprap surface .
f. type iv excavate the riprap foundation below the scour line or to the elevations shown on the plans .
obtain the resident engineers approval of the footing excavation before placing the stone or concrete riprap .
place the surface of the stones in contact with the protected slope at the angle shown on the plans .
key the individual stones into the surrounding riprap and lay them in close contact to break joints .
prevent earth and sand from filling the spaces between the stones .
wet the stones immediately after placement .
fill the spaces between the stones with grout working from bottom to top .
sweep the surface with a stiff broom .
do not grout the riprap at temperatures below num f num c. in hot dry weather protect the work from the sun and keep moist for at least num days after grouting .
grout shall consist of one part portland cement and num parts fine aggregate by volume mixed with water .
the department will not allow retempering of grout .
gabions and revetment mattresses num num num method of measurement the resident engineer will not include the area of laps in the measurement of filter fabric riprap .
num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit a type i plain riprap ton metric ton b type ia plain riprap ton metric ton c type ia filter blanket ton metric ton d type ii special plain riprap e type iia special plain riprap ton metric ton f type iia filter blanket ton metric ton g type iii laid up riprap square yard square meter h type iv grouted riprap square yard square meter i filter fabric riprap square yard square meter section num gabions and revetment mattresses num description this work consists of providing and placing stonefilled wiremesh baskets and plastic filter fabric for retaining embankments and controlling erosion .
gabion .
square or rectangular wiremesh basket with a thickness of at least num ft num m filled with hard durable stone .
revetment mattress .
rectangular wiremesh basket with a maximum thickness of num ft num m. num materials a .
material requirements provide materials in accordance with the following subsections material subsection filter sand num filter fabric num wire baskets num cubical stone for gabions and revetment mattresses num b .
basket requirements provide twisted wiremesh baskets unless otherwise shown on the plans .
ton metric ton num gabions and revetment mattresses num num for twisted wiremesh baskets supply gabion baskets with maximum nominal mesh openings of num in num in num mm num mm and revetment mattress baskets with maximum nominal mesh openings of num½ in num in num mm num mm .
for welded wiremesh baskets supply gabion baskets with maximum nominal mesh openings of num½ in num in num mm num mm and revetment mattress baskets with maximum nominal mesh openings of num½ in num in num mm num mm .
provide the same mesh style for all panels sides and diaphragms of the baskets .
assemble baskets to ensure each panel meets the strength and flexibility requirements in accordance with subsection num wire baskets for gabions and revetment mattresses .
construct baskets with height width and length within num percent of the dimensions shown on the plans .
install diaphragms that equally divide each gabion or revetment mattress into cells .
ensure the length of the diaphragm does not exceed one and onehalf times the width of the gabion base or the horizontal width of the revetment mattress .
provide the same material for diaphragms as provided for the basket body .
secure diaphragms to the base .
num equipment vacant num construction methods a .
technical supervision when construction begins ensure an experienced onsite technical representative from the basket manufacturer is present .
the representative must be available as needed for consultation during gabion or revetment mattress construction .
b .
foundation preparation place baskets on a smooth excavation extending to the limits shown on the plans or directed by the resident engineer .
remove loose or unsuitable materials .
fill depressions to grade with suitable materials from departmentapproved sources and compact to a density equal to the adjacent insitu material .
the resident engineer will inspect the prepared surface before allowing the contractor to proceed with subsequent construction .
c. filter sand placement uniformly spread filter sand on the prepared foundation surface ensuring that segregation of the filter sand does not occur .
repair damage to the foundation surface during filter sand placement .
compact and finish filter sand to an even surface .
d. filter fabric placement place filter fabric as shown on the plans .
lay the fabric without folds wrinkles or creases and do not stretch .
overlap strips at adjacent and endofroll joints at least num ft num m. stagger overlaps at endofroll joints at least num ft num m. use full rolls to minimize the number of endofroll laps .
place the uphill or upstream layer of a lap on top .
secure the top end of the fabric to prevent displacement .
if using securing pins place the pins in the adjacent joints spaced on num ft num m centers .
place securing pins through both fabric strips near the overlap midpoint .
gabions and revetment mattresses num num the resident engineer will reject filter fabric with defects or damage .
repair torn or punctured fabric by covering the area with a layer of fabric that extends at least num ft num m beyond the damaged area .
during shipment and storage keep the fabric wrapped in a heavyduty covering to protect the filter fabric from the following temperatures greater than num f num c direct sunlight ultraviolet rays mud dirt dust and debris .
cover the filter fabric within num days of installation .
replace filter fabric uncovered or unprotected after num days at no additional cost to the department .
e. connections use the following methods to connect gabions or revetment mattresses .
if polyvinyl chloride pvc coating is required by the contract use pvccoated or stainless steel connections .
num num in num mm tie wire if using num in num mm tie wire as the joint connection material assemble the vertical edges of the adjacent gabion panels forming groups of empty gabions .
a twistedwire mesh construct the joint using a single loopdouble loop lacing pattern locked loops of num in num mm tie wire at nominal spacing of num in num mm .
avoid using simple spiraling looping without locking of tie wire .
bweldedwire mesh construct the joint using alternating single and double halfhitches locked loops in every mesh opening along the joint .
securely fasten lacing wire terminals .
num spiral binders if using spiral binders with num in num mm wire or larger rotate the spiral into position so that it passes through each mesh opening along the joint .
wrap both ends of the spiral binders at least num times around the mesh to secure the spiral .
place continuous successive loops of spiral binders num in num mm apart .
do not use spiral binders after placing stone in the baskets .
num interlocking rings tiger tites for gabions and revetment mattresses use one interlocking ring in every mesh opening and lock the rings .
num overlapping rings spenax fasteners use overlapping rings if a num in num mm lap can be consistently obtained .
install one ring in each mesh opening .
maintain the minimum manufacturer recommended air pressure in the gun used to close the overlapping rings .
num gabions and revetment mattresses num num alternative fasteners use alternative fasteners with strengths of at least num lbft num knm for galvanized gabions num lbft num knm for pvc gabions and num lbft num knm for revetment mattresses .
space the connections to prevent gaps exceeding num in num mm between baskets when tested for connection tensile strength .
use fasteners that do not damage the wires protective coating .
f. assembly and installation num general place the assembled empty baskets on the prepared surface .
place the front row of baskets first and continue placing successive rows of baskets toward the top of the slope .
ensure creases are in the correct position and the top of each side is level .
install the baskets and avoid gaps between baskets when completed .
connect adjoining baskets in the same row before filling with stone .
avoid moving baskets after filling with stone .
connect adjacent rows of baskets along all contacting edges .
num installing connections make connections by joining selvage wire to selvage wire selvage wire to edge wire or selvage wire to mesh .
use meshtomesh connections only if one of the previous connections is not possible .
avoid using alternative fasteners spiral binders interlocking rings or overlapping rings to close stonefilled basket lids unless approved by the resident engineer .
the resident engineer may grant approval if the alternative fasteners can be installed on a stonefilled basket without stretching the basket or damaging the protective coating .
num stonefilling fill baskets with stone by hand or machine .
if using machines arrange the stones by hand to minimize voids .
avoid damaging the wire coating .
maintain basket alignment throughout the filling process .
correct bulges in the mesh before continuing to fill the baskets .
fill with stone layers no greater than num ft num m. fill cells no higher than num ft num m above the stone elevations in adjacent cells .
use care in placing stones in baskets drop stones into the baskets from no higher than num ft num m. along exposed faces arrange the stone by hand to ensure a neat and compact appearance .
uniformly overfill gabions and revetment mattresses by num½ in num mm .
allow for the proper closing of the lid and provide an even uniform surface .
do not underfill gabions and revetment mattresses .
num connecting wires for gabion baskets higher than num ft num m and with exposed faces place two uniformly spaced internal connecting wires between each stone layer .
connect the back and the front faces of each basket .
loop connecting wires around two mesh openings or a single weldedwire joint on each basket face .
securely twist the wire terminals .
gabions and revetment mattresses num num gabions and revetment mattresses num basket lids using a lid closing tool stretch each lid over the stone fill until the lid meets the edges of the panels .
avoid using crowbars or other singlepoint leverage bars to close the lid .
secure the lid with lacing wire or wire fasteners along the edges ends and internalcell diaphragms .
bend wire ends into the baskets .
num partial baskets for partial baskets cut fold and rewire the basket to address site conditions .
fold the mesh back and wire to the adjacent basket face .
assemble install fill close the lid and lace the reshaped partial basket in accordance with subsections num.fnum through num.fnum .
num pvc coated baskets do not install pvc coated materials until the ambient air temperature and the temperature of the pvc materials are at least num f num c above the brittleness temperature of the pvc materials .
g. backfilling backfill behind the gabions in accordance with subsection num.b embankments .
h. retaining walls construct retaining walls on a num to num percent batter as shown on the plans .
overlap vertical joints and offset horizontal joints in each successive layer .
num method of measurement vacant num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit a gabions cubic yard cubic meter b revetment mattresses square yard square meter c filter fabric square yard square meter the department will consider the cost of stone fill and filter sand for gabions and revetment mattresses to be included in the contract unit price for gabions and revetment mattresses .
unless otherwise shown on the plans the department will consider the cost of backfill for gabions to be included in the contract unit price for gabions .
num steel jetty bank protection num section num steel jetty bank protection num description this work consists of placing steel jetty bank protection .
this consists of a mainline jetty with or without backup jetties as shown on the plans .
the jetties consist of steel jacks connected by steel cables or reinforcing bars to a deadman anchor .
the department will establish the length of mainline and back up jetties and the distance between lines of jetties as shown on the plans .
the resident engineer may direct changes to the lengths and locations of jetties if erosive conditions have altered the landscape and rendered the plan design ineffective .
num materials a .
steel jack provide steel jacks consisting of the following three new structural steel angles num in num in ¼ in num in num mm num mm num mm num mm six high strength bolts with hexagon heads and nuts ½ in num½ in num mm num mm and no .
num doubleannealed smoothwire lacing .
b .
steel cable provide usedsteel oilfield cable that has been inspected respooled and oiltreated .
ensure the steel cable has a diameter of at least ⅞ in num mm or provide reinforcing steel bars of at least ¾ in num mm in diameter and cable clamps for fastening .
c. deadman provide deadman of concrete or timber .
ensure the concrete deadmen are class a concrete at least num ft num ft num½ ft num m num m num m. ensure the timber deadmen are new creosoted railroad ties at least num in num in num in num mm num mm num mm or creosoted timber pile cutoffs with a diameter of at least num in num mm at the smallest end and a length of num ft num m. num equipment vacant num construction methods a. constructing jacks bolt three steel angles together so each angle is perpendicular to the other two angles .
construct the jacks to a height of at least num ft num m and lace with at least four wire lines as follows tie the outside lacing line at each angle .
pass the second lacing line through the angles num ft num m from the ends .
pass the third lacing line through the angles num ft num m from the ends .
pass the inside lacing line through the angles num ft num m from the ends .
steel jetty bank protection num num b. anchoring jacks use double runs of steel cable or reinforcing bars to anchor the jacks .
pass one cable or bar on each side of the jack and apply a cable clamp to hold the cables together and to keep the jack in place .
for a mainline jetty anchor the cables or bars at each end with a deadman .
for backup jetties fasten the cables or bars to the mainline at a steel jack and anchor to a deadman at the opposite end .
minimize the use of splices and if necessary place splices only at a jack .
when making splices constructing end connections to timber deadmen or connecting backup jetties to a mainline jetty wrap each steel cable around the jack or deadman at least twice and fasten with double cable clamps .
connect concrete deadmen as shown on the plans .
splice reinforcing bars with a doubleflare vgroove weld of at least num in num mm in accordance with the current edition of the aws reinforcing steel welding code .
c. placing the deadman place the deadman in a trench and ensure the pull is at right angles to the deadman .
ensure the deadman bears on undisturbed earth .
bury the deadmen at least num ft num m deep measured to the bottom of the deadman .
backfill the trench and compact the soil to the density of adjacent insitu soil .
num method of measurement the resident engineer will measure the steel jacks by the number of jacks constructed placed and anchored .
for the mainline jetty the resident engineer will measure the length of steel cable from the center of the steel jack to the center of the deadman .
for backup jetties the resident engineer will measure the length of steel cable from the tie to the mainline jetty to the center of the deadman .
num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit a steel jack each b steel cable linear foot meter c deadman each the department will consider the cost of excavation and backfill for placing the deadman to be included in the contract unit price for deadman .
unless otherwise specified the department will consider the cost of excavation for placing steel jacks to be included in the contract unit price for steel jack and steel cable .
num integral curb combined curb gutter asphalt curb header curb num section num integral curb combined curb and gutter asphalt curbing and header curbing integral curb combined curb gutter asphalt curb header curb num description this work consists of constructing integral curb combined curb and gutter asphalt curbing and header curbing .
num materials provide class a concrete for integral curb combined curb and gutter or header curbing in accordance with section num portland cement concrete .
provide type snum or type snum asphalt concrete for asphalt curbing in accordance with subsection num composition of mixtures except provide asphalt concrete with an asphalt content of num times the asphalt content required by the appropriate jobmix formula .
provide sealant material in accordance with the following subsections or as otherwise approved by the resident engineer material subsection for concrete curb num for new concrete pavement num.f for most joint rehabilitation num.f for integral concrete curb joints num.d for combined curb and gutter joints num.d num equipment provide a curb machine capable of extruding a uniformly textured material to the shape and density and established line and grade required in the contract .
num construction methods a. excavation excavate to the depth shown on the plans and compact the base to a firm even surface .
replace soft or unsuitable material with material approved by the resident engineer and compact .
b .
forms provide forms made of wood metal or other material that will not warp or misalign during placement of curb material .
ensure forms extend the entire depth of curb or curb and gutter .
during the placement of the concrete or asphalt brace and secure the forms to prevent deflection from the alignment or grade shown on the plans or directed by the resident engineer .
the department will not allow shimming to the bottom of the forms to exceed num in num mm in builtup thickness for special curb sections .
obtain the resident engineers approval for fastening the builtup section to the form .
clean and oil or wet forms before placing the concrete .
ensure tight forms to prevent leaks .
integral curb combined curb gutter asphalt curb header curb num num c. placing concrete check forms then place and vibrate concrete in accordance with subsection num construction methods .
d. surface finish as soon as the curb concrete can retain its shape without support uniformly brush the surface .
edge formed concrete joints including edges at expansion and contraction joints or weakenedplane joints to the radius shown on the plans .
e. joints construct curb joints perpendicular to the subgrade and to the longitudinal axis of the curb .
construct expansion and contraction joints at locations of joints in the adjacent pavement structure and in accordance with subsection num joint fillers and sealants .
for expansion joints use premolded expansion joint filler of the thickness and at the locations shown on the plans .
for curb and gutter contraction joints used in conjunction with asphalt pavement saw in accordance with subsection num.h extruded method and seal with the same material used for sealing expansion joints .
f. curb openings for curb openings omit the top portion of the separate curb or the curb portion of the combined curb and gutter as shown on the plans or by the resident engineer .
if leaving the bottom portion of a separate curb or the gutter of combined curb and gutter make the concrete higher at the back of the curb line than at the front .
g. curing cure portland cement concrete curbs or combined curb and gutter in accordance with section num portland cement concrete pavement .
h. extruded method to construct an extruded combined curb and gutter operate the extrusion machine on a string or wire line with the rails or forms set at a uniform depth below the finished top of curb grade .
uniformly feed concrete into the machine .
ensure that after extrusion the concrete maintains the shape of the section without support .
ensure the finished curb or curb and gutter is well compacted with no voids or honeycombs and built to the shape line and grade shown on the plans .
perform additional surface finishing immediately after extrusion .
ensure tolerances in accordance with subsection num.q tolerances .
construct joints at the same locations needed for form construction .
unless the resident engineer approves other methods saw weakenedplane joints every num ft num m. num integral curb combined curb gutter asphalt curb header curb num numintegral curb combined curb gutter asphalt curb header curb i. asphalt curbing to construct short sections or radii of asphalt curbing the resident engineer may approve other methods .
ensure curbing constructed by alternative methods produces the same result as the machineproduced curbing .
construct asphalt curbing in accordance with subsection num.a stockpiling materials through subsection num.g tack coat except as follows establish one edge of the asphalt curb with a string or wire line .
place the asphalt curb at the lowest temperature that yields the best results for the mix placed and machine used .
ensure the placement temperature does not vary more than num f num c. j. backfill backfill the back side of the curbs with soil approved by the resident engineer and compact in layers no greater than num in num mm deep .
ensure the curb remains inplace and undamaged while placing and compacting the backfill .
repair damage to the curb at no additional cost to the department .
num method of measurement the resident engineer will measure the length of concrete curb combined curb and gutter concrete header curbing and asphalt curbing along the front face of the curb including curb openings .
num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit a concrete curb linear foot meter b combined curb and gutter linear foot meter c concrete header curbing linear foot meter d asphalt curbing linear foot meter the department will consider the cost of placing backfill for curbs to be included in the contract unit price for the relevant curb pay item .
concreteasphalt sidewalks driveways dividing stripswarning devices num num section num concrete or asphalt sidewalks driveways dividing strips and tactile warning devices concreteasphalt sidewalks driveways dividing stripswarning devices num description this work consists of constructing concrete or asphalt sidewalks driveways dividing strips and tactile warning devices .
num materials provide materials in accordance with the following subsections material subsection asphalt mixture num portland cement concrete class a num tactile warning device material num num equipment vacant num construction methods a .
concrete construction form place and finish concrete in accordance with subsection num construction methods except broomfinish or burlapdrag the final surface of concrete sidewalks driveways and divider strips or complete as directed by the resident engineer .
connect the old and new pavement with a sawed joint .
num expansion joints construct expansion joints to the dimensions required by the contract and fill with the premolded filler as shown on the plans .
num dummy joints use a jointing tool or other method approved by the resident engineer to divide the sidewalk into sections with dummy joints .
extend the dummy joints into the concrete at least onethird the concrete slab depth and to ⅛ in num mm wide .
num construction joints form construction joints around appurtenances extending the joints into the sidewalk driveway or dividing strip .
install premolded expansion joint filler to a thickness of ¼ in num mm between the concrete and fixed structures .
num curing use moist burlap or cotton mats to cure concrete for at least num hr in accordance with subsection num.j curing .
during the curing period do not allow traffic to use the surface .
prevent vehicular traffic from using the surface for additional time as directed by the resident engineer .
num concreteasphalt sidewalks driveways dividing stripswarning devices num num concreteasphalt sidewalks driveways dividing stripswarning devices b. asphalt construction excavate and build forms in accordance with subsection num.a excavation and subsection num.b forms .
perform asphalt construction in accordance with subsection num construction methods .
place the asphalt material on the compacted subgrade in one or more layers and compact to the thickness shown on the plans .
use a handoperated or power roller to uniformly compact the material .
the type and weight of the roller must meet the resident engineers approval .
handtamp areas inaccessible to the roller .
c. backfill backfill the sides of sidewalks and driveways immediately after form removal and honeycombed areas are filled and pointed .
backfill using material approved by the resident engineer thoroughly compacted in layers no deeper than num in num mm compacted .
protect the concrete or asphalt material from damage during placement and compaction .
where the elevation of the adjacent surface is lower than the sidewalk or driveway ensure the width of the backfill is at least num ft num m. d. protection from traffic use barricades to protect sidewalks driveways and dividing strips from traffic .
protect concrete for num days and asphalt for num day unless otherwise directed by the resident engineer .
e. remove relay or extend brick or stone sidewalks if relaying or extending brick or stone sidewalks prepare the subgrade in accordance with subsection num.a concrete construction .
provide a sand cushion num½ in num mm deep with a uniform flat surface at the subgrade elevation .
before relaying sidewalk clean the old bricks .
lay the bricks or stones close together to match the existing walk and tamp firmly into the sand cushion .
ensure the surface of the walk is smooth and at the grade shown on the plans .
fill the joints with mortar grout composed of one part portland cement and two parts mortar sand by volume by spreading an excess over the surface and sweeping into the joints .
clean the surface of the brick .
backfill the sides of the walk as required in the contract for concrete sidewalks .
f. tactile warning device install tactile warning device materials in accordance with the manufacturers specifications and as shown on the plans .
num method of measurement vacant num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit a concrete sidewalk square yard square meter b concrete driveway square yard square meter manholes drop or curb inlets and junction boxes num num pay item pay unit c concrete dividing strip square yard square meter d remove and relay brick or stone sidewalk square yard square meter e brick or stone sidewalk square yard square meter f asphalt sidewalk square yard square meter or ton metric ton g asphalt driveway square yard square meter or ton metric ton h asphalt dividing strip square yard square meter or ton metric ton i tactile warning device square foot square meter the department considers the cost of reinforcement excavation backfill expansion joint material rolled curb on driveways and other related miscellaneous work to be included in the contract unit price for the relevant pay item .
section num manholes drop or curb inlets and junction boxes num description this work consists of constructing manholes drop or curb inlets junction boxes or similar structures using precast concrete units brick masonry or castinplace concrete .
num materials a .
general provide materials in accordance with the following section and subsections material section or subsection portland cement num mortar sand num clay brick num concrete brick num structural steel num steel castings num iron castings num precast manholes num portland cement concrete class a num the department will allow precast concrete units instead of brick masonry or cast inplace concrete unless otherwise shown on the plans except the department will not allow brick masonry for the construction or rebuilding of sanitary sewer manholes .
ensure precast structures with slab tops that may be subject to traffic meet hsnum loading requirements .
ensure precast units consist of class a concrete .
num manholes drop or curb inlets and junction boxes num num manholes drop or curb inlets and junction boxes provide coarse aggregate in accordance with subsection num coarse aggregate .
provide size no .
num coarse aggregate for thin section concrete .
if using alternative forms of concrete provide in accordance with aashto m num astm c num .
provide reinforcing steel for precast concrete units in accordance with subsection num bar steel reinforcement billet steel subsection num welded steel wire fabric and subsection num steel wire strand for prestressing .
if using alternative steel provide in accordance with aashto m num astm c num .
provide two thandles for up to the first num locking manhole covers and one for each additional num locking manhole covers .
b. portland cement mortar with brick masonry provide mortar composed of one part portland cement and two parts mortar sand by volume mixed with water to form a plastic consistency .
do not substitute more than num percent of the cement by volume with hydrated lime .
add the hydrated lime to the cement first .
c. accessories for accessories such as bolts rivets spacers small ibeams channels and plates for assembling or supporting frames grates or covers provide firstquality standard commercial material free of defects .
num equipment provide specialized equipment capable of offloading handling and placing the largest single unit subassemblies or both .
provide lift holes or lift rings in each unit in accordance with the manufacturers recommendation .
ensure lift devices and connection points are safe for handling above ground and in the inlet excavation .
num construction methods a .
concrete when constructing concrete bottoms for manholes and inlets round the concrete to the dimensions and shape shown on the plans .
trowel the surface to obtain a uniform smooth and impervious hardfanned finish .
ensure exposed concrete edges have at least a ½ in num mm chamfer or a rounded edge .
finish exposed concrete surfaces in accordance with subsection num.g finishing formed concrete surfaces .
b. clay brick or concrete brick for brick masonry used in circular or curved walls with radii less than num ft num m install stretchers every fifth course and headers for the remainder .
ensure the thickness of the joints does not exceed ¼ in num mm vertical on inside faces or ⅜ in num mm on horizontal faces .
for brick masonry used in both straight and curved walls with radii at least num ft num m install headers every fifth course and stretchers for the remainder .
ensure the thickness of the joints does not exceed ⅜ in num mm .
construct vertical joints in subsequent courses half the length or width of the brick .
manholes drop or curb inlets and junction boxes num num lay the brick in a full bed of mortar and construct shoved joints .
the department will not allow buttered joints .
for joints on the inside or exposed face of the masonry rub the joints fully and cut as the brickwork is built up .
build up the masonry in level courses true to the lines grades and dimensions shown on the plans .
use bats to close joints around irregular openings as directed by the resident engineer .
thoroughly wet the brick immediately before placing .
clean and wet old brick masonry before joining new masonry to it .
if the contract requires a mortar coating apply to the minimum thickness shown on the plans .
apply the mortar coat while the brick masonry is clean and damp then trowel to a uniform smooth impervious surface .
c. pipe connections use inlet and outlet pipe of the size shown on the plans or as directed by the resident engineer .
ensure the end of the pipe is flush with the inside of the wall and tightly seal the circumference of the pipe in the wall with mortar .
remove the lip of the female end of the pipe and press in and trowel the mortar flush with the face of the wall .
d. special curb if building curbs adjacent to sewer inlets use the same type of concrete as the regular curb or class a concrete where no regular curb is being built .
accurately shape the forms for the curb opening to the dimensions and at the locations shown on the plans .
ensure the forms remain in place for at least num days to cure the concrete or longer as directed by the resident engineer .
e. reinforcing steel place reinforcing steel in accordance with section num reinforcing steel for structures .
f. castings grate and drop inlet grates and special frames assemble and place castings grates special frames and supports as shown on the plans .
bed the frames of manholes and covers and inlets and grates in a layer of mortar with a full bearing and set to the grade shown on the plans .
unless otherwise shown on the plans make the top of the casting flush with the surrounding surface .
finish exposed surfaces of special structural steel frames and supports in accordance with section num structural steel .
g. excavation and backfill excavate to the depth shown on the plans and compact the base for manholes inlets or junction boxes to a firm even surface .
replace unsuitable material with suitable material and compact as directed by the resident engineer .
h. precast units bed precast concrete units on a solid foundation at least num in num mm thick that consists of clean uniformly graded material capable of being mechanically leveled leveled by flooding or floated on a lean grout .
the department will not allow the presence of clay balls or cement clumps .
if using sand flooding or grout pouring for bedding backfilling or both securely anchor num manholes drop or curb inlets and junction boxes num num the units to prevent lateral or vertical movement .
immediately after placement backfill inlet excavation and compact using incremental layers or sand flooding .
place entrance and exit conduits round oval elliptical arch pipe or concrete box with flowlines as shown on the plans .
the department will not allow alterations of the elevation or angle to facilitate ease of installation or to make use of an existing blockout .
set precast concrete inlet units flush with or slightly below the subgrade to prevent interference with the movement of the paving equipment .
if precast concrete inlet assemblies are set at subgrade elevation use a bedded brick fired clay or concrete leveling course to bring the inlet assembly to the final grade shown on the plans .
the department will allow a formed and poured concrete collar .
pin the concrete collar to the inlet box and additional opening boxes as approved by the resident engineer .
ensure precast concrete units provide a soiltight connection between subassemblies and at each entrance or exit conduit blockout .
if a unit is delivered with a blockout placed in error or if a plan revision renders a blockout unnecessary clean the hole and fill with a concrete patch .
for blockouts the department will allow a patch from a previous blockout hole securely grouted in place or poured or placed using a drymix highstrength concrete .
provide gasket material for use between subassemblies or between the inlet unit and entrance or exit conduits in accordance with the materials divisions approved products list for adhesive materials .
seal the joints and base of precast manholes in accordance with subsection num.e outlet headwalls to prevent water passage except make joints with a single natural rubber or neoprene gasket or oring in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
num method of measurement a. manhole the resident engineer will measure each manhole as including the concrete bottom and up to num ft num m of wall measured from the bottom of the frame cover casting to the flowline of the outlet conduit .
b .
additional depth in manhole the resident engineer will measure the depth of wall in excess of num ft num m for additional depth of manhole in accordance with subsection num.a manhole .
c. special manhole the resident engineer will measure special manhole by the volume of num in num mm thick wall constructed and make deductions for openings .
the resident engineer will measure the concrete bottom in accordance with section num method of measurement .
d. inlet the resident engineer will measure each inlet by the number of inlet provided by each type and design as shown on the plans .
manholes drop or curb inlets and junction boxes num num manholes drop or curb inlets and junction boxes e. additional depth in inlet the resident engineer will measure the depth of single or double inlet boxes and additional curb opening boxes in excess of the minimum depth shown on the plans for additional depth in inlet .
f. junction boxes the resident engineer will measure the volume of num in num mm thick wall for junction boxes and make deductions for pipe openings with diameters greater than num in num mm .
num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit a manhole each b additional depth in manhole vertical foot meter c replacement of manhole frame and cover each d replacement manhole frame each e replacement of manhole cover each f replacement of manhole cover grate each g inlet each h additional depth in inlet vertical foot meter i replacement of inlet frame and grate each j replacement of inlet frame each k replacement of inlet grate each l junction boxes cubic foot meter m replacement of cast iron hood each n welded steel grate each the department will consider the cost of the following to be included in the contract unit price for the relevant pay items excavation backfill reinforcing steel frames covers grates cast iron hoods support beams support beams with riser plates bolts nuts and thandles for locking manhole covers .
num adjustment of existing structures num section num adjustment of existing structures num description this work consists of adjusting altering relocating resetting and realigning existing structures equipment or appurtenances .
this applies to public structures shown on the plans to remain .
num materials provide materials of an equivalent grade to the existing structure as shown on the plans or materials required by the contract for similar work .
num equipment vacant num construction methods a .
general if required by the contract refurbish and reset departmentprovided electrical equipment including delivering the equipment to the project from the location shown on the plans .
adjust reset or rebuild existing structures to the final grade shown on the plans or as approved by the resident engineer .
make adjustments to existing structures in pavement after placing the final surface course .
protect the altered removed or reset structure or appurtenance during transport and adjustment .
repair or replace unprotected items damaged during transport or adjustment at no additional cost to the department .
transport items from the storage site and reset at no additional cost to the department .
modify clean or repair the structure or appurtenances before resetting as shown on the plans .
b. manholes if the contract requires the tops of the manholes to be lowered to a new grade remove the walls and rebuild manholes so the maximum batter of the walls does not exceed num inft num mmm .
if the contract requires manholes to be raised num ft num mm or less to the new grade construct the walls vertically from the top of the batter section .
if the contract requires manholes to be raised more than num ft num mm to the new grade remove the walls to the bottom of the batter section or to an elevation at which the inside diameter of the manhole is at least num ft num m and rebuild in accordance with section num manholes drop or curb inlets and junction boxes .
c. inlets and manholes reset or rebuild inlets manholes or similar structures to the grade shown on the plans in accordance with section num manholes drop or curb inlets and junction boxes .
adjustment of existing structures num num adjustment of existing structures d. valve boxes and meter boxes reset or remove valve boxes and meter boxes to the grade shown on the plans without damaging .
replace damaged items at no additional cost to the department .
e. fire hydrants valves water meters waterlines manholes etc .
if the contract does not require this work coordinate with the owner of structures to lower or relocate waterlines and reset water valves meters manholes and fire hydrants .
if the contract requires this work alter these items in accordance with the requirements of the owner and section num water pipe and fittings .
f. pipe sewers remove and relay pipe sewers and appurtenances in accordance with section num sanitary sewer pipe conduits .
g. waterlines remove and relay or lower waterlines and appurtenances in accordance with section num water pipe and fittings .
num method of measurement the resident engineer will measure reset relaid and adjusted structures by each unit of the type and size required by the contract .
num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit a manhole adjust to grade each b manhole rebuilt each c inlet adjust to grade each d inlet rebuilt each e valve box adjust to grade each f meter box adjust to grade each g fire hydrant reset each h valve reset each i water meter reset each j waterline lowered linear foot meter k waterline removed and relaid linear foot meter l pipe sewer removed and relaid linear foot meter m remove and reset manhole frame and cover each the department will consider the cost of valve boxes meter boxes etc .
to be included in the contract unit price for valves reset and water meters reset .
the department will consider the cost of valves in waterlines and fire hydrant leads and the cost of resetting to be included in the contract unit price for valves reset .
the department will consider the cost of adjusting valve boxes under pavement to be included in the contract unit price for valve boxes adjust to grade .
num adjustment of existing structures num num adj ustment of existing structures the department will pay for separately classified extensions to fire hydrant leads for new waterlines in accordance with section num water pipe and fittings .
if the extensions are not classified separately the department will consider the cost of pipe to be included in the contract unit price for fire hydrant reset .
section num drainage conduits num description this work consists of installing new or removing and reinstalling existing pipe conduits including the following pipe underdrains and edgedrains at least num in num mm in diameter and other pipe with inside diameter of at least num in num mm used in storm drains and culverts or drainage conduits not defined as bridges .
num materials provide drainage conduit in accordance with section num drainage conduits .
provide the class of reinforced concrete pipe the sheet thickness of corrugated steel and corrugated aluminum pipe and the heights of fill above the tops of pipes as shown on the plans .
unless otherwise required by the contract provide class iii reinforced concrete culvert pipe .
if the type of pipe is not shown on the plans the type is optional .
provide the same type of pipe for each application unless the resident engineer approves an alternative in writing .
provide materials in accordance with the following subsections material subsection joint filler num.b standard bedding material num cover material for pipe underdrains num for jacking operations provide the type size class and quantity of pipe shown on the plans .
num equipment vacant num construction methods a .
general begin installing pipe conduits at the outlet or the lowest point of the line .
if installing a main or submain drainage conduit with at least one lateral or tributary drainage conduits num num drainage conduits construct the tributary lines after completing the main or submain drainage conduit so ensure drainage during construction .
replace cracked and deformed conduits before final acceptance at no additional cost to the department .
provide for drainage during construction .
join new and existing storm drain appurtenances as shown on the plans or as approved by the resident engineer .
protect structures from damage during construction .
ensure storm drain conduits do not project beyond the inside wall of other sewers or sewer appurtenances .
install the invert or flow line of the drainage conduit to the grade line shown on the plans unless otherwise directed by the resident engineer .
establish the center and grade lines in the trench at intervals no greater than num ft num m. the department will allow an interval increase to num ft num m if using a laser device to establish the center and grade lines except when establishing the center and grade lines of manholes or appurtenances set the first interval at num ft num m. seal drainage conduit dead ends wyes and tees by cementing stoppers in place .
when temporarily stopping storm drain work prevent trash or debris from entering conduits using a nonwatertight stopper to close the end of conduits with diameters num in num mm or less .
place edge drain conduit in an excavated trench lined with separator fabric .
provide surfacing above the trench backfill as shown on the plans .
construct splices in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
use elbow outlet fittings of highimpact polyethylene or equivalent material to transition between the edge drain conduit and the edge drain outlet laterals .
place the edge drain and under drain outlet laterals and headwalls on a smooth grade backfill the trenches with native material and compact as shown on the plans .
install the outlet lateral and connect to the edge drain within num hr of placing the edge drain .
to repair damaged edge drain conduit splice with an undamaged section of conduit .
make repairs at no additional cost to the department .
upon completion and before acceptance by the resident engineer cover lateral outlets and clear the headwalls of debris .
b. excavation excavate only as much trench for pipe conduit as can be laid within num calendar days unless otherwise directed by the resident engineer .
excavate only as much trench for pavement edge drain conduit as can be set and backfilled in num calendar day .
protect existing pavement from damage during excavation and placement of pavement edge drain .
repair damages at no additional cost to the department .
after completing the embankment to the height required by the contract above the flow line grade excavate trenches to place conduits in embankment fill .
excavate trenches to the width shown on the plans from the bottom of the trench to at least num ft num m above the top of the conduit .
provide additional excavation to accommodate the bells at every joint .
ensure the size and depth of the additional excavation relieves any load on the bell and provides firm bedding under the conduit and adequate space to construct the joint .
num drainage conduits num place concrete cradle or refill as shown on the plans or directed by the resident engineer .
compact the full length and width of the trench bottom .
remove and replace soft or unsuitable material and replace with suitable material as directed by the resident engineer .
for cross drains excavate to a grade line with a longitudinal camber as shown on the plans .
unless otherwise required by the contract excavated materials not used on the project as embankment or backfill becomes the property of the contractor for removal and disposal .
the department will consider trench excavation as unclassified excavation as defined in accordance with subsection num description .
c. bedding place the following classes of bedding material in accordance with the type and size of conduit as shown on the plans or as directed by the resident engineer class a. bedding material in accordance with subsection num standard bedding material .
class b. bedding material in accordance with subsection num standard bedding material .
class c. bedding material in accordance with subsection num standard bedding material .
class d. bedding material in accordance with subsection num standard bedding material and compacted in the bottom of the trench as shown on the plans .
underdrain bedding .
bedding material of granular backfill material in accordance with subsection num.bnum coarse cover aggregate compacted in the bottom of the trench as shown on the plans .
edge drain bedding .
bedding material in accordance with subsection num coarse aggregate size num .
compact backfill material placed above bedding material in accordance with subsection num.b embankments .
d. separator fabric install separator fabric in accordance with section num separator fabric for bases as shown on the plans .
e. outlet lateral headwalls construct outlet headwalls in accordance with section num structural concrete and place at each outlet lateral as shown on the plans or as directed by the resident engineer .
f. rodent screen install rodent screens in each outlet lateral line and fasten to the outlet end of the edge drain lateral pipe .
drainage conduits num num g. laying pipe place pipe on a foundation of bedding material approved by the resident engineer to the center and grade lines shown on the plans with the bell facing upstream .
ensure the conduit remains in place .
lower the pipe into the trench without dropping .
use hoisting equipment to place the pipe .
clean the inside of the barrel before lowering the pipes into the trench .
avoid damaging the pipe or trench .
replace damaged pipe or repair damaged trench at no additional cost to the department .
start laying the pipe at the outlet or the lowest point of the line .
ensure the bottom of the pipe contacts the shaped bedding along the entire length .
lay paved or partially lined pipe so the longitudinal centerline of the paved segment conforms to the flow line .
when placing elliptical and elliptically reinforced pipes ensure the major axis is within num of a horizontal plane through the longitudinal axis of the pipe .
do not fill or ram material under pipe to raise the pipe to grade .
embed under drain pipe in the bedding material and place at the center and grade lines shown on the plans .
lay perforated pipe with the perforations facing down .
place under drain pipe with a topofpipe identification marker facing up .
fasten metal screens to the outlet end of the subdrain pipe .
provide mesh screens with ½ in num mm openings fabricated of steel wire with diameters of num in num mm or num in num mm after galvanization .
ensure the wire mesh meets the requirements of astm a num .
permanently seal the dead end of the pipe with end caps .
at under drain pipe outlets provide and set a marker post as shown on the plans .
h. joining pipe conduit when joining pipe conduit sections ensure the ends are fully inserted and the inner surfaces are flush .
construct joints with mortar cold applied masticrubber gaskets or plastic joint material as shown on the plans .
ensure the joints are concentric and reasonably watertight .
keep the inside of the pipe free of joint material .
join flexible conduit with an external or internal coupling device or with a twistlock coupling system integrated into the wall of the conduit .
fasten the coupling system to the conduit and ensure the system does not release during installation handling and backfilling operations .
the resident engineer will accept coupling systems based on the field conditions and will not accept systems that repeatedly release .
the resident engineer can approve or reject the coupling system regardless of it being on the materials division approved products list .
i. backfilling allow the resident engineer access to the trench for inspection of the conduit before backfilling .
ensure smooth inside joints and clean barrels .
before backfilling replace misaligned settled or damaged pipes .
after inspection and approval by the resident engineer backfill the pipe trench with material as shown on the plans preventing displacement of or damage to the pipe .
place standard bedding material over pipes num drainage conduits num except pipe under drains to the depth shown on the plans .
place and compact backfill in accordance with subsection num.b embankments .
j. jacking pipe conduit install pipe conduit by jacking boring or pushing as shown on the plans or directed by the resident engineer .
install the pipe conduit to the center and grade lines shown on the plans .
use methods and equipment for jacking and boring pipe conduit as approved by the resident engineer .
prevent operations from interfering with existing underground utilities .
keep the disturbed area to a minimum .
install jacked bored or pushed pipe conduits at least num in num mm below the ground line or subgrade .
cut an x in the curb or surface above both sides of the pipe conduit crossings as approved by the resident engineer .
only use a circulation medium water or other fluids in boring or jacking operations with the written approval of the resident engineer .
use minimum pressure when applying the circulation medium .
keep the circulation medium in the casing throughout jacking and boring operations .
install pipe conduit by jacking under railroad embankments highways streets or other facilities without interfering with operation of the railroad highway street or other facility and without damaging the embankment or structure .
install pipe conduit using jacking in accordance with the size type and class shown on the plans .
if the strength of the pipe conduit is not rated for the additional pressure of jacking operations reinforce the pipe conduit to withstand jacking pressure at no additional cost to the department .
if jacking or pushing pipe conduit with an inside diameter greater than num in num mm under railroads highways streets or other facilities bore or remove the soil during the jacking or pushing operation .
if jacking or pushing pipe conduit with an inside diameter of num in num mm or less under railroads highways streets or other facilities install the pipe conduit using a combination of boring and jacking .
use a boring auger or bit with a diameter smaller than that of the pipe conduit .
jack the pipe conduit as the boring auger drills out the material .
bore no more than num ft num m ahead of the pipe conduit .
if the grade of the pipe conduit at the jacking end is below the ground surface excavate pits for jacking .
continuously dewater the pits until backfilling is complete .
provide heavyduty jacks for installing the pipe conduit in the embankment .
apply even pressure to the jacks .
provide a jacking head and bracing between the jacks and the jacking head to ensure the pipe conduit receives uniform pressure .
provide a jacking frame or backstop .
set the pipe conduit on guides braced together to support the sections of pipe conduit and to direct it to the center and grade lines shown on the plans .
if pipe conduit sections are less than num ft num m long place two sections in the guide frame at the same time .
lubricate the joints to minimize breakage .
place the jacking assembly in line with the grade of the pipe conduit .
push the pipe conduit through the embankment with jacks and excavate earth material ahead of the pipe conduit removing the material through the pipe conduit .
excavate at least onethird the circumference of the pipe conduit to accommodate the underside of the pipe conduit .
ensure the excavated area conforms to the shape and grade of the conduit .
unless otherwise specified create a clearance of num in drainage conduits num num num mm or less for the upper half of the pipe conduit .
where the excavation conforms to the pipe conduits shape taper the clearance to zero .
the department will allow a steel cutting edge around the head and for not less than the upper twothirds of the conduit and extending a short distance beyond the end of the conduit .
construct the steel cutting edge and mount and use it so as to ensure that clearance between the outside of the conduit and the undisturbed earth will be not more than ½ in num mm .
if when excavating inside the pipe do not exceed the outside diameter of the conduit or extend more than num in num mm beyond the lead edge of the cutting head this will provide for final trimming by the cutting edge and eliminates any void space except that clearance allowed above regarding the steel cutting head .
perform jacking operations without interruption to prevent the pipe conduit from becoming firmly set in the embankment .
stop jacking operations at the first signs of caving .
make corrections and install measures to prevent future caving before restarting as approved by the resident engineer .
use grout to fill cavities or voids created by jacking operations as approved by the resident engineer .
remove conduit damaged by jacking operations and replace at the no additional cost to the department .
k. relaying culvert pipe clean the culvert pipe before relaying and install in accordance with subsection num.g laying pipe .
num method of measurement the resident engineer will not deduct from the length of pipe measurements for the following wye branches and standard manholes for conduits num in num mm or less in diameter .
the resident engineer will make deduct from the length of pipe measurements for the following special structures and manholes and all structures for conduits larger than num in num mm in diameter .
the resident engineer will measure the length of drainage conduit edge drain conduit and edge drain outlet laterals along the conduit center and grade lines .
the resident engineer will calculate the volume of standard bedding material class a class b and class c as follows calculate the theoretical crosssectional area using the width of the trench and the height of the bedding material as shown on the plans deduct the theoretical crosssectional area of the embedded portion of the pipe using the outside diameter as shown on the plans and multiply the difference by the length of the drainage conduit completed in place .
the resident engineer will measure pipe under drain cover material using the width num drainage conduits num num and depth of the trench shown on the plans and will not deduct the volume of the under drain pipe .
the resident engineer will calculate the volume of trench excavation by multiplying the width of the trench shown on the plans the length of the drainage conduit completed in place and the trench depth determined as follows cut areas the average depth from the lower excavation line to the finished subgrade shown on the plans .
fill areas the depth from the lower excavation line shown on the plans to num ft num m above the drainage conduit .
the resident engineer will establish the lower excavation line used in determining the depth of trench excavation by subtracting the thickness of the drainage conduit wall as determined below and the depth of bedding material below the outside surface of the drainage conduit shown on the plans from the flow line elevation shown on the plans .
the resident engineer will determine the thickness of the drainage conduit wall as follows for rigid drainage conduit the actual wall thickness and for flexible drainage conduit the height of the corrugation or actual wall thickness .
in adjacent excavation and embankment areas the resident engineer will establish an equitable measurement elevation .
the resident engineer will measure jacked conduit along the centerline of the conduit .
num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit a reinforced concrete pipe round elliptical or arch linear foot meter b corrugated galvanized steel pipe round or arch linear foot meter c mill precoated corrugated galvanized steel pipe linear foot meter d corrugated aluminum pipe linear foot meter e corrugated polyethylene pipe linear foot meter f cast iron pipe linear foot meter g polyvinyl chloride pvc pipe linear foot meter h perforated pipe underdrain linear foot meter i nonperforated pipe underdrain linear foot meter j edge drain conduit perforated linear foot meter k edge drain outlet lateral nonperforated linear foot meter l prefab .
culv .
end sect .
round elliptical or arch each m culvert end treatment each n sloped concrete end section each drainage conduits num num pay item pay unit o special end sections of reinforced concrete each p galvanized steel culv .
end sec .
round or arch each q outlet lateral headwall each r standard bedding material class a cubic yard cubic meter s standard bedding material class b cubic yard cubic meter t standard bedding material class c cubic yard cubic meter u pipe underdrain cover material cubic yard cubic meter v trench excavation cubic yard cubic meter w jacked conduit linear foot meter x relaying culvert pipe linear foot meter drainage conduits the department will pay for different sizes and types of pipe as separate pay items .
the department will consider the cost of removing unsuitable material to be included in the contract unit price for trench excavation and will consider the replacement with suitable material to be included in the contract unit price for the relevant bedding material pay item .
the department will pay for separator fabric in accordance with section num separator fabric for bases .
the department will consider the cost of standard bedding material class d earth backfill sheeting shoring stoppers plugs and joint filler to be included in the contract unit price for the relevant pay item .
the department will include the cost of under drain pipe outlet markers to be included in the contract unit price for the relevant pipe under drain pay item .
the department will consider the cost of constructing pilot tunnels and conduit used in jacking operations to be included in the contract unit price for jacked conduit .
the department will consider the removal and disposal of excess material to be included in the contract unit price for other relevant excavation and removal pay items .
num wick drains and strip drains num section num wick drains and strip drains num description this work consists of installing prefabricated wick drains and strip drains .
num materials a. wick drains provide prefabricated wick drains with a freedraining flexibleplastic core wrapped in a nonwoven filter fabric .
fabricate the core with drainage channels .
provide a rigid wick drain capable of withstanding lateral earth pressures due to embedment and surcharge so the vertical flow capacity through the core will not be adversely affected .
ensure the prefabricated drains resist wet rot mildew bacterial action and insects .
provide prefabricated drains with discharge capacities of at least num galmin num lmin if measured under num gradient at num psi num kpa in accordance with astm d num .
the prefabricated drains must be alidrain ameridrain type num mebra drain or an approved equivalent .
provide type b certifications for these drains in accordance with subsection num material certifications .
for other materials submit samples of the prefabricated drain for evaluation and approval at least one month before beginning work .
b .
strip drains provide strip drains that are flexible prefabricated rectangular shaped composite products .
the drain conduit must consist of a polyolefin inner core completely wrapped by a filter fabric .
ensure the inner core supports the fabric that acts as a filter stiffener and flow channel for water draining downgrade to the outlet laterals .
permanently bond the filter fabric to the core protrusion .
ensure at least num protrusions from the inner core per square foot num protrusions per square meter of strip drain surface .
ensure at least num percent of the protrusions are bonded to the filter fabric .
provide nonwoven filter fabric that consists of long chain synthetic polymers composed of at least num percent by weight polyolefins polyesters or polyamides .
interconnect the horizontal and vertical flow of water within the strip drain for the full height of the core at all times .
the drainage core with the geotextile laminated to one side of the core must provide a flow rate of at least num qtsecyd num lsecm of width when tested in accordance with astm d num under the test conditions in subsection num.a wick drains with a gradient of num .
if core construction separates the flow channel into two or more sections consider the flow rate on the inflow face to determine the core acceptability .
attach the geotextile to the core to prevent folding wrinkling or other movement during handling or after placement .
use nonwatersoluble heatsealing or other wick drains and strip drains num num wick drains and strip drains bonding methods recommended by the manufacturer .
use adhesive in areas of the geotextile fabric where flow is not expected .
if heat sealing maintain the required strength values of the geotextile .
encapsulate the collector pipe by extending the geotextile below the bottom of the core length .
avoid exposing the fabric to ultraviolet radiation .
the resident engineer will reject fabric that is exposed for more than num days from the manufacture date to the completion of installation .
num handling and storage the manufacturer will provide the strip drain wrapped in black plastic or in covered rolls for storage handling and placement .
num strip drain assembly materials certification provide a type a materials certification for strip drains in accordance with subsection num material certifications for tests except for composite inplane flow and compressive strength .
for strip drain inplace flow and compressive strength provide a type b materials certification in accordance with subsection num material certifications .
provide a num ft num m sample of the strip drain from each lot or shipment to the departments materials engineer for inspection and testing .
the resident engineer will not require a fabric bond to the core if the structural integrity of the drain is defined and provided by the core alone .
num equipment install drainage wicks with equipment that will cause the least amount of subsoil disturbance during the installation operation .
install the drainage wick using a sleeve or mandrel that intrudes into the soil .
ensure the sleeve protects the wick material from tears cuts and abrasions during installation .
provide a sleeve with a cross sectional area no greater than num in² num mm² .
to minimize disturbance to the subsoil intrude the sleeve into the subsoil using static or vibratory methods the department will not allow impact methods .
ensure the sleeve has an anchor rod or plate at the bottom to prevent the soil from entering the bottom of the sleeve during installation and to anchor the bottom of the drain when the sleeve is removed .
at least two weeks before installing the drainage wicks submit the details of the sequence and method of installation to the resident engineer .
num construction methods a .
general the resident engineer will allow the installation of wick drains when the minimum experience requirements are met .
the minimum experience requirement consists of successfully completing three wick drain installation projects .
identify the three projects by project name location description size completion date and contract manager .
construct a work platform to install the drains .
keep the work platform in place and allow it to become part of the embankment .
num wick drains and strip drains num b. wick drains before installing drainage wicks demonstrate that the equipment method and materials produce an installation that meets the contract requirements .
install trial wicks at locations directed by the resident engineer .
the resident engineers approval of the method and equipment to install the trial wicks does not constitute acceptance of the method for the remainder of the project .
if the resident engineer decides the method of installation produces unsatisfactory wick alter the method equipment or both .
locate number and mark drainage wicks .
take precautions to preserve the markings .
ensure drainage wick locations do not vary by more than num in num mm from the locations shown on the plans or directed by the resident engineer .
install drainage wicks from the working surface to the depth shown on the plans or to a depth where the soil resists an effort at further penetration using equipment that meets the minimum requirements .
the resident engineer may revise the plan limits and vary the depths spacing or the number of wicks .
check the equipment for plumbness before advancing each wick and ensure it does not deviate by more than num percent from the vertical .
the resident engineer will reject wicks that are visibly damaged or are out of place by more than num in num mm .
provide the resident engineer with a means to determine the linear quantity of wick material at each wick location .
during installation of the wick provide a means of determining the depth of the drainage wick .
splice or connect the drainage wick material to ensure wick material continuity .
ensure a length of wick drain protrudes above the surface at each wick installation to secure the wick drain to the strip drain .
neatly cut the wick material at the upper edge .
to loosen stiff upper surface soils before installing the drainage wicks use auguring or other methods provided that augering does not extend more than num ft num m into the soils .
complete the drain from the elevation of the obstruction to the working surface .
notify the resident engineer where obstructions are encountered below the working surface that can not be penetrated using equipment meeting the minimum requirements .
install a new drain num in num mm from the obstructed drain as directed by the resident engineer .
protect instrumentation devices .
replace damaged instrumentation devices at no additional cost to the department .
c. strip drains lay strip drains flat and straight with minimal slack .
place strip drain products with a hard back and protrusions so the core back lies next to the ground with the studs pointing up .
ensure splices are neat and made in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations using kits provided by the manufacturer .
secure the wick or strip drains and ensure the drains remain connected and in place throughout the construction process .
sanitary sewer pipe conduits num num use end dumping for the first layer of embankement to avoid damage to the drains from equipment traffic .
construct a num ft num m bridge lift over the horizontal drains using low ground pressure equipment and light compaction .
num method of measurement the resident engineer will measure the length of prefabricated strip and wick drains including trial drains along the centerline of the drain .
num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit a prefabricated wick drain linear foot meter b prefabricated strip drain linear foot meter the department will pay for the volume of work platforms as unclassified borrow or unclassified excavation in accordance with section num earthwork .
the department will consider the cost of auguring stiff soils to be included in the contract unit price for prefabricated wick drain .
section num sanitary sewer pipe conduits num description this work consists of constructing sanitary sewer pipe .
refer to the oklahoma state department of health osdh regulations the manufacturers recommendations astm ansi awwa and the public utility for whom the work is to be performed for additional specifications .
the special provisions plans public utility specifications supplemental or standard specification will govern over the osdh minimum regulations .
num materials provide materials in accordance with section num drainage conduits .
mark the pipe with the appropriate specification number e.g .
aashto astm ansi nsf awwa .
a .
pipe before delivery to the jobsite subject concrete pipe to an inplant hydrostatic test of num psi num kpa in accordance with ansiastm c num .
coat concrete sanitary sewer pipe with two coats of coal tar base paint each at least num mil num mm thick .
allow each coat to dry for num hr .
provide plastic pipe bearing the seal of the national sanitation foundation nsf with a standard dimension ratio sdr no greater than num .
as an alternative use castinplace reinforced concrete boxes for sanitary sewer installations .
ensure the precast concrete boxes pass the same hydrostatic test .
numsanitary sewer pipe conduits num sanitary sewer pipe conduits num b .
joints provide joints in accordance with section num drainage conduits except make joints with a single natural rubber or neoprene gasket or oring in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
provide reinforced concrete pipe joints in accordance with ansiastm c num with a num cement mortar collar formed using a diaper .
provide vitrified clay pipe joints in accordance with ansiastm c num .
ensure polyvinyl chloride pvc pipe fittings and inline tees dimensionally conform to astm d num with an sdr of num .
num sanitary sewer pipe conduits num equipment vacant num construction methods a .
general begin construction of pipe conduits at the outlet or low point of the line .
if the construction involves the building of a main or submain pipe conduit with one or more laterals or tributaries start construction of tributary lines after completing the main or submain pipe conduit to the point at which the tributary or laterals discharge into it .
during construction make provision for the sewerage of the system .
connect sanitary sewers or sewer appurtenances to other sanitary sewers or to sewer appurtenances as shown on the plans or approved by the resident engineer .
do not allow sewer pipe to project beyond the inside wall line of other sewers or sewer appurtenances .
num setting grade lines use the grade line shown on the plans supplemental drawings or established by the resident engineer as the elevation of the invert or flowline of the sewer .
establish the grade line and alignment using batterboards and a top line .
when laying pipe maintain a top line over a span of threegrade stakes .
as each batterboard is erected sight the top line to ensure the accuracy of the grade stakes and the batterboard setting .
ensure the inspector is alerted of errors discrepancies or displacement of grade stakes .
num using a laser device establish the batterboards at intervals of no more than num ft num m. if a laser device establishes line and grade increase the batterboard interval to num ft num m. always set the first batterboard at num ft num m when laying out a manhole or appurtenance .
num accommodating water mains separate sanitary sewers and water mains vertically and horizontally in accordance with the osdh regulations .
horizontally place the sewer at least num ft num m from existing or proposed water mains and num ft num m from potable water wells .
where sewers cross water mains either above or below provide a vertical clearance of at least num ft num m. if a water main crosses under a sewer provide structural support to the sewer .
install sewer pipe joints at least num ft num m from water lines unless otherwise approved by the resident engineer .
when impossible sanitary sewer pipe conduits num num to meet these horizontal and vertical separation requirements construct and pressure test the sewer line to ensure it is watertight before backfilling .
num closing dead ends when constructing ends seal the dead ends of sewers wyes and tees by cementing stoppers in place .
securely place tightfitting watertight stoppers or bulkheads in or across the end of sanitary sewer lines .
b. excavation excavate in accordance with subsection num.b excavation .
c. bedding place bedding in accordance with subsection num.c bedding .
d. laying pipe lay pipe in accordance with subsection num.g laying pipe .
e. joining pipe conduit construct joints in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
before joining pipes clean and dry the surfaces of the joint surface of the pipe .
keep trenches free of water until the joints become water tight .
avoid realigning the pipe after completing the joint unless the pipe is removed and a new joint is constructed .
f. backfilling backfill in accordance with subsection num.i backfilling .
g. field testing provide written notification to the resident engineer num hr before testing .
leakage tests may include water or low pressure air testing .
ensure outward or inward leakage exfiltration or infiltration does not exceed num gal per num in num l per num mm of pipe diameter per mile kilometer per day .
perform an exfiltration or infiltration test with a positive head of at least num ft num m. conduct deflection tests on flexible pipes at least num days after placing the final backfill .
ensure the pipe deflection does not exceed num percent .
make the deflection test with a rigid ball or mandrel with a diameter equal to num percent of the inside diameter of the pipe .
do not use mechanical pulling devices unless otherwise approved by the resident engineer .
perform lamping in the presence of the inspector .
as required by osha regulations use explosionproof devices to provide a mechanical method of exchanging the air within the sewer line .
correct the pipe alignment as directed by the resident engineer at no additional cost to the department .
ensure threequarters of the pipe barrel is visible from manhole to manhole or appurtenance .
h. inspection the public utility will assign a representative to the project to coordinate compliance with the utility specifications .
the utilities representative will answer to the resident engineer .
direct all negotiations decisions instructions interpretations and matters influencing the work to the resident engineer .
num sanitary sewer pipe conduits num sanitary sewer pipe conduits num method of measurement the resident engineer will measure the length of polyvinyl chloride pvc pipe and sanitary sewer service line along the pipe center and grade lines .
the resident engineer will include the length of the riser pipe in the measurement for sanitary sewer service line .
the resident engineer will not include the following for measurement the length of line within manholes and special structures .
the length of vertical pipe or fittings required for drop manholes .
num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit a polyvinyl chloride pvc pipe linear foot meter b sanitary sewer service connection each c sanitary sewer service line linear foot meter the department will consider the cost of installing an inline tee and bracing for riser pipe to be included in the contract unit price for sanitary sewer service connection .
the department will consider the cost of the line within manholes and special structures the vertical pipe or fittings required for drop manholes earth backfill sheeting shoring and concrete cradles to be included in the contract unit price for the relevant pay item .
the department will consider the cost of all fittings and adaptors to connect service to the existing line to be included in the contract unit price for sanitary sewer service line .
the department will consider the cost of testing to be included in the contract unit price for the relevant pay item .
water pipe and fittings num num section num water pipe and fittings num description this work consists of constructing waterlines and service lines .
num materials provide materials in accordance with section num miscellaneous materials .
a .
pipe provide pipe as shown on the plans with aashto astm ansi or awwa specifications numbers for quality control and installation .
provide pipe or fittings with a pressure rating of at least num psi num mpa .
provide plastic pipe bearing the seal of the national sanitation foundation nsf with a standard dimension ratio sdr not exceeding num and an outside diameter od equal to the od of the equivalent size ductile iron pipe .
for cast or ductile iron pipe provide the following minimum thickness class num in to num in num mm to num mm diameter class num and num in num mm and larger diameter class num .
wrap cast and ductile iron pipe with a loosefitting slipon polyethylene film that covers the entire pipe and fittings .
b .
joints provide packing and jointing materials for pipe joints and fittings in accordance with the awwa and the public utility .
c. fittings provide copper fittings for copper waterlines and cast or ductile fittings for other waterlines .
provide bronze service clamps for standard water service connections .
provide couplings with factoryinstalled brass bushings in accordance with astm b num and awwa c num for standard corporation stop threads .
num equipment vacant num construction methods a .
supplemental drawings provide supplemental pipe and fitting installation drawings .
ensure the installation drawings include the following profiles with a horizontal scale no greater than num ft to num in num m to num mm and a vertical scale no greater than num ft to num in num m to num mm .
ensure both scales are clearly indicated the brand name and model number of materials installation instructions thrust block sizes and locations fitting locations water pipe and fittings disinfection methods and num water pipe and fittings num methods and materials for making connections to the existing lines .
identify drawings by station number and lateral positioning .
perform pipe and fitting work in accordance with the more stringent specifications or regulations from the following the public utility or the oklahoma state department of health osdh .
after resident engineer approval the installation drawings become part of the contract .
ensure the details dimensions and quantities on the installation drawings are in accordance with the contract requirements regardless of the resident engineers approval .
b .
general excavate the trench to at least num in num mm below the surface of the natural ground or established subgrade .
during construction provide for trench drainage .
suspend pipelaying operations during rain or when the trench can not be kept free of water .
place a watertight plug in the open end of the main when stopping construction .
before excavating the water line trench locate intersecting sewer lines house sewer lines and sewers within num ft num m of the water line as shown on the plans .
prevent waste discharge into the trench .
immediately restore disturbed sewers to a tight operating condition at no additional cost to the department .
horizontally and vertically separate sanitary sewers and water mains in accordance with osdh regulations .
place water mains at least num ft num m horizontally from existing or new sanitary sewer lines .
where water mains cross sanitary sewers either above or below provide a vertical clearance of at least num in num mm .
where a water main crosses under a sewer provide structural support for the sewer .
install sewer pipe joints at least num ft num m from water lines unless otherwise approved by the resident engineer .
when impossible to meet these horizontal and vertical separation requirements construct and pressure test the sewer line to ensure it is watertight before backfilling .
block bends tees crosses outlet assemblies valves and plugs with concrete except where the fittings have flanged welded or harnessed joints .
place concrete blocking so the joints are accessible for repairs .
c. excavation excavate in accordance with subsection num.b excavation .
d. bedding place bedding in accordance with subsection num.c bedding .
e. laying pipe lay pipe in accordance with subsection num.g laying pipe .
water pipe and fittings num num f. joining pipe conduit join pipe conduit in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations and awwa requirements .
before joining pipe conduit clean and dry the joint surfaces of the pipe .
keep trenches free of water until the joints become watertight .
avoid realigning the pipe after completing the joint unless the pipe is removed and a new joint is constructed .
g. connecting to existing lines where shown on the plans or directed by the resident engineer make connections to existing lines .
h. removal of existing lines abandon existing lines that are no longer used .
if the contract requires removal of existing lines remove at no additional cost to the department .
i .
setting valves locate valves as shown on the plans or directed by the resident engineer .
unless otherwise required by the contract set valves with the stem up and caulk the joints as required by the contract .
clean the parts of foreign material .
j .
setting fire hydrants locate fire hydrants as shown on the plans or directed by the resident engineer .
before placing a hydrant remove foreign material from within the body .
tighten the stuffing boxes and open and close the hydrant valve to ensure the parts are fully functioning .
ensure the hydrant leads are cast or ductile iron pipe .
block the back side of the hydrant opposite the pipe with concrete between the hydrant and the vertical face of the trench end to keep the hydrant from moving .
place each hydrant on a stone or concrete slab at least num in num mm thick and num in num mm square .
around the drain of the hydrant place at least num ft³ num m³ of broken stone gravel or brick bats .
compact soil backfill to the elevation of the surrounding ground surface at least num ft num m from the hydrant in accordance with subsection num.i backfilling .
k. dead ends close dead ends with caps or plugs for spigot and bell ends .
caulk caps and plugs and brace with a concrete block .
place a num in num mm blowoff on pipes up to num in num mm in diameter .
l. backfilling backfill in accordance with subsection num.i backfilling .
m.field testing provide written notification to the resident engineer num hr before testing .
test the installed pipe for pressure and leakage in accordance with awwa standard c num .
ensure the working pressure of the pipe does not exceed twothirds of the rated pressure of the pipe .
ensure leakage does not exceed num galin num lnum mm of pipe diameter per mile kilometer per num hr at num psi num kpa testing pressure .
disinfect new cleaned or repaired water mains in accordance with rules and regulations governing operation of public water supply systems .
allow water with num water pipe and fittings num num num ppm to num ppm of chlorine to stand num hr and develop a residual of at least num ppm .
drain the spent solution and replace with potable water before using the line .
alternatively use methods listed in the latest awwa specifications .
obtain safe bacteriological samples on two consecutive days before using new cleaned or repaired water mains .
n. inspection the public utility will assign a representative to the project to coordinate compliance with the utility specifications .
the utilities representative will answer to the resident engineer .
direct all negotiations decisions instructions interpretations and matters influencing the work to the resident engineer .
num method of measurement the resident engineer will measure the length of water pipe including crosses tees sleeves outlet assemblies and plugs .
each pipe size constitutes a separate pay item which the resident engineer will measure along the centerline with no deductions for the space occupied by fittings valves and other materials .
the resident engineer will measure each valve size as a separate pay item .
num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit a ductile iron pipe lined linear foot meter b polyvinyl chloride pvc pipe linear foot meter c copper water service pipe linear foot meter d valves each e corporation stops each f meter installation each g fire hydrants each h supplemental drawings lump sum if a pay item for supplemental drawings does not exist the department will pay in accordance with subsection num plans and working drawings .
the department will consider the cost of the following to be included in the contract unit price for the relevant pipe pay item installation of bends tees crosses sleeves outlet assemblies plugs and other fittings connections to existing lines removal of abandoned lines excavation bedding material and blocking .
the department will consider the cost of testing to be included in the contract unit price for the relevant pay item .
removal of buildings structures and obstructions num num the department will consider the cost of the following to be included in the contract unit price for fire hydrants drainage stone blocking and fire hydrant extensions .
the department will consider the cost of the following to be included in the contract unit price for corporation stops tapping service clamp and coupling .
the department will consider the cost of the following to be included in the contract unit price for meter installation meter can meter setter with ground key angle stop crushed stone and fittings for a complete installation the public utility will specify the materials for corporation stops and meter installations .
section num removal of buildings structures and obstructions num description this work consists of the following removing and disposing of specified obstructions salvaging designated materials backfilling the resulting trenches holes and pits removing abandoned items restoring the site to match the surrounding conditions and removing and recycling or disposing of production equipment for oil fields .
comply with current local state and federal regulations pertaining to the removal and disposal of facilities referred to as buildings and structures .
num material vacant num equipment vacant num construction methods a .
general the contractor will be provided with the national emissions standards for hazardous num removal of buildings structures and obstructions num removal of buildings structures and obstructions air pollutants neshap inspection reports to support the contractors notification to deq as required .
inform the resident engineer of the proposed methods before removing buildings structures or obstructions .
raze remove and dispose of buildings foundations and other obstructions that are on the rightofway as required by the contract .
observe contract provision regarding the removal or disposal of utilities and structures by others .
remove portions of a system or configuration as required by the contract to ensure the remaining parts continue to function as intended .
remove salvageable material required by the contract without damaging sections that are readily transportable .
store this material at locations shown on the plans or directed by the resident engineer .
destroy unusable and perishable material .
dispose of nonperishable material outside the project limits with the written permission of the property owner .
submit copies of property owner agreements to the resident engineer .
address hazardous materials in accordance with subsection num hazardous materials and provide documentation to the resident engineer after disposal .
remove building structures and other obstruction to num ft num m below the surrounding ground elevation and break basement floors to provide drainage from the basement as approved by the resident engineer provided no hazardous materials are present .
fill basements or cavities left by structure removal to the level of the surrounding ground and if within the prism of construction compact them in accordance with subsection num.b embankments and subsection num.d selective subgrade topping .
repair and replace damaged items due to negligence as approved by the resident engineer at no additional cost to the department .
b .
removal of bridges culverts and other existing structures make arrangements to accommodate traffic before removing bridges and culverts .
if shown on the plans remove existing structures in accordance with subsection num removal and disposal of salvaged materials structures and obstructions .
num structures to remain property of department if structures are to remain the property of the department use an approved method of dismantling steel superstructure and wood bridges that ensures the material is not damaged .
before dismantling paint steel members with match marks using steel stencils and obtain the approval of the departments bridge engineer .
dismantle steel members at the original field splices and support on falsework during dismantling operations or dismantle as approved by the resident engineer .
cut piers abutments and piling num ft num m below the ground line cover with native soil .
for channel changes cut piers abutments and piling to the elevation of the channel excavation shown on the plans .
neatly stack salvaged lumber and similar material on the rightofway outside the ditch line .
break up old concrete and similar materials and place in the fill in accordance with removal of buildings structures and obstructions num num subsection num.anumbnum rock fill or dispose of as directed by the resident engineer .
remove the substructures of existing structures to the natural stream bottom .
remove parts outside of the stream num ft num m below natural ground surface .
to accommodate new structures remove old substructures within the new structure limits .
do not leave material in the channel .
perform blasting or other removal operations that may damage new construction before starting new construction .
num structures to become property of the contractor if structures or material become the property of the contractor remove and dispose of the material in accordance with subsection num final cleanup .
remove piers abutments piling and substructures in accordance with subsection num.bnum structures to remain property of department .
c. removal of culvert and sewer pipe unless otherwise required by the contract carefully remove salvageable culvert and sewer pipe avoiding damage to the pipe .
remove and store pipes in accordance with subsection num storage and handling of materials .
d. removal of pavement sidewalks curbs etc .
break concrete pavement base course and other similar materials designated for removal into pieces no heavier than num lb num kg .
stockpile at locations shown on the plans .
if the contract requires the removal of asphalt concrete or portland cement concrete pavement saw the joint to the line and depth as approved by the resident engineer to prevent underbreak or shatter of adjacent areas .
e. structures abandoned remove abandoned structures to at least num in num mm below the foundation grade of the new structure .
tightly plug with concrete each end of abandoned sewer lines or other similar structures .
remove abandoned manholes and similar structures depth shown on the plans fill the voids and compact in accordance with subsection num construction methods .
prepare areas for pavement or other construction over abandoned structures by backfilling and compacting in uniform layers not exceeding num in num mm deep in accordance with subsection num construction methods .
consolidate other areas over abandoned structures by flushing with water during backfill operations .
f. disposal of materials abandoned material will become the property of the contractor .
remove and dispose of in accordance with subsection num removal and disposal of salvaged materials structures and obstructions .
drop inlet grates and frames manhole covers and frames concrete or clay pipe water pipe goosenecks valves stops valve boxes or material of value will become the property of the contractor unless otherwise shown on the plans or required by the contract .
num removal of buildings structures and obstructions num num g. site clearance comply with the current local state and federal environmental protection regulations and the following clear obstructions and maintain surface drainage drainage structures and appurtenances .
if live utility lines are damaged contact the utility owner and provide for repairs at no additional cost to the department .
ensure a licensed inspector performs neshap inspections for buildings and structures required by the contract for demolition and submit a copy of the neshap predemolition inspection and notification to the resident engineer before demolition .
if anticipated regulated friable or nonfriable asbestos containing material is encountered notify the resident engineer in writing .
the department will require up to num days for the abatement disposal of the asbestos containing material .
the department will arrange for the removal of asbestos containing material .
proceed with the building removal as directed by the resident engineer .
the contractor may abate the asbestos containing material at no additional cost to the department subject to approval from the engineer and oversight by the departments environmental programs division .
use a licensed welldriller to plug abandoned water wells in accordance with oklahoma water resources board owrb chapter num subchapter num .
provide written notification to the resident engineer of wells ground water or monitoring not shown on the plans .
provide written notification to the resident engineer of oil wells gas wells injection wells and all associated gatheringdistribution lines not shown on the plans .
the oklahoma corporation commission has regulatory oversight for oil and gas conservation oac num .
remove and dispose of septic tank contents be licensed hauler and in accordance with all local state and federal rules and regulations .
address any hazardous materials encountered in accordance with subsection num hazardous materials and provide documentation to the resident engineer after disposal .
plug or cap abandoned sewer lines water lines and similar structures in accordance with local ordinances .
remove refuse in accordance with odeq solid waste management regulations oac num .
submit copies of the dump receipts to the resident engineer for every load removed from the project .
notify the resident engineer of underground storage tanks not shown on the plans including petroleum or butane tanks .
the resident engineer will coordinate the removal of underground tanks .
num method of measurement the resident engineer will measure the length of pipe removed calculated by multiplying the number of sections by the commercial lengths or by measuring the pipe in place before removal .
removal of buildings structures and obstructions num num removal of buildings structures and obstructions num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit a removal of structures and obstruction lump sum b removal of specified items linear foot meter square yard square meter cubic yard cubic meter lump sum or each c sawing pavement linear foot meter d removal of existing bridge structure lump sum e neshap predemolition inspection and notification each f oil field equipment removal lump sum if pay items for removal of buildings structures and obstructions do not exist the department will consider the cost associated with each to be included in the contract unit price for other relevant items of work .
the department will consider the cost of removing preserving storing and disposing of salvageable material to be included in the contract unit price for the relevant pay items .
the department will consider the cost of excavating removing disposing of backfilling and compacting cavities created by removed buildings structures and obstructions to be included in the contract unit price for the relevant pay items .
num removal of underground storage tanks num section num removal of underground storage tanks num description this work consists of removing underground storage tanks .
comply with the oklahoma corporation commission occ and oklahoma department of environmental quality odeq rules regulations codes and guidance documents including the occ ust removal guidebook the american petroleum institute bulletin num for recommended practices for removal of underground storage tanks and with all other current local state and federal regulations pertaining to the removal and disposal of underground storage tanks .
num material vacant num equipment vacant num construction methods a .
general schedule the date for the removal of underground storage tanks with the resident engineer .
the resident engineer shall report this date to the departments environmental programs division .
report this date to the appropriate regulatory entity occ odeq etc ..
the department will allow the regulatory inspector to be onsite during the removal operation .
tank removal and sampling activities shall be performed by appropriately qualified and licensed professionals as required by law ex .
occ remover occ remediation consultant etc .. use a laboratory preapproved by the odeq .
a tank closure report shall be prepared in accordance with applicable local state and federal rules and regulations and in consultation with the departments environmental programs division .
submit the analytical results and tank closure reports to the resident engineer .
the resident engineer shall provide this documentation to the departments environmental programs division .
b .
removal of tanks the tanks become the property of the contractor upon removal from the ground .
remove the tanks from the job site within num hours of removal as per the occ ust removal guidebook .
provide the department with a certificate of destruction for each removed tank .
c. removal of contaminated soil return all loose soils to the pit to minimize open excavation safety hazards .
however if gross evidence of contamination is observed the excavation may be left open for further assessment at the discretion of the resident engineer and the environmental programs division .
if required the management of contaminated soil shall be coordinated with the removal of underground storage tanks num num removal of underground storage tanks departments environmental programs division .
the department will pay for additional excavation for removal of contaminated soil in accordance with subsection num basis of payment .
num method of measurement vacant num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit a removal of underground storage tank each b removal of contaminated soil cubic yard cubic meter the department will consider cost of the laboratory soil analysis to be included in the contract unit price for the relevant pay items .
removal of underground storage tanks and contaminated soil certificate of destruction scrappingdisposal company site of destruction tank removal contractor tank information tank no .
size location company address city state zip destruction date i certify that the above described tank has been rendered unusable for storage of fluids and the tanks and removed sludge were disposed of in accordance with applicable local state and federal regulations .
print name signature title subscribed and sworn to before me on this ___ day of ___ in the year num___ .
my commission expires notary public num pipe railing and miscellaneous pipe work num section num pipe railing and miscellaneous pipe work num description this work consists of providing and erecting pipe railing with steel and concrete posts and miscellaneous pipe work .
num materials provide materials in accordance with subsection num guide posts .
for standard black steel pipe provide two coats of aluminum paint finish field coat in accordance with subsection num requirements for paint systems .
provide concrete posts in accordance with section num bridge decks approaches rails and parapets .
provide reinforcement in accordance with subsection num bar steel reinforcement billet steel .
num equipment vacant num construction methods a .
pipe railing submit shop drawings of the railing details to the resident engineer .
allow num days for approval .
join the pipe railing to posts with fittings .
make splices using male and female connections with dimensions no greater than the outside dimension of the pipe railing .
weld railing in accordance with subsection num welding .
secure railing posts with fittings as shown on the plans .
b. miscellaneous pipe install miscellaneous pipe for conduit and drains in concrete curbs sidewalks or retaining walls as shown on the plans or as directed by the resident engineer .
ensure the pipes are completely embedded in the concrete .
num method of measurement the resident engineer will measure the length of pipe railing from center to center of the end posts not including the length of steel and concrete posts .
num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit a pipe railing linear foot meter b miscellaneous pipe work linear foot meter the department will consider the cost of steel and concrete posts to be included in the contract unit price for pipe railing .
guardrail and end treatments num num if a pay item for miscellaneous pipe work does not exist the department will consider the cost of miscellaneous pipe work to be included in the contract unit price of other relevant pay items .
section num guardrail and end treatments num description this work consists of constructing guardrail end treatments posts blockouts and other appurtenances .
the department defines the following types of guardrail beam guardrail steel wbeam single beam guardrail steel wbeam double beam guardrail steel thrie beam single beam guardrail steel thrie beam double beam guardrail steel transition section guardrail anchor unit or guardrail end treatments get .
use gets that are designed as wbeam guardrail terminals .
provide gets with anchors capable of supporting the rail tensile strength developed during a downstream impact and remaining crashworthy for endon impacts .
ensure the gets satisfy the national cooperative highway research program nchrp report num for a test level num tlnum terminal and are approved for use on the national highway system .
num materials provide materials in accordance with the following sections and subsections material section or subsection portland cement concrete class a num epoxy resin adhesive num reinforcing steel num requirements for paint systems num guardrail posts num spacer blocks blockouts num beam guardrail elements num fittings steel hardware num reflective sheeting for guide posts num nonshrink grout num ensure the gets are manufactured with new material and assembled in accordance with the manufacturers standards .
provide a get capable of flattening and bending the guardrail away from the impacting vehicle .
ensure the guardrail elements are continuous numgauge sections either one num ft num m long section or two num ft num m long sections .
num guardrail and end treatments num guardrail and end treatments num equipment vacant num construction methods a .
setting posts for guardrail or barrier posts set posts for guardrail as shown on the plans .
dig post holes in compacted soil .
keep the bottoms of the holes free of loose material to ensure a stable post foundation .
space the posts as shown on the plans and set plumb with the front faces in a straight line .
for curves set posts a uniform distance from the edge of the pavement .
set the tops of the posts to the elevations shown on the plans or as approved by the resident engineer .
after placing the posts backfill the holes with material approved by the resident engineer .
compact each layer of material to a depth no greater than num in num mm .
ensure compaction operations do not change the alignment of the post .
posts for guardrail may be machine driven .
fill surface depressions resulting from driving the posts .
use material similar to the insitu material and compact .
b .
rail elements erect rail elements in a smooth continuous installation .
tighten all bolts except adjustment bolts .
provide bolts with lengths that extend beyond the nuts .
if field painting rail elements first apply a rustinhibitive primer to correct damage to the shop coat of paint .
field paint surfaces before erecting rail elements inaccessible to painting after erection .
uniformly apply the number of coats of paint required in the contract by brush or pressure spray .
protect the following with two coats of zinc rich paint abraded galvanized surfaces with exposed base metal the threads of fittings and fasteners and cut ends of bolts .
install doublefaced guardrail as shown on the plans .
do not modify anchorbolt holes or slots to accommodate connections in the field .
obtain resident engineer approval for modifications to standard guardrail design .
ensure modifications pass department inspection before installing .
c. placing metal plate rails and fittings fasten metal plate rails to the posts as shown on the plans .
overlap the rail sections at least num in num mm in the direction of traffic so the end of the previous plate rail covers the start of the succeeding plate rail .
use only one type of metal plate guardrail on the project unless otherwise shown on the plans .
d. guardrail anchor units construct guardrail anchor units as shown on the plans .
if encountering rock harder than medium sandstone surface outcropping massive boulders and ledge rock under overburden during construction of the concrete anchor proceed as follows guardrail and end treatments num num num for surface outcroppings drill four spaced and patterned holes with num in num mm diameters .
fill half of each rock hole with pourable epoxy grout insert full depth anchor bolts and stabilize them .
fill the remainder of the hole with epoxy .
expel air bubbles and voids from the holes .
num for rock with soil overburden num in num mm deep or less use the following steps drill four spaced holes for the anchor bolts .
drill four additional holes with a diameter of num½ in num mm each num in num mm from the center of the concrete anchor and spaced num apart .
fill half of each outer hole with pourable epoxy grout .
insert plumb and stabilize one number num reinforcing steel bar per hole cut to the length needed for the anchor unit .
cut the reinforcing steel bar to a length that allows insertion of at least num in num mm into the rock and a clearance of num in num mm above the top of the concrete anchor .
fill the remainder of the hole with epoxy and expel the bubbles .
tie the num numwnum wnum wire mesh to the bars after the grout dries .
spread pourable epoxy grout on the surface between the rock and concrete for positive bond .
construct the upper portion of the anchor unit as shown on the plans .
num for rock encountered deeper than num in num mm construct the anchor in accordance with the procedure for soil with overburden num in num mm deep or less and omit the four additional anchors .
e. guardrail end treatments get ensure experienced workers fabricate and install the get as shown on the plans and ensure the end treatment remains intact redirects side vehicular impacts and flattens the rail element to attenuate headon vehicular impacts .
construct gets with certified crashtested hardware .
ensure nchrp num tlnum certification for substituted hardware .
obtain the resident engineers approval of substitution get component hardware and ensure it passes department inspection before installation .
f. blockouts for safety end treatments use certified blockouts meeting the minimum requirements of nchrp num tlnum .
provide a letter of certification with substitutions .
obtain the resident engineers approval of substitutions before installation .
provide certification of blockouts used in safety end treatments .
ensure that composite or synthetic blockouts used in safety end treatments attached to bridges or permanent concrete walls have been crashtested and certified .
g. guardrail bridge connection gbc ensure experienced workers fabricate and install the gbc as shown on the plans and ensure the bridge connection remains intact redirects side vehicular impacts and num guardrail and end treatments num num guardrail and end treatments flattens the rail element to attenuate vehicular impacts at the approach ends of the bridge rail .
construct gbcs with approved nchrp num tlnum designs using only certified and crashtested hardware .
provide nchrp num tlnum certifications for substitute hardware except for posts an blockouts which may not be substituted without an actual crash test certification .
obtain the resident engineers approval of substitution gbc component hardware and ensure it passes department inspection before installation .
num method of measurement the resident engineer will measure the length of guardrail from center to center of the supporting posts .
the resident engineer will measure blockouts using the length of the guardrail from the first blockout to the beginning of the next anchor unit .
num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit a beam guardrail wbeam single linear foot meter b beam guardrail wbeam double linear foot meter c beam guardrail thriebeam single linear foot meter d beam guardrail thriebeam double linear foot meter e beam guardrail transition section each f guardrail anchor each g guardrail end treatment each h blockouts linear foot meter i guardrail bridge connection each fences num num section num fences num description this work consists of the constructing fence and gates .
the department defines the following styles of fence fence style wwf woven wire fence fence style swf strand wire fence fence style clf chain link fence fence style gdf glare deflector fence and fence metal panel .
num materials provide materials in accordance with the following section and subsections material section or subsection portland cement concrete class a num requirements for paint systems num fence style wwf num fence style swf num fence style clf num fence style gdf num if not shown on the plans provide posts hardware and fittings in accordance with section num materials for guard rail guide posts bridge rail miscellaneous railing and fences .
provide the same kind of material for posts hardware and fittings throughout the project unless otherwise approved in writing by the resident engineer .
provide reinforcing steel in accordance with section num reinforcing steel for structures .
num equipment vacant num construction methods a .
general perform clearing and grubbing to construct the fence in accordance with section num clearing and grubbing .
install the style type and class of fence as shown on the plans .
install fence gates at locations shown on the plans or as directed by the resident engineer .
upon receipt of the notice to proceed existing fencing on the rightofway becomes the responsibility of the contractor .
at intersections with existing fences or at locations with required fencing breaks make post spacing adjustments .
ensure cross fencing connections include an end post placed perpendicular to the rightofway fence or at the angle of the cross fence .
maintain constructed fences and gates .
num fences num fences num concrete if the plans show embedding posts braces or anchors in concrete install temporary guys or braces to hold the posts in position until the concrete sets .
do not install materials on posts or strain guys and bracing until num days after placement of the concrete unless otherwise approved by the resident engineer .
num driving option as an option to setting fence posts in concrete footings or placing in tamped earthen holes the resident engineer may approve driven line posts .
for the driving option protect the tops of wooden line posts and ensure the posts are sharpened by the supplier before treating with preservative .
the resident engineer will reject wood posts with split or damaged tops .
do not field sharpen or taper dress the post tips .
use a fitted impact head for metal posts to minimize post deformation or damage to the galvanized or painted finish .
after driving the metal posts clean damaged tops and paint with a zincrich paint .
the resident engineer will reject metal posts with severely deformed or poorly painted tops .
num offset control perform adequate plumb and offset alignment control to ensure a smooth profile and alignment .
in shallow depressions use longer posts and barbed wire fans to maintain a smooth topoffence profile .
if necessary use strengthened fence construction and movable water gates for installations over deep ravines .
do not fill swales or ravines to facilitate fence construction .
maintain the existing drainage .
num installations in rock for driven installations using mechanical or pneumatic equipment the department defines refusal as num in num mm or less entry per minute of driving with a num lb num kg hammer delivering at least num blows per minute .
for installations in earth and in rock softer than medium sandstone adhere to the following criteria ensure the driven posts reach the minimum embedment as shown on the plans or reach refusal .
for refusal encountered at num in num m or deeper keep the post in place and top cut to the profile control .
for refusal encountered at depths less than num in num m pull the post and install a concrete footing to the dimensions shown on the plans for earth installations .
for installations in surfacelevel medium or harder sandstone adhere to the following criteria drill a hole of the diameter and depth for footings in rock for the type of post shown on the plans .
insert plumb and brace the post .
fill the hole with lean grout thin hydraulic cement .
fences num num for installations in medium to hard rock under a layer of earth adhere to the following criteria if rock is encountered at any depth less than the minimum driven embedment as shown on the plans auger the earth .
consider as a regular concreteembedded earth footing .
drill a hole of the diameter for footings in rock for the type of post shown on the plans to a depth yielding the total minimum earth embedment or the minimum rock embedment whichever occurs first .
fill half of the rock hole with an approved type of lean grout and insert plumb and brace the post .
fill the remainder of the rock hole with lean grout .
place concrete for the earth footing above the grouted rock hole .
provide driven posts in earth at least num in num m where refusal is reached or the minimum earth embedment as shown on the plans .
the resident engineer will require the minimum rock embedment unless the total minimum earth embedment is reached first .
with these conditions met the department will allow top cutting the post to profile control .
num aligning posts set the tops of posts to the grade and alignment shown on the plans .
only cut the post tops as shown on the plans specified in this section or approved by the resident engineer .
after cutting wood posts paint the tops with a preservation solution .
do not flame cut .
clean and paint cut areas on metal posts with a single coat of zincrich paint .
attach wire or fencing of the required size and type to the posts and braces as shown on the plans .
install wire to the elevations shown on the plans and stretch wire taut .
num grounding the fence at locations where an overhead power line electric transmission distribution or secondary line crosses a fence ground the fence in accordance with the following install a galvanized or coppercoated steel ground rod num ft num m long with a diameter of at least ½ in num mm directly below the point of crossing .
drive the rod vertically until the top is num in num mm below the ground surface .
use a no .
num solid copper conductor or equivalent to connect each fence element to the grounding rod .
braze or fasten the connections with approved noncorrosive clamps .
at locations where a power line runs parallel or nearly parallel to and above the fence ground the fence at each end and gate post and at intervals no greater than num ft num m. maintain grounding of fences on abutting property equivalent to the existing protection .
num fences num b .
fence style wwf woven wire fence this style of fence consists of woven wire fabric with smooth barbless or barbed wire strands on a steel post system wood post system or both .
num alignment install wwf to the general alignment angles corners and attachment types at culverts as shown on the plans .
in general construct fences on the permanent rightofway line .
to construct the rightofway fence clear the work area of obstructions level the ground and remove minor irregularities .
num setting posts provide line posts of the size shown on the plans and install on the permanent rightofway line to a line shown on the plans or on a line approved by the resident engineer and in a true line on the property owners side .
embed posts in the ground to the depth shown on the plans tamping and firmly setting .
space line posts as shown on the plans .
set additional posts at abrupt changes in grade alignment location or at locations directed by the resident engineer .
for small depressions provide extralength posts fan posts if not practical for the fence to closely follow the contour of the ground .
at these locations close the space below the bottom of the fence fabric with wire stretched taut between posts either on horizontal lines or fanned at no greater than num in num mm spacing as shown on the plans or as approved by the resident engineer .
stretch the wires taut and fasten to the posts to prevent vertical movement of the wires .
the department will allow pouring concrete for posts footings without forming if the excavation is stable and does not cave or slide .
form footings if directed by the resident engineer .
num placing fencing fasten barbed wire barbless wire or smooth wire to all fan end corner gate or stretcher posts and to line posts as shown on the plans .
use tools designed for the purpose in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
apply the tension for stretching with mechanical fence stretchers or singlewire stretchers designed for the purpose .
stretch strands taut to a tensile force of num lb num kg as shown on the plans or to a tensile force recommended by the manufacturer .
splice strand wire and wire fabric using a mechanical device of a type approved by the resident engineer or make a wire splice by carrying the ends of wires num in num mm past the splicing tools and wrap them around both wires backward from the tool for at least five turns .
attach wire to the private property side of the fence posts on curves place wirefabric on the side of the post that will maintain the wire in a taut condition .
stretch woven wire fabric uniformly tight with an approved mechanical tensioning device conforming to its location on the posts as shown on the plans .
place stays parallel straight and uniformly spaced as shown on the plans .
staple each woven fabric wire and strand wire to wood posts or fasten with approved fittings to steel posts .
cut or splice woven wire at stretcher or wood posts to prevent buckling or undue stretching .
fences num num build attachment assemblies as shown on the plans .
for attachments to culvert or bridge end walls drill the holes with a drill of the same size as the expansion device .
do not chip or break the concrete .
c. fence style swf strand wire fence this style of fence consists of smooth barbless or barbed wire strands on a steel post system wood post system or both .
construct strand wire fence swf in the same manner as wwf in accordance with subsection num.b fence style wwf woven wire fence .
ensure the swf has the type and number of strands of wire as shown on the plans or as approved by the resident engineer .
install the fence on the permanent rightofway line .
d. fence style clf chain link fence this style of fence consists of chain link fabric fencing on a galvanized steel or aluminum alloy post system with or without barbed wire smooth tension wire or climb barrier systems .
num alignment align clf in accordance with subsection num.a general and subsection num.bnum alignment .
num setting posts and placing fencing perform alternate line post driving in accordance with subsection num.a general .
dig post holes to the minimum size and spacing shown on the plans .
set posts plumb centered in the hole and to the lines shown on the plans .
place posts in the concrete before the initial set .
ensure the posts are puddled and supported plumb until the concrete is fully set .
allow concrete to cure at least num days before stretching wire on the posts .
set post braces before placing wire .
attach wire to the private property side of the fence posts on curves place wire on the side of the post that will maintain the wire in a taut condition .
stretch the wire slightly above the tension recommended by the manufacturer to address the affects of seasonal temperatures and allow the wire to slack when the mechanical pullers are released .
attach pullers to the full width of the wire and make ties in at least seven locations on each post before releasing the wire .
the contractor may pull wire from both directions and joint by inserting one picket .
place smooth tension and barbed wire after placing the proper size of fabric .
num concrete wall for fence across ravines where it would not be practical to set posts and follow the ground line with the fence set posts in a concrete wall as shown on the plans and at locations directed by the resident engineer .
if constructing a wall across a dry wash or periodically wet ravine provide drainage .
the department will allow a partial wall on each bank with a water gate or fan in the center or culverts through a solid wall .
e. fence style gdf glare deflector fence this style of fence consists of a mesh fence on groundembedded posts guard rail posts parapet wall or concrete median barrier .
num fences num num fences num alignment in general construct gdf in the median between opposing lanes of traffic as shown on the plans .
num setting post and placing fencing set posts and place fencing in accordance with subsection num.dnum setting posts and placing fencing .
for fence mounted on guardrail bolt the fence post to the guardrail post using bolts as shown on the plans .
for fence mounted on a parapet wall or median barrier cast or drill holes in the wall and fit them with pipe sleeves as shown on the plans .
the department will allow threaded pipe flanges firmly attached to the top surface of the barrier wall as an alternate attachment method .
space terminal posts at intervals no greater than num ft num m or as shown on the plans .
truss diagonal braces from the brace end of the line post to the terminal post and fasten with a brace band .
on curves place the wire fabric on the side of the post that will maintain the wire in a taut condition .
install glare deflector fence fabric as shown on the plans and fasten to the line posts with wire ties at num in num mm intervals and to the top and bottom tension wire with wire ties or hog rings at intervals no greater than num in num mm .
tighten the chain link glare deflector fence to provide a smooth uniform appearance .
install stretcher barbands at intervals no greater than num in num mm .
num methods of measurement the resident engineer will measure the length of each continuous run of fence along the ground line of the fence from outside to outside of end posts .
the resident engineer will not include the length of connections to cross fences in the measurement of fences .
the resident engineer will measure gates as complete units of the size type and class required by the contract .
num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit a fence style wwf linear foot meter b gate style wwf each c fence style swf linear foot meter d gate galvanized steel each e fence style clf linear foot meter f gate style clf each g fence style gdf linear foot meter the department will consider the cost of connections to cross fences to be included in the contract unit price for the relevant fence pay item .
the department will pay for the cost of class a concrete and reinforcing steel used in the construction of concrete wall for fence if required by the contract in accordance with section num structural concrete and section num reinforcing steel for structures .
removal and storage or reconstruction of fencing and guardrail num num section num removal and storage or reconstruction of fencing and guardrail num description this work consists of removing and storing or reconstructing fencing and guardrail .
num materials provide salvaged materials in good condition from the existing installation for reconstruction .
replace other materials .
provide paint in accordance with subsection num requirements for paint systems .
unless otherwise required by the contract provide aluminum paint for refurbishing .
provide zincrich paint in accordance with subsection num requirements for paint systems .
num equipment vacant num construction methods a .
removal and storage store removed material at the location shown on the plans or as directed by the resident engineer .
when removing material prevent damage to posts cable fence plates or fittings .
coil and tie cable or fence before storing .
box or tie fittings together in bundles .
stack metal plates and posts on blocks off the ground .
b. reconstruction of guardrail or fence when reconstructing guardrail or fence remove and temporarily store until the resetting operation .
reconstruct guardrail or fence in accordance with section num guardrail and end treatments and section num fences .
replace lost or damaged material at no additional cost to the department .
coat newlycut holes with zincrich paint .
after erecting metal plate rail clean abrasions of existing paint and apply one coat of aluminum paint to damaged and primed areas .
after the first coat dries apply a second coat of aluminum paint to all plate rail and fittings in accordance with subsection num.b rail elements .
if required by the contract set departmentprovided guardrail at locations shown on the plans in accordance with section num guardrail and end treatments .
num method of measurement for removal and storage of guardrail or fence the resident engineer will measure the length from center to center of end posts before removal .
for removal and reconstruction of guardrail or fence the resident engineer will measure the length from center to center of end posts after reconstruction and approval .
num removal and storage or reconstruction of fencing and guardrail num removal and storage or reconstruction of fencing and guardrail num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit a remove and store fence linear foot meter b remove and reconstruct fence linear foot meter c remove and store guardrail linear foot meter d remove and reconstruct guardrail linear foot meter section num monuments num description this work consists of constructing concrete monuments or markers .
num materials provide materials in accordance with the following sections material section portland cement concrete class a num reinforcing steel num the department will provide the bronze plates used for markers or monuments .
num equipment vacant num construction methods construct monuments and rightofway markers using reinforced concrete in accordance with section num structural concrete and as shown on the plans .
provide monuments and rightofway markers with a carborundum finish .
replace monuments or rightofway markers damaged during construction before final acceptance at no additional cost to the department .
set and plumb monuments and rightofway markers to the depth shown on the plans .
compact select backfill approved by the resident engineer to stabilize and secure the monuments or rightofway markers .
num method of measurement vacant num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit a monuments each b rightofway markers each concrete longitudinal barrier num num pay item pay unit c rightofway markers removed and reset each if the contract requires the placement of bronze plates only e.g .
in the end posts of bridges or face of curbs the department will consider the cost of placing bronze plates to be included in the contract unit price for other relevant pay items .
section num concrete longitudinal barrier num description this work consists of constructing longitudinal concrete barrier with concrete and reinforcing steel .
the department will consider alternative designs that meet exterior dimensions and test and performance criteria required by the contract .
submit alternative designs to the resident engineer for approval .
num materials provide materials in accordance with the following sections material section portland cement concrete class a num white concrete num reinforcing steel num num equipment vacant num construction methods measure batch and mix concrete for the longitudinal concrete barriers in accordance with subsection num construction methods .
build forms for the barriers in accordance with section num forms falsework temporary works .
place reinforcing steel for the barriers in accordance with section num reinforcing steel for structures .
place the concrete for the barriers in accordance with section num structural concrete .
ensure exposed concrete surfaces are smooth and dense .
finish concrete surfaces in accordance with subsection num.g finishing formed concrete surfaces .
after removing the forms fill rough areas holes and porous spots .
cut bolts wires or other appliances used to hold the forms ¼ in num mm below the surface and fill the depressions with cement mortar .
finish exposed surfaces in accordance with subsection num.g finishing formed concrete surfaces .
num concrete longitudinal barrier num concrete longitudinal barrier num method of measurement vacant num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit a concrete longitudinal barrier design num linear foot meter b concrete longitudinal barrier end sections each the department will consider the cost of concrete and reinforcing steel used in the construction of longitudinal concrete barriers and end sections to be included in the contract unit price for the relevant pay items .
section num hightension cable barrier num description this work consists of providing and installing complete sections of hightension cable barrier or wire rope systems including crashworthy end treatments concrete socketed foundations concrete anchors and other appurtenances or hardware fittings .
num materials provide materials in accordance with the following sections subsections and external reference materials section subsection or external reference portland cement concrete class aa num psi num reinforcing steel num anchor bolts and nuts num galvanizing bolts nuts and washers aashto m num fittings steel hardware num reflective sheeting num a. rigging screws turnbuckle provide rigging screws for tensioning the cable that are galvanized after threading in accordance with astm a num .
for installations longer than num ft num m include at least one rigging screw per num ft num m strand .
for installations num ft num m or less in length include one rigging screw per strand near the center of the strand installation .
provide rigging screws that will develop minimum tensile loads without yielding to num lb num metric ton .
hightension cable barrier num num hightension cable barrier b .
wire ropes provide galvanized ¾ in num mm diameter num num wire rope in accordance with aashto mnum type i class a coating except with a breaking strength of at least num lb num metric ton .
the department requires samples for proof testing to ensure the wire ropes and connections meet or exceed the minimum breaking load for the rope .
verify the wire rope is prestretched during manufacturing to ensure a minimum modulus of elasticity of num lbin² num kgmm² after prestretching .
c. threaded terminals swaged type provide shop or field swaged threaded terminals .
ensure the threaded terminals are righthand or lefthand threaded mnum x num pitch in accordance with ansi b numm .
the department will allow threaded terminals of stainless steel construction or galvanized after processing in accordance with astm a num .
ensure the body of the threaded terminal provides at least num in num mm wire rope engagement depth .
ensure the fully fitted ropes develop a minimum breaking load mbl of num lb num metric ton .
d. end terminals provide end terminals placed within the clear zone as defined by aashto roadside design guide with the following characteristics comply with national cooperative highway research program nchrp report num meet test level num tlnum requirements and have an fhwa letter of acceptance .
the resident engineer may approve the use of other terminals in locations where impacts are unlikely or if properly shielded by impact attenuators .
provide end terminals fabricated from materials in accordance with astm a num and galvanized after fabrication in accordance with astm a num .
ensure welding required by the contract is performed by a certified welder in accordance with aws dnum .
e. posts provide socketed posts with caps placed in metal or plastic sleeves installed in a concrete foundation .
provide posts fabricated from materials meeting or exceeding astm a num and galvanized after fabrication in accordance with astm a num .
ensure welding required by the contract is performed by a certified welder in accordance with aws dnum .
provide domestically produced posts coldformed from hotrolled milled steel of the dimensions shown on the plans .
prevent debris from entering the socket by providing a fitting gasket to tightly seal each post .
provide and place reinforcing steel in concrete foundations as shown on the plans .
f. delineating high tension cable barrier provide high tension cable barrier installations delineated with retroreflective sheeting .
provide type viii retroreflective sheeting in accordance with num hightension cable barrier num num astm d num .
provide yellow or white sheeting the same color as the adjacent edge line .
apply the sheeting to the last five posts at each end of the installation and for the remainder of the installation at least every num ft num m. attach the sheeting near the top of the post in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
ensure at least num in² num mm² of sheeting is visible when viewed on a line parallel to the roadway centerline .
for median installations apply the sheeting to both sides of the post .
for roadside installations apply the sheeting only to the side facing traffic .
num equipment vacant num construction methods a .
general at the locations shown on the plans or as directed by the resident engineer provide crashworthy impact attenuators or end treatments for hightension cable barrier systems .
ensure the hightension cable barrier systems and end treatments satisfy the nchrp report num for test level num tlnum or test level num tlnum and are approved for use on the national highway system .
ensure the manufacturer provides an fhwa letter of acceptance before approval by the resident engineer and installation .
use a hightension cable barrier system of four wire ropes with a maximum post spacing of num ft num m center to center .
locate and align the cable barrier system as shown on the plans or as directed by the resident engineer .
ensure proper wire rope height as required by the contract .
ensure the surface between the cable barrier system and the edge of the traveled way is smooth without edge dropoffs holes depressions or slope changes .
space posts as shown on the plans .
set posts plumb and in line .
place and tension the cable barrier system in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations immediately after initial installation .
recheck the tension two to three weeks after the initial tensioning and adjust if necessary .
complete a tension log form signed by the person performing the tension reading that includes the following time date location ambient temperature final tension reading and the manufacturers recommended tension chart .
submit the log to the resident engineer upon completion of the hightension cable barrier work .
b .
foundations construct concrete foundations in accordance with section num structural concrete and the manufacturer recommendation .
ensure the top of the footing conforms to the slope of the surround surface .
construct concrete foundations in place as shown on the plans and to the grade directed by the resident engineer .
if an obstruction prevents construction of the foundation at the location shown on the plans the resident engineer will direct a new location .
hightension cable barrier num num hightension cable barrier place end terminal foundations in excavations of natural undisturbed ground to the size and shape required by the wire rope safety cable manufacturer based on soil type and ground conditions .
if overexcavation is unavoidable ensure the sides of the excavation are vertical and use additional concrete to completely fill the excavated area .
anchor each of the fours cables independently to a concrete end anchor .
alternatively form and cast the foundations then backfill using mechanical vibration to achieve at least num percent compacted density .
excavate the foundations to the depth determined by the manufacturers design engineer but to no less than num in num mm in diameter and num in num mm in depth .
ensure excavated materials do not fall back into the hole .
c. placement install the cable barrier system on a slope no steeper than numhnumv .
install the cable barrier system at least num ft num m from the traveled way or hazardous objects .
for slopes located within a median ditch do not place the cable barrier from num ft num of the toe of slope to num ft num m up the slope .
num method of measurement for concretesocketed foundations and anchors the resident engineer will measure the volume of concrete in accordance with subsection num method of measurement .
num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit a hightension cable barrier tlnum linear foot meter b hightension cable barrier tlnum linear foot meter c end anchors each d guardrail transition each the department will consider the cost of the excavation backfilling reinforcing steel and other incidentals to be included in the contract unit price for end anchors .
the department will consider the cost of the following to be included in the contract unit price for hightension cable barrier tlnum or hightension cable barrier tlnum anchor bolts nuts washers ground rod socket or sleeve excavation backfilling caps and other incidental work necessary to construct the cable barrier system .
the department will pay for class aa concrete used in the construction of concrete anchor units and foundations in accordance with section num structural concrete .
num mailboxes num section num mailboxes num description this work consists of placing mailboxes on public rightsofway within the roadway clear zone as defined by the aashto roadside design guide to ensure public safety and safe access for mail delivery and retrieval .
refer to the plans for a summary of the various sizes types quantities and locations of mailboxes .
num materials a. mailboxes provide mailboxes made of light metal or formed thermoplastic in accordance with usps requirements .
provide mailboxes with dimensions nomenclature and marking in accordance with aashto a guide for erecting mailboxes on highways appendix c. property owners are responsible for providing newspaper tubes of the appropriate material and dimensions and placing names on mailboxes .
b .
post systems num wood post provide a support post system consisting of a num in num in num mm num mm nominal wood post capable of withstanding the elements and soilborne attacks treated or untreated .
the resident engineer will allow the post to be smooth and square or rough sawn .
ensure that surface splintering is not hazardous .
the department will allow a natural oiled or painted surface finish .
the resident engineer will allow an alternative wood post with a num½ in num mm nominal diameter treated or untreated and capable of withstanding the elements and soilborne attacks .
remove bark and if finishing the surface use oil or paint .
num metal posts provide metal posts e.g .
steel pipe cold rolled shape hot rolled member with strength in bending equal to or less than a standard weight steel pipe schedule num with a nominal diameter of num in num mm .
use the following equation to calculate n n tys sm ys sm num num where num sm section modulus of schedule num num in num mm steel pipe num ys yield strength of schedule num num in num mm steel pipe num psi num mpa n sm section modulus of new post system and n tys tested yield strength of new post system .
the department will allow round or square aluminum or aluminized steel tubing if the section is capable of supporting the mailbox array and withstanding lateral loads caused by mail and paper delivery and retrieval .
mailboxes num num mailboxes the contractor may use commercially available metal post systems integrating a mailbox support arm for one to five mailboxes .
provide patented materials in accordance with subsection num patented devices materials and processes .
num posttobox attachment provide posttobox attachment fittings capable of preventing separation of the mailbox from the post if the installation is struck by an automobile or light truck .
num basis of acceptance provide type d certification for the basis of acceptance of materials .
the resident engineer will provide visual inspection .
num equipment vacant num construction methods a .
general provide mailbox designs capable of withstands wind loads lateral loads or both .
if the resident engineer approves use a concrete footing or a footing of native soil mixed with cementitious material to ensure the posts remain upright .
do not exceed the dimensions or strength criteria for specified posts in accordance with subsection num materials .
if directed by the resident engineer provide weakened plane joints for posts at the ground surface to guarantee bending or failure during vehicular impact .
accepted post designs include use of a concrete footing or installation of the posts through an asphalt or portland cement concrete surface .
embed the posts no deeper than num ft num m or to the depth recommended by the manufacturer or supplier .
if using a metal post system with an antitwist device embed no deeper than num in num mm into the ground .
mailboxes placed on public rightofway are privately owned .
coordinate with mailbox owners and usps to ensure that owners receive mail deliveries during construction .
allow mailbox owners to claim salvageable items from existing mailbox installations for the duration of the contract not to exceed a maximum of num days .
mount no more than two mailboxes on a singlepost support system unless otherwise approved by the resident engineer .
mount newspaper receiver tubes below the mailbox or on the post under the mailbox .
if using alternatedesign mailbox support system not included in the contract or on standard drawings obtain departmentapproval before installing .
the department will not approve under any circumstances rigid massive or unyielding mailbox support systems or housings that may cause heavy damage to impacting vehicles or cause severe injury or death .
install support systems using a cantilever arm to maximize the post offset where terrain allows .
b .
placement place mailboxes at locations where access is allowed by law .
never place mailboxes with access from the through lanes of a freeway or at other prohibited num mailboxes num nummailboxes locations .
horizontally space singlepost support systems by at least threequarters of the exposed height of the post including the mailbox .
place mailboxes on the righthand side of the road in the direction of the delivery route .
on oneway streets the department will allow mailboxes installed on the left hand side of the road .
set the bottom of the box at the elevation specified by usps from num ft to num ft num m to num m above the roadway .
offset the face of the mailbox from the edge of the traveled way as shown on the plans .
on residential streets and rural roads adjust the lateral placement and clearance of mailbox systems as directed by the resident engineer .
place mailboxes at driveways on the near side in the direction of the delivery route .
place mailboxes located at intersecting and through roads as shown on the plans .
num method of measurement the resident engineer will measure mailbox installations as single one mailbox per support system or multiple two or more mailboxes per support system .
the resident engineer will measure each existing mailbox within the project limits affected by the construction as removal of a mailbox installation or remove and reset mailbox .
mailbox will be measured as each mailbox installed regardless of the installation .
num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit a mailbox installationsingle each b mailbox installationmultiple each c mailbox each d remov mailbox each the department will consider the cost of removing storing and reconstructing the mailbox installation including the serviceable crashworthy support system and the mailbox to be included in the contract unit price for remove and reset mailbox .
the department will consider the cost of installing ownerprovided newspaper tubes to be included in the contract unit price for the relevant pay items .
the department will pay for base and surfacing for allweather turnouts in accordance with the appropriate sections of chapter num bases and chapter num general requirements for surfaces .
each field office or laboratory num num section num field office or laboratory num description this work consists of providing a field office on the project and a laboratory building at asphalt or readymixed concrete plants for the independent and exclusive use of department personnel for the duration of the project .
num materials the resident engineer will direct a time and location for the installation of the field office or laboratory .
provide a mobile unit or a permanent structure for the field office or laboratory building .
weatherproof and maintain the buildings as approved by the resident engineer .
provide buildings with the following characteristics outside dimensions of at least num ft num ft num m num m inside ceiling height of at least num ft num m floors at least four windows that can be opened closed and locked and two doors near opposite ends of the building that can be locked .
furnish field office buildings with an office desk and at least one chair .
ensure the building is wired for electricity and has at least three double wall plugs and three overhead ceiling lights .
provide buildings capable of maintaining an interior temperature from numf to numf numc to numc .
provide required utility services including telephone service .
ensure laboratory buildings meet the following requirements locate the building at the plant site at a location convenient to the physical control center of the plant and in view of delivery loading and unloading as approved by the resident engineer .
equip the building with a num ft num ft num m num m work bench .
provide a gas or electric oven and hot plate .
provide an inside cold water supply line plumbed to a potable water supply .
provide a pressurized drychemical abcrated fire extinguisher of at least num lb num kg rated capacity .
place the fire extinguisher on a wall at a location approved by the resident engineer .
maintain the fire extinguisher in a completely charged condition .
ensure the local fire authority inspects approves and tags for serviceability at least every num months .
for building units used as the laboratory for asphalt extractions provide a fume hood for removing flammable organic vapors generated by routine laboratory testing .
ensure the fume hood adheres to the following characteristics fireproof with an explosionproof motor blower and light .
interior dimensions of at least num ft num m wide by num¾ ft num m deep by num½ ft num m high .
num field office or laboratory num num field office or laboratory tempered safety glass front panel which slides up at least num ft num m to provide access to the fume hood and slides down to fully enclose the fume hood .
produce a volume of airflow per minute at least num times the nominal external volume of the fume hood .
vent the exhaust from the fume hood to the outside atmosphere .
equip the fume hood with an air bypass that prevents jetstream effects as the front panel closes .
include catalog cut sheets brochures and specifications with the fume hood .
num equipment vacant num construction method remove the field office or laboratory building or mobile unit from the project or plant site as directed by the resident engineer .
num method of measurement on optional tied projects if bid as a tie the department will delete at least one field office and one laboratory from the tied portion of the proposal .
maintain the remaining field offices on the job sites and the remaining laboratories at the plant sites until tied projects are complete .
num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit a field office each b laboratory each the department will consider the cost of utility connections and site preparation for the field office and laboratory to be included in the contract unit price for field office and laboratory .
the department will pay for these items in full once in place and fully operational .
if the contractor does not maintain the laboratory or field office in a working condition the department may reduce the amount of payment proportional to the time the facility was not in working condition .
mobilization num num section num mobilization num description this work consists of the contractors preparatory operations including moving personnel and equipment to the project site and establishing the contractors offices buildings and facilities .
num materials vacant num equipment vacant num construction method vacant num method of measurement vacant num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit mobilization lump sum the department will pay in two installments except if the first pay estimate submitted is the final estimate the department will pay the total lump sum bid .
if the lump sum price for mobilization is less than or equal to the maximum amount payable for mobilization item as defined in table num mobilization payment schedule the first payment for mobilization will be num percent of the lump sum price .
the department will pay this amount on the first estimate following partial mobilization and construction initiation .
the department will make the final payment on the estimate following substantial mobilization .
if the lump sum price for mobilization is more than the maximum amount payable for mobilization item as defined in table num the first payment for mobilization will be num percent of the maximum amount payable for mobilization item .
the department will pay this amount on the first estimate following partial mobilization and construction initiation .
the department will pay the remaining num percent of the maximum amount payable for mobilization item on the estimate following substantial mobilization .
the department will pay the difference in the lump sum price for mobilization and the maximum amount payable for mobilization item the overbid amount when the project is complete in accordance with subsection num.b project completion .
estimates are due in accordance with subsection num progress payments .
the department will not consider mobilization in determining this date .
the department will not pay for demobilization and remobilization due to shutdowns suspensions of the work or other mobilization activities .
for contracts that include multiple tied projects the total original contract amount including mobilization in table num is the sum of the original contract amounts of the separate tied projects .
for contracts that contain multiple mobilization items the sum of num mobilization num num mobilization mobilization items will be subject to the limitation of the maximum amount payable for mobilization item .
the department will pay lump sums for mobilization in accordance with the following table num mobilization payment schedule total original contract amount including mobilization maximum amount payable for mobilization item num num num of total contract amount num num num num total contract num num num num total contract num the resident engineers field office and laboratory is a separate pay item not included in this work .
section num construction staking num description this work consists of providing placing and maintaining construction layout stakes for the proper prosecution and inspection of the work .
num materials vacant num equipment vacant num construction methods stake the line and grade of construction features .
depending on the availability of the departments survey staff the contract may require either construction staking level i or level ii .
a .
construction staking level i num department responsibilities the department will perform the following construction staking activities locate and reference the centerline or control line of permanent construction stake the rightofway lines for construction purposes only identify and verify bench marks take original and final cross sections for earthwork construction features to obtain volumes for pay quantities set major control points on the tangents and at the beginning and ending points of curves on the centerline or control line and establish bench marks for bridges and special structures .
construction staking num num construction staking if the survey centerline and the construction reference line are not the same the resident engineer will set the major control points on the construction reference line .
num contractor responsibilities perform the following construction staking activities set additional stakes and other horizontal or vertical controls to establish a correct work layout stake the centerline or control line of temporary features if the contract requires measurement of earthwork quantities using photogrammetry clear and grub the entire project before taking the original photos or beginning the excavation work place stakes for line and grade to maintain the tolerances specified in the contract for the operation being performed and on grade stakes mark the station number and the distance from the centerline of construction .
preserve survey stakes and bench marks and reset if damaged lost or removed .
provide qualified staff with appropriate equipment to perform construction layout work .
the department will not allow the use of department employees or departmentowned equipment for construction staking work that is the responsibility of the contractor .
b .
construction staking level ii num department responsibilities the department will take original and final cross sections for earthwork construction features to obtain volumes for pay quantities .
num contractor responsibilities perform the following construction staking activities locate and reference the centerline of permanent construction stake the rightofway lines for construction purposes only identify and verify bench marks set major control points on the tangents and at the beginning and ending points of curves to mark the centerline establish bench marks for bridges and special structures .
set additional stakes and other horizontal or vertical controls to establish a correct work layout stake the centerline or control line of temporary features if the contract requires measurement of earthwork quantities using photogrammetry clear and grub the entire project before taking the original photos or beginning the excavation work place stakes for line and grade to maintain the tolerances specified in the contract for the operation being performed and on grade stakes mark the station number and the distance from the centerline of construction .
num construction staking num num if the survey centerline and the construction reference line are not the same the resident engineer will set the major control points on the construction reference line .
preserve survey stakes and bench marks and reset if damaged lost or removed .
provide qualified staff with appropriate equipment to perform construction layout work .
the department will not allow the use of department employees or departmentowned equipment for construction staking work that is the responsibility of the contractor .
notify the resident engineer if bench marks or major survey control points previously established by the department have been destroyed damaged or removed .
the resident engineer will reestablish the control points .
c. error correction and resident engineer notification provide platforms and equipment for safe access to check the staking .
if significant errors occur resurvey to the satisfaction of the resident engineer .
regardless of inspection or acceptance of the layout by the department the contractor is responsible for establishing the proper dimensions grades and elevations for the work .
the resident engineer will resolve plan errors .
notify the resident engineer of plan errors by the end of the next working day .
the resident engineer will perform special surveys to determine corrective action for plan errors .
measure the profiles of existing highway features that will connect to the project for num ft num m. if the profiles of the project and the existing features do not match immediately notify the resident engineer .
ensure the surface of the finished project creates a smooth ride for the entire length of the project .
verify the original cross sections .
if requested the department will provide original cross sections .
resolve disputes regarding the departments original cross sections before beginning earthwork activities in the disputed areas .
the resident engineer may suspend contract time if the dispute resolution stops work that is critical to the timely completion of the project .
if requested the resident engineer will provide the completed final cross sections .
for a dispute regarding original or final cross sections jointly gather the cross section data with the resident engineers surveyors to resolve the dispute .
perform survey work compilation of field notes and documentation in accordance with the odot guide for construction staking .
num method of measurement unless specified in the contract the department will measure the volumes of pay quantities and perform survey control of permanent facilities .
num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit a construction staking level i lump sum b construction staking level ii lump sum construction staking num num the department will make a partial deduction of payment for staking if the notifications specified in subsection num.c error correction and resident engineer notification are not made .
the department will pay for construction staking in accordance with the following num percent on first pay estimate num percent when num percent of the contract work is completed num percent when num percent of the contract work is completed num percent when num percent of the contract work is completed num percent when the resident engineer verifies that all construction features have been properly placed and completed the contractor has submitted all staking documentation to the engineer and the engineer has accepted the staking documentation .
num chapter num materials section page no .
num portland cement concretenum num supplementary cementitious materials num num bases and miscellaneous aggregatesnum num select borrow num num lime num num thin surface courses num num plant mix bituminous bases and surfaces num num electrical conduitnum num delineatorsnum num traffic stripenum num construction fabrics num num erosion control stone num num masonry bricknum num signs num num overhead sign structures num num galvanized steel sign postsnum num reinforcing steelnum num structural steelnum num miscellaneous metalsnum num drainage conduits num num paint for structural steel num num timber perservatives and treatment num num materials for guard rail guide posts bridge rail miscellaneous railing and fencesnum num miscellaneous materials num num num material for roadside development and erosion controlnum num pavement markersnum num concrete surface finish for structures num num electrical conductors num num pull boxesnum num traffic signal backplates num portland cement concrete num num section num portland cement concrete num mix design and proportioning the department requires that all portland cement concrete be air entrained .
the department will allow portland cement concrete produced using portland cements blended hydraulic cements and hydraulic cements .
a .
classes of concrete if the plans do not show the concrete class provide concrete in accordance with the following class aa .
use class aa concrete in superstructures .
class a .
use class a concrete for pavements and substructures pier caps columns abutments retaining walls and reinforced concrete not requiring class aa concrete .
class ap .
use class ap concrete in shoulders merge areas and gore areas for portland cement concrete pcc pavements .
class c. use class c concrete for soil erosion control structures .
class p. use class p concrete for precast prestressed concrete members .
table num specifies the requirements for each concrete class table num concrete classes class of concrete minimum cement content lbyd³ kgm³ air content watercement ratio a lblb kgkg slump b in mm minimum numday compressive strength c psi mpa aa num num num num num num num num num num num num a num num num num num num num num num num num num ap num num num num num num num num num num num num c num num num num num num num num num num num num p num num num num num num num num num num as required by the contract a use the weight of each material to calculate the water to cement ratio wc using the following equation wc water cement cement substitutes determine the water use by adding the water measured into the batch the water used in admixtures and the free water on wet aggregate and subtracting the water absorbed by dry aggregate .
b ensure the slump reflects a workability appropriate for the application .
if using a highrange waterreducing admixture limit the slump to a maximum of num in num mm .
c compressive strength is based on the average of the results of three test cylinders .
the contract documents specify class p concrete compressive strengths .
portland cement concrete num portland cement concrete num ensure class a concrete for paving has flexural strength of at least num psi num mpa at num days or num psi num mpa at num days .
determine the flexural strength at the mix design stage and obtain certification from the concrete supplier .
b .
cement substitution the department will allow a substitution of a portion of the cement content at the concrete batch plant .
provide cement substitutes in accordance with section num supplementary cementitious materials .
make cement substitutions on a onetoone basis by weight mass in accordance with table num .
refer to subsection num.anum portland cement and subsection num.anum hydraulic cement for portland cement and hydraulic cement specifications .
table num cement substitutes for portland and hydraulic cement cement substitutes maximum percent by weight mass fly ash or pozzolans only num slag only num silica fume only num combination of fly ash or pozzolans and silica fume num combination of fly ash or pozzolans slag and silica fume num refer to subsection num.anum blended hydraulic cement for blended hydraulic cement specifications .
table num cement substitutes for blended hydraulic cement cement type material maximum percent by weight mass fly ash num xx silica fume num slag num xx ip xx combinations see table num fly ash num silica fume num slag num xx is xx combinations see table num note xx is the percentage of pozzolan in the ip cement or the amount of slag in the is cement .
ensure portland cement is at least num percent of the cementitious materials including substitutions at the cement production and the concrete batch plant .
for concrete mix design purposes consider the intended concrete use and weather conditions when determining cement substitutes .
ensure the substitutions do not exceed the limits specified in table num and table num .
limit combinations to individual limits .
c. proportioning design and produce concrete mixtures in accordance with table num concrete classes .
base the mix design on absolute volume for the concrete class required by the contract and the consistency for concrete placement .
proportion the coarse and fine aggregate in accordance with aci num .
use the least amount of fine aggregate portland cement concrete num num and mixing water to produce the workability for placement conditions .
ensure high early strength concrete meets the minimum strength within num hr of placement .
submit the mix design to the resident engineer at least num days before production .
the department will not allow placing pcc to begin until the resident engineer approves the mix design .
include the following information with each mix design project identification contractors and producers name and address mix design designation mix design intended use expected travel time from batch to placement if the concrete will be pumped aggregate sources gradation moisture content and saturated surface dry batch mass water source and test reports required by subsection num water fine aggregate fineness modulus cement type and source type of cement substitutions if used and source type of admixtures and sources high range water reducer if used in accordance with subsection num.c high range water reducer hrwr concrete mixture material proportions unit weight air content slump water to cement ratio compressive strengths at num days and num days compressive strengths at num hr for high early strength concrete and flexural strength at num days or num days for class a used for concrete paving .
submit new mix designs if the resident engineer rejects the mix design material sources change or the mix design produces unacceptable workability or production test results .
d. tests and samples for concrete sampling and testing use the procedures in table num .
table num concrete sampling and testing property tested aashto test procedure sampling a t num slump t num air t num or t num curing of specimens b t num strength compressive c t num num portland cement concrete num table num concrete sampling and testing property tested aashto test procedure flexural d t num a sample pumped concrete after it is discharged from the pump .
b maintain the initial curing temperature at numf numc or greater .
the resident engineer will not require a recording thermometer .
maintain the final cure from numf to numf numc to numc until tested .
c base compressive strengths on the average of three test cylinders .
d base flexural strengths on the average of two test beams .
num e. mix identification reference authorized mix identifications on batch tickets test results reports and correspondence .
num portland cement a .
general provide cement that meets the specifications for the following types as required by the contract portland cement blended hydraulic cement hydraulic cement or rapid setting cement for bridge deck overlays and repairs only .
num portland cement provide portland cement in accordance with aashto m num except as modified by the following ensure the tricalcium aluminate cnuma content in type i cement does not exceed num percent .
report the amount of portland cement retained on the no .
num num µm sieve in accordance with aashto t num on mill test reports .
ensure the total equivalent alkalis do not exceed num percent .
the resident engineer may waive this limit on a per project basis if the proposed concrete mix design meets the expansion limits in option r of astm c num when tested in accordance with astm c num .
provide type iv and type v cements that meet the optional physical requirements .
supply supporting data for cement provided under optimum sonum requirements as described in footnote d of table num of aashto m numquarterly to the departments materials engineer .
portland cement concrete num num num blended hydraulic cement provide blended hydraulic cement in accordance with aashto m num except as modified by the following ensure the total equivalent alkalis do not exceed num percent .
the resident engineer may waive this limit on a per project basis if the proposed concrete mix design meets the expansion limits in option r of astm c num when tested in accordance with astm c num .
ensure the tricalcium aluminate cnuma content does not exceed num percent .
record the amount of blended hydraulic cement retained on the no .
num num µm sieve in accordance with aashto t num .
use the air permeability method in accordance with aashto t num to determine and record the fineness on mill test reports .
test silicon dioxide sionum aluminum oxide alnumonum and calcium oxide cao in accordance with aashto t num and report the results on mill reports .
provide cement substitutions that do not exceed the limits in subsection num.b cement substitution .
supply supporting data for cement provided under optimum sonum requirements as described in footnote a of table num of aashto m num quarterly to the departments materials engineer .
num hydraulic cement provide hydraulic cement in accordance with astm c num except as modified by the following ensure the total equivalent alkalis do not exceed num percent .
the resident engineer may waive this limit on a per project basis if the proposed concrete mix design meets the expansion limits in option r of astm c num when tested in accordance with astm c num .
ensure the tricalcium aluminate cnuma content does not exceed num percent .
record the amount of hydraulic cement retained on the no .
num num µm sieve in accordance with aashto t num .
use the air permeability method in accordance with aashto t num to determine and record the fineness on mill test reports .
ensure the loss on ignition for hydraulic cements does not exceed num percent .
provide cement substitutions that do not exceed the limits in subsection num.b cement substitution .
the departments materials engineer may limit substitutes in cement production by type and percentage .
num rapid setting cement provide rapid setting cement in accordance with table num table num rapid setting cement properties material or property cement a calcium sulfoaluminate cnumanums num dicalcium silicate cnums num num portland cement concrete num table num rapid setting cement properties material or property cement a tricalcium aluminate cnuma num a approximate percentages by weight mass num b .
general construction requirements table num specifies the cement for each application .
use these cement types as shown on the plans .
table num cement properties cement type use i ii v gu ipxx isxx general construction i ii iii he gu ipxx high early strength ii v ms hs sulfate mitigation iv mh lh low heat of hydration if required by the contract provide white portland cement in accordance with the requirements for type i cement .
use the product from one mill for one hydraulic cement brand and type on structures .
provide a storage unit that protects the cement against dampness .
the resident engineer will reject partially set cement or cement with caked lumps .
the department will not allow salvaged cement .
ensure the cement manufacturer identifies the types and amounts of cement substitutions on each shipping ticket .
ensure a qualified domestic manufacturer performs the tests .
reimburse the department for inspection expenses incurred outside the united states and additional expenses incurred by the use of foreign cement .
use sampling and test methods in accordance with aashto m num aashto m num or astm c num except as modified by the departments acceptance policy approval procedure for hydraulic cement .
the procedure is available on the following web page httpwww.okladot.state.ok.us num admixtures this subsection does not cover specifications for fly ash ground granulated blast furnace slag or silica fume .
use admixtures included in the approved mix design .
the department will not allow using admixtures to replace cement or using admixtures containing more than num ppm of chloride in prestressed or reinforced concrete .
provide admixtures in accordance with the following accurately measure admixture dosages into each batch .
dispense admixtures in liquid form .
provide dispensers large enough to measure the quantity for each batch .
unless liquid admixtures are added to premeasured water arrange the discharge to uniformly flow into the water stream .
store admixtures to prevent freezing .
agitate admixtures to prevent solids from separating or settling .
do not use air agitation .
if using more than one liquid admixture use separate equipment to provide and dispense each admixture .
ensure that admixtures are compatible when used in combination .
portland cement concrete num num a .
air entraining admixtures provide air entraining admixtures in accordance with aashto m num .
the department may allow an exception if the manufacturer provides certification that the product is neutralized vinsol resin with caustic soda and contains no other additive .
add air entraining admixture during initial batching .
if air content is below the specification minimum additional air entraining admixture may be added at the jobsite followed by a minimum of num revolutions at mixing speed provided the revolution limit of num is not exceeded .
b .
chemical admixtures provide chemical admixtures in accordance with aashto m num for the type of admixture supplied .
when concrete mix designs contain a high range water reducer hrwr admixture type f or g define the following the purpose for its use whether it will be added to the mix at the plant or jobsite and the maximum slump after addition .
provide a concrete mixture design in accordance with subsection num mix design and proportioning before adding the admixture .
c. corrosioninhibiting admixtures if required by the contract provide corrosioninhibiting admixtures that have the characteristics specified in table num when tested in accordance with aashto m num .
table num physical requirements for corrosioninhibiting admixture characteristic value calcium nitrite content percent by weight mass num time of setting allowable deviation from control initial num hrnum hr final num hrnum hr strength minimum percent of the control any time compressive num flexural num length change maximum shrinkage percent of the control num relative durability factor minimum num ensure the corrosion inhibitorprotected specimens have an average corrosion current less than num µa when tested in accordance with astm g num .
run the test for three cycles in accordance with section num period of testing after the control specimens fail .
ensure the protection potentials ep are greater than num mv versus sce when tested in accordance with astm g num .
modify the test medium to contain a num ph calcium hydroxide ca ohnum solution and sodium chloride nacl content equal to approximately num lbyd³ num kgm³ of concrete .
after num years of testing ensure the corrosion inhibitorprotected test specimens have a corrosion current in micro amps of less than num percent of the control when num portland cement concrete num num tested in accordance with astm g num .
make concrete test specimens with at least num in num mm of cover over the reinforcement and ensure a maximum water to cement ratio of num .
unless otherwise required by the contract provide concrete containing num galyd³ num lm³ of corrosion inhibiting admixture .
account for possible set acceleration effects from calcium nitrite based admixture .
the department will allow the use of setretarding admixtures to counter the acceleration effects .
d. latex emulsion admixtures provide a water based homogenous nontoxic film forming polymeric emulsion formulated latex admixture to which all stabilizers were added at the point of manufacture .
provide the latex modifier in accordance with table num .
table num latex modifier properties polymer type styrene butadiene stabilizers num latex nonionic surfactant num portland cement composition polydimethyl siloxane percent solids num num mass per unit volume lbgal kgl at numf numc num num color white store latex admixture in suitable enclosures and completely cover with insulating blankets to protect from freezing and exposure to temperatures greater than numf numc .
the department will not allow storage of latex admixture containers at the project site for more than num days .
num water provide water in accordance with aashto m num except as modified by the following if the water to be used is from an approved odeq public water source the resident engineer will not require additional quality testing .
if using water from another source submit test reports from the concrete producer showing compliance with aashto m num and table num chemical limits for mix water before use .
the department will allow a blend of concrete wash water and other water sources as mix water if the concrete producer submits certification that the water meets the requirements of aashto m num table num chemical limits for mix water and table num acceptance criteria for questionable water supplies .
test the blended water weekly for num weeks or provide previous test reports .
test blended water monthly for compliance .
provide water test results when requested by the resident engineer .
table num chemical limits for mix water contaminant test method maximum concentration ppm chloride cl astm d num prestressed concrete num bridge decks and superstructure num all other concrete num portland cement concrete num num table num chemical limits for mix water contaminant test method maximum concentration ppm sulfate sonum astm d num num alkalis nanumo numknumo astm d num and astm d num num total solids aashto t num num table num acceptance criteria for questionable water supplies property limits test method compressive strength minimum percent of the control at num days num aashto t num time of set deviation from control hr num aashto t num num fine aggregate a .
materials covered this subsection covers fine aggregate quality and size for pcc pavements or bases highway bridges and incidental structures .
provide mortar sand in accordance with aashto m num .
b .
general requirements provide fine aggregate that consists of a singlesource natural sand in accordance with aashto m num class a except as modified by subsection num.c gradation .
alternatively provide a fine aggregate that consists of a combination of natural sands or a combination of natural and manufactured sands in accordance with aashto m num class a except as modified by the following mix the two materials under controlled conditions and stockpile as a finished aggregate .
alternatively the two materials may be combined from separate stockpiles during batching operations at a hydraulic cement concrete plant .
ensure the combined fine aggregate meets the gradation requirements of subsection num.c gradation .
if a manufactured sand is used in combination with natural sand ensure the fine aggregate blend has an acid insoluble residue of at least num percent by weight when tested in accordance with ohd lnum .
obtain crushed fine aggregate manufactured sand from a coarse aggregate source on the materials divisions approved products list for use in hydraulic cement concrete .
c. gradation provide fine aggregate with a finemess modulus between num and num that is well graded from coarse to fine and when tested in accordance with aashto t num and aashto t num meets the requirements of table num .
num portland cement concrete num num table num fine aggregate gradation sieve size percent passing ⅜ in num mm num no .
num num mm num num no .
num num mm num num no .
num num mm num num no .
num num µm num num no .
num num µm num num no .
num num µm num num no .
num num µm num num the gradation requirements specified in table num represent the extreme limits of suitability .
ensure the gradation from one source does not have large changes in percentages of gradation .
use the average fineness modulus to determine the uniformity of the fine aggregate .
the average fineness modulus is the average of the last num tests by the resident engineer and maintained by his office .
the resident engineer will not accept fine aggregate represented by a test result with a fineness modulus that deviates more than num from the average .
determine the aggregate fineness modulus by adding the total percentage of sample material that is coarser than each of the following sieve sizes and dividing by num no .
num num µm no .
num num µm no .
num num µm no .
num num mm no .
num num mm no .
num num mm and ⅜ in num mm .
num coarse aggregate this subsection covers coarse aggregate quality and size for use in pcc pavements or bases highway bridges and incidental structures .
provide coarse aggregate in accordance with aashto m num class a except as modified by the ensure coarse aggregate produces class a concrete with a durability factor of at least num .
determine the durability factor after num cycles of alternate freezing and thawing in accordance with aashto t num procedure a .
limit the los angeles abrasion percent wear to a maximum of num percent after num revolutions when tested in accordance with aashto t num .
the resident engineer will not apply the sodium sulfate soundness requirement .
ensure at least num percent of the coarse aggregate retained on the no .
num num mm sieve is crushed stone or mechanically crushed gravel with at least two fractured faces .
limit the quantity of flat or elongated pieces to num percent or less at a ratio of num when tested in accordance with astm d num .
provide coarse aggregate graded in accordance with table num .
portland cement concrete num num table num coarse aggregate gradation percent passing per processed aggregate size number sieve size num num num num num num½ in num mm num num in num mm num num num½ in num mm num num in num mm num num num num num ¾ in num mm num num num ½ in num mm num num num num num num num ⅜ in num mm num num num num num num no .
num num mm num num num num num num num num num num no .
num num mm num num num num num num num num no .
num num mm num num no .
num num µm num num num num num num num num num num more than one approved source of coarse aggregate may be used in a concrete mix no .
num for class a and class ap concrete no .
num for massive class a concrete no .
num no .
num or no .
num for class c concrete no .
num for thin overlays details and thin sections if allowed by the resident engineer no .
num or no .
num for class aa or class p concrete and no .
num or no .
num for class p concrete if the specified numday compressive strength is greater than num psi num mpa or the contract requires permeability limits .
num curing agents provide concrete curing agents consisting of the following burlap cotton mats white or redpigmented membrane curing compound waterproof paper polyethylene film linseed oil emulsion or water for ponding .
keep the curing agents free of material that may damage the concrete surface .
a. burlap provide class num burlap cloth in accordance with aashto m num .
provide new burlap free of starch filler or other substances added during the manufacturing process .
if the burlap contains these substances wash it by repeatedly rinsing in clear water .
alternatively the department will allow old burlap that has only been used for curing concrete .
the department will not allow the use of worn burlap or burlap with holes .
provide burlap that is at least num ft num mm longer than the width of the concrete being covered .
b .
cotton mats provide new cotton mats or used cotton mats used only for curing concrete .
the department will not allow the use of worn cotton mats or cotton mats with holes .
design .
provide the specified sizes of coarse aggregate for the following types of concrete num portland cement concrete num c. liquid membrane curing compounds provide liquid membrane curing compounds in accordance with aashto m num type num or type numd except as modified by the following ensure type num whitepigmented compound hiding power has a daylight reflectance of at least num percent of magnesium oxide reflectance in accordance with astm e num .
color type numd compound with a red fugitive dye so inspection indicates complete coverage .
ensure the color remains for at least num hr and then gradually disappears .
ensure the curing compound has at least num percent water retention when tested in accordance with ohd lnum .
d. sheet materials provide sheet materials in accordance with aashto m num .
the resident engineer may approve a sheet material type not specified in aashto m num if all other requirements of aashto m num are met .
cut the sheet material into sheets wide enough to completely cover the exposed concrete surface .
when joints are needed in the sheets provide a lap joint of at least num ft num mm .
the department will not allow the use of sheet sections that have lost their moistureretaining qualities .
e. linseed oil emulsion provide linseed oil emulsion in accordance with table num table num linseed oil emulsion composition composition percent by weight mass oil phase num by volume boiled linseed oil num num saturated tallow alcohols num num total num water phase num by volume water num num sodium hydroxide num num dipicolinic acid num num total num ensure the emulsion is stable at the time of application .
color the linseed oil emulsion with a red fugitive dye to indicate complete coverage for inspection .
ensure the color remains for at least num hr and then gradually disappears within num weeks .
ensure the curing compound has at least num percent water retention when applied at a coverage rate of num ft²gal num m²l and tested in accordance with ohd lnum .
store and transport linseed oil emulsion in plastic containers marked with the manufacturers name contents lot number and date of manufacture .
f. water for ponding and material for dikes provide water for ponding in accordance with subsection num water .
construct dikes from a combination of loam sand or clay .
ensure dikes are free of rocks sticks or objects that may prevent a watertight dike .
portland cement concrete num num num joint fillers and sealants this subsection covers the requirements for joint fillers and sealants for pcc .
a. preformed expansion joint filler for concrete bituminous type provide preformed expansion joint filler in accordance with aashto m num .
the department will not allow this type of expansion joint filler if the contract requires a sealant .
b. preformed expansion joint fillers for concrete paving and structural construction num nonbituminous joint filler provide nonbituminous joint filler in accordance with aashto m num .
num bituminous joint filler nonextruding and resilient bituminous types provide bituminous joint filler in accordance with aashto m num except the maximum allowable load to compress the test specimen to num percent thickness before testing is num psi num mpa .
the resident engineer will waive compliance with the asphalt content requirement if the material meets all other specified physical requirements .
c. preformed elastomeric compression joint sealant this subsection covers preformed elastomeric compression joint sealants for pcc pavements and concrete bridge floors .
num preformed joint seals provide joint seals manufactured from an elastomeric material that is resistant to heat oil jet fuel and ozone .
ensure the material is compatible with concrete and is in accordance with aashto m num .
num shape and dimensions make the molded joint seals to the crosssectional dimensions lengths and tolerances as shown on the plans .
place the sealant in one piece for the full length of transverse joint and in practical lengths to suit field conditions for longitudinal joints .
num inspection the resident engineer will inspect the surface and dimensions of representative sections of each lot to determine visual compliance .
replace preformed elastomeric compression joint sealant that elongates more than num percent during placement at no additional cost to the department .
num lubrication adhesive provide lubricant adhesive if necessary that maintains consistency at the installation temperature and is compatible with the sealant and concrete .
ensure the lubricant remains unaffected by the normal moisture in the concrete .
ensure the lubricant adhesive consists of the same base polymer as the sealant blended with a volatile solvent .
d. hot poured joint sealant provide hot poured joint sealants that readily bond to concrete surfaces .
num portland cement concrete num num sealant provide joint sealants in accordance with aashto m num .
heat the sealant material to the manufacturer recommended temperature range .
num backer rod if shown on the plans use a backer rod of the size and dimensions required by the contract .
provide a backer rod that is compatible with the joint sealant and is in accordance with astm d num .
e. low modulus silicone joint sealant nonsag this subsection covers nonsag low modulus silicone joint sealants and expanded polyethylene backer rod for sealing pcc pavement joints .
provide silicone sealant in a onepart silicone formulation .
the department will not allow acetic acid cure sealants .
num silicone sealant provide a silicone sealant in accordance with astm d num type ns .
num backer rod provide a backer rod that is compatible with the joint sealant and does not bond or react with the sealant .
provide a backer rod in accordance with astm d num .
f. low modulus silicone joint sealant selfleveling this subsection covers selfleveling low modulus silicone joint sealants and polyethylene backer rod for sealing pcc pavement joints pcc to asphalt concrete pavement joints or both .
provide selfleveling silicone sealant in a onepart silicone formulation .
the department will not allow acetic acid cure sealants .
num silicone sealant provide a silicone sealant in accordance with astm d num type sl .
num backer rod provide a backer rod that is compatible with the joint sealant and does not bond or react with the sealant .
provide a backer rod in accordance with astm d num .
g. rapid cure joint sealant and elastomeric mortar this subsection covers rapid cure joint sealant and elastomeric mortar for expansion joints in bridge decks .
num joint sealant provide selfleveling rapid cure silicone joint sealant that cures to a low modulus rubber when exposed to atmospheric moisture .
the department defines rapid cure as the development of integrity within the silicone in no more than num hr to accommodate highway traffic and bridge movements .
deliver sealing compound to the job site in the manufacturers original sealed container .
ensure each container is marked with the manufacturers name batch or lot number and has the manufacturers certification .
ensure petroleum is not deleterious to the sealant .
provide joint sealant in accordance with table num .
portland cement concrete num num table num joint sealant characteristics test characteristic limit test method as supplied extrusion rate num gmin mil s num specific gravity num num astm d num as installed at numf numc and num num relative humidity accelerated weathering num hr no cracks blisters or bond loss astm c num skinover time num min ohd lnum nonvolatile content num ohd lnum joint elongation num astm d num joint modulus at num num psi num psi num kpa num kpa astm d num a a modify section num of astm d num as follows clean six num in num in num in num mm num mm num mm concrete blocks .
hold them under running tap water and scrub with a brush for num sec .
allow blocks to dry for num hr at room temperature .
assemble blocks with num in num in num mm num mm surfaces facing with ½ in ½ in num in num mm num mm num mm teflon spacers .
use clamps to hold blocks in place .
insert backer rod closed cell ½ in diameter by num in num mm diameter by num mm do not touch the surface with fingers .
inject sealant to fill the cavity with no air entrapment .
allow the sealant to flow to a smooth surface do not strike off .
allow to cure at numf numc and from num to num percent relative humidity .
cure for num hr remove clamp and teflon spacers and pull the test specimens at num inmin num mmmin .
num elastomeric mortar provide binder material consisting of a twocomponent rapid curing liquid polymer that cures to a dense semiflexible polymer .
ensure the final product is resistant to chemicals weather abrasion and impact .
provide binder material that the sealant manufacturer determines compatible with the sealant .
cure the binder in the neat to form the primer between the elastomeric mortar and the existing surfaces .
mix the binder with aggregate to form the polymer based mortar .
provide aggregate for the elastomeric mortar that the manufacturer determines compatible with the liquid polymer binder material .
ensure the binder material properties are in accordance with table num .
table num combined liquid components property limit test method viscosity numf numf numc numc brookfield model lvt spindle no .
num num rpm num num astm d num gel time num min num min aashto m num elongation num num astm d num a tensile strength num psi num mpa astm d num a shore d hardness num day cure at numf numc num num astm d num a test method type num molded specimens ¼ in num mm thickness speed of testing shall be num in num in num mm num mm .
provide elastic mortar that has the properties specified in table num .
num portland cement concrete num num table num elastic mortar properties property limit test method absorption num astm d num compressive strength num hr method b num psi num mpa astm c num bond shear strength num psi num mpa astm c num abrasion resistance wear index taber hnum num astm c num compressive stress num psi num mpa ohd lnum resilience num ohd lnum thermal compatibility pass astm c num num general use procedure the manufacturer will recommend mixing and application times .
consult the manufacturer before modifying the elastomeric mortar .
num backer rod provide a backer rod in accordance with astm d num .
num primer apply the primer in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations before installing the sealant .
num alternative joint products the departments bridge engineer may consider alternative sealants and elastomeric mortar systems as equals to the expansion joint system above if they successfully complete a num year trial installation and evaluation in oklahoma .
num high density concrete for bridge deck repair and overlay this subsection covers the material requirements for high density concrete hdc for bridge deck repairs and overlays .
prepare and submit mix designs in accordance with subsection num.c proportioning .
a .
aggregate provide fine aggregate in accordance with subsection num fine aggregate except for the gradation requirements .
provide coarse aggregate in accordance with subsection num coarse aggregate except for the gradation requirements .
ensure coarse aggregate does not have an absorption greater than num percent by mass .
provide combined aggregate in accordance with table num .
table num combined aggregate gradation sieve size percent passing ¾ in num mm num ½ in num mm num num ⅜ in num mm num num no .
num num mm num num no .
num num mm num num no .
num num µm num num portland cement concrete num num table num combined aggregate gradation sieve size percent passing no .
num num µm num num no .
num num µm num num no .
num num µm num num b .
concrete provide concrete in accordance with table num .
table num concrete properties concrete class minimum cement content lby³ kgm³ air content a maximum watercement ratio b lblb kgkg slump c in mm minimum compressive strength at road opening d psi mpa hdc num num num num num ½ num num num num num a test air content in accordance with aashto t num or aashto t num. b using the weight of each material calculate the water to cement ratio wc by the following equation wc water cement cement substitutes determine the water actually used by adding the water measured into the batch the free water on wet aggregate admixtures and subtracting water absorbed by dry aggregate .
c test slump in accordance with aashto t num .
ensure the slump reflects a workability appropriate for the application .
d compressive strength is based on the average of three test cylinders tested in accordance with aashto t num .
refer to the contract for class p concrete compressive strengths .
use cement in accordance with subsection num.anum portland cement subsection num.anum blended hydraulic cement or subsection num.anum hydraulic cement .
the department will allow the use of waterreducing admixture in accordance with subsection num admixtures .
c. grout provide grout for bonding hdc to existing concrete that consists of equal parts of cement and fine aggregate by weight mass .
mix the cement and aggregate with enough water to form a stiff slurry .
ensure the slurry has a consistency that allows for application with a stiff brush or broom in a thin even coat that will not run or puddle .
thin the grout to a paintconsistency to seal vertical joints around repairs between adjacent lanes and at curbs .
num latex modified concrete for bridge deck overlays this subsection covers the material requirements for latex modified concrete lmc for bridge deck repairs and overlays .
prepare and submit mix designs in accordance with subsection num.c proportioning .
use cement in accordance with subsection num.anum portland cement subsection num.anum blended hydraulic cement or subsection num.anum hydraulic cement .
num portland cement concrete num a .
aggregate provide fine aggregate in accordance with subsection num fine aggregate except for the gradation requirements .
provide coarse aggregate in accordance with subsection num coarse aggregate except for the gradation requirements .
ensure the coarse aggregate does not have an absorption greater than num percent by weight mass .
provide combined aggregate in accordance with table num .
table num combined aggregate gradation sieve size percent passing ¾ in num mm num ½ in num mm num num ⅜ in num mm num num no .
num num mm num num no .
num num mm num num no .
num num µm num num no .
num num µm num num no .
num num µm num num no .
num num µm num num b. latex emulsion admixture provide latex emulsion admixtures in accordance with subsection num.d latex emulsion admixtures .
c. latex modified concrete provide latex modified concrete for overlay that contains num gal num l of latex emulsion admixture per bag of cement and is workable with the properties specified in table num .
table num latex modified concrete properties concrete class minimum cement content lby³ kgm³ air content a maximum watercement ratio b lblb kgkg slump c in mm minimum compressive strength at road opening d psi mpa lmc num num num num num num num num num num num a test air content in accordance with aashto t num or aashto t num. b using the weight of each material calculate the water to cement ratio wc by the following equation wc water cement cement substitutes determine the water actually used by adding the water measured into the batch the free water on wet aggregate water in admixtures and subtracting the water absorbed by dry aggregate .
c test slump in accordance with aashto t num .
ensure the slump reflects a workability appropriate for the application .
after sampling discharged material delay the slump test from num min to num½ min .
d base the compressive strength on the average of three test cylinders tested in accordance with aashto t num .
refer to the contract for class p concrete compressive strengths .
portland cement concrete num num num penetrating water repellent for treatment of concrete surfaces this subsection covers the material requirements for penetrating water repellents for concrete surfaces .
a .
general provide penetrating water repellent treatment solution consisting of an organo silicon compound dissolved in a solvent carrier .
provide a solvent carrier that produces a hydrophobic surface covalently bonded to the concrete when applied .
provide one of the following organo silicon compounds alkylalkoxysilane oligomerous alkylalkoxysiloxane .
ensure the solvent leaves no greater than num percent residue by weight mass when evaporated .
provide a penetrating waterrepellant treatment solution that does not permanently stain discolor or darken the concrete .
ensure the solution does not alter the surface texture form a coating on concrete surfaces and is compatible with the special surface finish texture coatings specified in subsection num.g finishing formed concrete surfaces .
ensure the treated concrete surface dries within num min of application .
tint the penetrating water repellent treatment solution with a fugitive dye to make the solution visible on the treated concrete surface for at least num hr .
ensure the dye is not conspicuous longer than num days after application when exposed to direct sunlight .
b .
testing if applying a penetrating water repellant treatment solution to a bridge deck or approach slab test cores in accordance with table num .
num epoxy resin and other adhesives for general use with concrete this subsection covers epoxyresin and related bonding systems for pcc .
a .
general if the epoxyresin type grade and class are shown on the plans provide an epoxyresin system in accordance with aashto m num .
if the epoxyresin system is not specified provide the appropriate type with the approval of the resident engineer for the intended purpose as follows type a .
an epoxyresin for bonding hardened concrete to hardened concrete .
type b .
an epoxyresin for bonding fresh concrete to hardened concrete .
table num core sample specifications for water repellant treatment test method limit absorption ohd lnum num hr water immersion num by weight penetration ohd lnum num in num mm deep num portland cement concrete num type c. an epoxyresin for bonding traffic markers to hardened concrete and to asphalt concrete .
type d. a fluid epoxy for crack injection in old structures repair .
type e. an epoxy for repairing spalled areas on vertical concrete structures without forms .
type f. an epoxy for repairing spalled areas on concrete structures with forms .
type g. an epoxy for filling small holes in concrete .
type h. an epoxy for installing rebar and anchor bolts in hardened concrete except when exposed to suspended or sustained tension loads .
type j .
an epoxy for posttensioning anchorage protection systems .
type k. high molecular weight methacrylate hmwm a monomer which when polymerized can structurally rebond cracks and act as a film forming sealant against chloride ions on concrete surfaces .
type l. epoxy penetrant a two part low viscosity epoxy resin penetrating sealant that rebonds cracks and acts as a film forming sealant against chloride ions on concrete surfaces .
type m. an epoxy for sealing cracks before an epoxy bridge deck overlay .
type n. an epoxy or epoxyurethane for multiple layer polymer concrete bridge deck overlays .
b. specification requirements for epoxyresin and related bonding systems num type a provide type a epoxy in accordance with aashto m num for type iv grade num .
num type b provide type b epoxy in accordance with aashto m num for type v grade num .
num type c provide type c epoxy in accordance with aashto m num for type iv .
num type d provide type d epoxy in accordance with aashto m num for type iv grade num with a maximum viscosity of num cp num pas at numf numc .
num type e provide type e epoxy in accordance with aashto m num for type iv grade num except with an elongation in tension of at least num percent .
mix no greater than num parts sand to num part epoxy by volume .
match to the color of no .
num in federal standard no .
numa .
num type f provide type f epoxy in accordance with aashto m num for type iv grade num or grade num with an elongation in tension of at least num percent .
mix no greater than portland cement concrete num num num parts sand to num part epoxy by volume .
match to the color of no .
num in federal standard no .
numa .
num type g provide type g epoxy in accordance with aashto m num for type ii grade num grade num or grade num at hole location as shown on the plans .
num type h provide type h epoxy in accordance with aashto m num for type iv grade num .
num type j provide type j epoxy that will produce a low exothermic reaction and have characteristics for machine base plate applications .
extend the material with the aggregate supplied by the manufacturer .
use all the aggregate supplied .
provide factory preportioned epoxy compound with aggregate .
deliver epoxy and aggregate in the original containers labeled with manufacturers name date of manufacture product identification and batch numbers .
store condition and use the product in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
provide epoxy grout and aggregate mix for type j epoxy in accordance with table num .
table num epoxy grout and aggregate mix properties property test value test method compressive strength cubes num day cure at numf numc num psi num mpa astm c numb tensile strength at num day num psi num mpa astm c num flexural strength num day cure at numf numc num psi num mpa astm c num modulus of elasticity num day cure at numf numc num psi num gpa astm c num coefficient of thermal expansion from numf to numf numc to numc num ininf num mmmmc astm c num peak exotherm specimen num in num in num in num mm num mm num mm numf numc astm d num slant shear at num day bond strength to concrete num psi num mpa astm c num thermal compatibility num cycles passed astm c num linear shrinkage at num day num astm c num flowability and bearing area num contact area astm c num gel time specimen num in num in num in num mm num mm num mm num hr astm d num numtype k monomer materials for hmwm provide a low viscosity low odor hmwm monomer system in accordance with table num .
ensure standard methyl methacrylate mma resins are not used due to volatility .
provide a compatible promoterinitiator system that has a deck surface cure time from num min to num hr at the surface application temperature .
formulate the promoterinitiator system to allow for adjustment of the gel time to compensate for the temperature changes during treatment application .
submit to the resident engineer a table showing correct promoter and initiator proportions to be added to the monomer to achieve the cure time requirements based on the surface temperature .
ship materials within num months of the date of manufacture .
num portland cement concrete num the resident engineer will accept two component materials if the material requirements of table num are met .
table num hmwm properties property requirement astm test method viscosity brookfield a num cp num cp d num density pensky martens cc at numf num lbgal d num flash point numf d num vapor pressure at numf num mm hg d num shelf life num year gel time num g mass to a thin film num min d num tensile elongation num d num cure time at deck temperature bulk num min num min surface num min num min bond strength num psi d num percent volatiles num d num a brookfield viscometer model rvt with a ul adaptor or model lvf no .
num spindle and ul adaptor at numf .
numtype l materials for epoxyresin supply a two part epoxyresin in accordance with table num epoxymixed system properties .
add a fluorescent tracer dye to provide evidence of crack penetration .
table num epoxymixed system properties property requirement standard mixing ratio num viscosity brookfield num cp astm c num bond strength num day cure num psi astm c num water adsorption num hr num astm d num tensile strength num mil thickness num psi astm d num elongation num astm d num gel time in mass at numf num min aashto m num percent volatile num astm d num numtype m hairline cracks and encapsulating steel grid provide type m epoxy as a two component hybrid polymer system free of fillers and volatile solvents that can provide a simple volumetric ratio .
formulate type m epoxy so that it has an extremely low viscosity and surface tension and an affinity for concrete and steel .
mix component a and component b in the appropriate ratio so the cured resin is in accordance with table num .
portland cement concrete num num table num physical properties of the cured system property value standard strength compressive num days num psi num psi aashto t num tensile num psi num psi astm d num tensile elongation num num astm d num water absorption numwt .
astm d num shore d hardness numf numc num num astm d num gel time num min num min gel time procedure a adhesion to concrete percent failure in concrete num astm c num surface tension num dynescc num dynescc astm d num percent solids num astm d num a measure a num oz sample of the epoxy into an unwaxed paper cup in recommended proportions at numf numc .
record the time and mix immediately for the specified duration .
pour num g of the mixture into a new num oz unwaxed paper cup and place on a wooden surface .
starting num min from the recorded time probe the mixture every num min with a small stick until a small ball forms in the center of the container .
gel time is the total time from pouring the mix to ball formation .
perform the test in an enclosed area with a temperature of numf numf numc numc and a relative humidity of num num percent .
numtype n physical requirements of epoxy or epoxyurethane copolymer overlay system provide a two component epoxy or epoxyurethane system in accordance with table num .
table num physical properties of the cured system property value standard compressive strength with aggregate at num hr num psi astm c num a at num days num psi astm c num a tensile strength num day num psi num psi astm d num elongation neatnum day num num astm d num absorption neat num day num astm d num shore d hardness numf numc num astm d num gel time num min num min astm c num adhesion to concrete percent failure in concrete num astm c num viscosity num p num p brookfield rvt spindle no .
num at num rpm .
thermal compatibility no delamination of overlay astm c num a modified with plastic inserts .
num white concrete this subsection covers the requirements for providing white pcc for median barriers specified in section num concrete longitudinal barrier .
num portland cement concrete num a .
materials if white pcc is shown on the plans use the following requirements to supplement the general provision for pcc .
num cement provide white portland cement in accordance with aashto m num for type num portland cement .
ensure the portland cement contains no more than num percent of ferric oxide fenumonum by mass .
num fine aggregate provide light colored fine aggregate in accordance with subsection num fine aggregate .
num coarse aggregate provide light colored coarse aggregate .
use no .
num or no .
num coarse aggregate in accordance with subsection num coarse aggregate .
num water use mixing water in accordance with subsection num water that is free of impurities that may cause staining .
b. proportioning proportion white concrete mixes in accordance with aci num .
for barrier construction ensure the white concrete mix contains num lbyd³ num kgm³ of white type num cement with an air content of num percent num percentage point and a slump of num in num in num mm num mm .
ensure a maximum water to cement ratio of num and a minimum compression strength of num psi num mpa at num days .
c. batching and mixing provide clean mixing and batching equipment to prevent white concrete contamination and discoloration .
use cement bins truck mixer drums and weigh hoppers that are free of loose gray portland cement .
d. surface finish use form oil that will not stain the surface to construct white concrete median barriers in metal forms .
treat the surface with a penetrating water repellent solution at the rate recommended by the manufacturer in accordance with section num penetrating water repellent treatment .
e. acceptance ensure the white concrete barrier or parapet is at least as white as numynum in accordance with the munsell book of color .
before white concrete barrier or parapet production submit to the resident engineer a num ft² num m² test panel of material for the construction .
use the test panel as a standard as approved by the resident engineer .
portland cement concrete num num num fiber reinforcement for pcc a .
general requirements this subsection covers fiber reinforcement added to pcc .
provide polypropylene fibers or steel fibers in accordance with the subsection num.anum and subsection num.anum .
num polypropylene fibers use synthetic fibers that are num percent polypropylene collated fibrillated fibers manufactured to graduated lengths of equal proportions for secondary reinforcement .
provide fibers in accordance with astm c num for type iii .
num steel fibers use steel fiber in accordance with astm a num for type ii cutsheet steel .
provide steel fibers with an aspect ratio of num and from num⅛ in num mm to num in num mm long .
b .
application add the fibers to the pcc at a rate specified by the manufacturer .
mix the concrete to uniformly distribute the fiber .
num dowel bar retrofit mortar provide a mortar for retrofitting portland cement concrete pavements with dowel bars in accordance with table num .
combine the mortar mix with an aggregate extender in accordance with subsection num coarse aggregate size no .
num to form a concrete .
table num grout properties property test value asshto astm test method compressive strength num hours without aggregate extender num psi num mpa t compressive strength num days without aggregate extender num psi num mpa t compressive strength num hours with aggregate extender num psi num mpa t compressive strength num days with aggregate extender num psi num mpa t freezethaw durability factor with and without aggregate extender num cycles num tnum procedure b bond strength by slant shear with and without aggregate extender num days num psi num mpa c num a linear shrinkage with and without aggregate extender num days num c num a referenced from astm c num .
num psi num mpa or c num num portland cement concrete num num temporary concrete mix design and proporationing this subsection covers the material for use in the construction of temporary concrete .
temporary concrete is any concrete that is to be installed and removed during the project and will not become part of any permanent structure or pavement .
temporary concrete will be known as class t concrete .
provide class t concrete in accordance with subsection num mix design and proportioning class ap concrete except for the following the department does not require air entrainment or any other concrete admixtures .
the department waives the aashto t num procedure a freezethaw testing for all aggregates .
the department waives the fractured face requirement for all aggregates .
ensure aggregate material larger than the no num sieve has an aashto t num los angeles abrasion percent wear of no greater than num .
provide fine and coarse aggregates manufactured from virgin rock or stone reclaimed rock or stone or recycled crushed concrete .
provide fine and coarse aggregates in accordance with the gradation requirements in subsection num fine aggregate and subsection num coarse aggregate or provide combined aggregates in accordance with table num combined aggregate gradation .
provide all materials used in class t concrete from sources on the materials divisions approved products list except for the aggregate sources which are to be approved by the resident engineer .
maintain temporary concrete at the no additional cost to the department .
num posttensioning grout this subsection covers grouts for protecting posttensioning steel .
the department differentiates grout applications into horizontal vertical and repair .
the department will not allow the use of grouts that contain aluminum powder or components that produce hydrogen carbon dioxide or oxygen gas .
a .
certification submit to the resident engineer a type a certification for each grout shipment in accordance with subsection num materials certifications indicating compliance with subsection num.b test procedures .
prepackage grouts in moisture proof containers .
label containers with the manufacture date lot number shipment date and mixing instructions .
b .
test procedures num laboratory tests provide grout tested from numf to numf numc to numc in accordance with table num .
conduct the tests using a grout mix with the minimum efflux time .
adjust the water content to produce the minimum and maximum efflux time .
portland cement concrete num num table num grout properties property test value astm test method total chloride ions by weight of cementitious material num c num fine aggregate passing the no .
num num μm sieve if used num c num a hardened height change at num hr and num days num num c num b expansion num for up to num hr c num wet density lab report maximum and minimum test value in lbft³ kgl c num field report maximum and minimum test value in lbft³ kgl c num compressive strength num day average of num cubes num psi num mpa c num initial set of grout num hr num hr c num time of efflux c num sec num sec c num immediately after mixing num sec num sec c num d num sec c num num min after mixing with remixing for num sec num sec c num d bleeding at num hr num c num e permeability at num days num coulombs at num v for num hr c num a modify astm c num procedure and use a no .
num sieve .
determine the percent passing after washing the sieve .
b modify astm c num to include verification at num hr and num days .
c adjust flow rates in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
the department defines the efflux time as the time to fill a num l container under the flow cone .
d modify astm c num procedure by filling the cone to the top instead of to the standard level .
e modify astm c num in accordance with the wick induced bleed test in subsection num.bnum laboratory wick induced bleed test .
num laboratory wick induced bleed test modify the astm c num test method as specified in table num grout properties in accordance with the wick induced bleed test as follows use a num in num m long wick of sevenwire ½ in num mm diameter strand in accordance with astm a num .
before cutting wrap the strand ends at each end with num in num mm wide duct or electrical tape to prevent the wires from splaying .
use acetone or hexane solvent to degrease the strand .
with a wire brush remove surface rust before temperature conditioning .
condition the dry ingredients mixing water prestressing strand and test apparatus overnight from numf to numf numc to numc .
mix the conditioned dry ingredients with the conditioned mixing water and place num ml of the grout into the num ml graduate cylinder .
measure and record the grout level .
insert the strand into the graduated cylinder .
center and fasten the strand so it is parallel to the cylinder vertical axis .
measure and record the grout level .
store the mixed grout at temperatures from numf to numf numc to numc .
num portland cement concrete num measure the level of the bleed water every num min for num hr and hourly for the next two readings .
calculate the bleed water at the end of the num hr test period and the expansion per the astm c num procedures .
express the bleed water quantity as a percent of the initial grout volume .
record if the bleed water remains above or below the top of the original grout height .
specify if bleed water is absorbed into the specimen during the test .
num simulated field high temperature fluidity test perform a conditioned laboratory high temperature grout fluidity test using the mixing and storage tanks of production grouting equipment .
ensure the grouts are in accordance with table num grout properties .
for the test to be successful ensure the grout has an efflux time no greater than num s at the end of the num hr test period .
determine the efflux time using astm c num or the following modifications before the test condition the room grout water duct pump mixer and other equipment to numf numc for at least num hr .
use from num ft num m to num ft num m of duct for the test .
use duct with an inside diameter of num in num mm .
mix the grout to the water content in accordance with subsection num posttensioning grout .
pump the grout through the duct until it discharges from the duct outlet end and is returned to the pump .
start the num hr test period after the duct is completely full of grout .
record the time to circulate the grout through the duct .
constantly recirculate the grout into the commercial grout mixer storage tank .
pump and recirculate the grout for at least num hr .
record the pumping pressure at the inlet grout temperature and fluidity at the discharge outlet every num min during the test period .
num accelerated corrosion test method perform the accelerated corrosion test method actm as specified in appendix b of the posttensioning institute specification for grouting of posttensioning structures .
report the time to corrosion for the test grout and control sample using a neat grout with a num water to cement ratio .
the department defines satisfactory grout as grout with an average time to corrosion longer than the control sample and a time to corrosion exceeding num hr .
num variation in testing for specific applications a horizontal horizontal applications include grouting superstructure and transverse substructure tendons in caps and struts .
provide grouts for horizontal applications in accordance with subsection num.b test procedures .
bvertical vertical applications include grouting substructure column tendons .
provide grouts for vertical applications in accordance with subsection num.b test procedures .
perform the schupack pressure bleed test procedure for cement grouts for posttensioned structures in accordance with appendix c of the posttensioning institute specification for grouting of posttensioned portland cement concrete num num structures .
test grout at num psi num kpa and report the percent bleed .
the resident engineer will only accept grout without bleed water num. c repair use repair applications to augment grouting operations that do not fill the duct or anchorage .
for new construction the department will allow repairs with the same grout for the tendon if the void is no greater than num gal num l. in other cases use a nonsanded grout in accordance with subsection num.bnum laboratory tests and subsection num.bnum accelerated corrosion test method with a modified maximum permeability of num coulombs tested in accordance with astm c num at num v. provide nonsanded grouts with num percent passing no .
num sieve and num percent passing no .
num sieve in accordance with astm c num .
wash and dry each sieve before weighing in accordance with astm c num as modified for sieve size .
num controlled lowstrength material a .
general controlled lowstrength material clsm .
a low strength grout backfill material consisting of portland cement fly ash fine aggregate and water .
the department will allow the use of an air entraining agent .
b .
mix design design the mix using absolute volumes .
use at least num lbyd³ num kgm³ of portland cement in the mix design .
submit the proposed mix design with trial batch testing data before use .
include the weight mass specific gravity material source and material requirements for each ingredient .
include the flowability results unit weight mass and trial batch strength tests .
the department will allow the submittal of previously used and successful mix designs without retesting if material sources have not changed .
provide materials in accordance with the following sections and subsections for clsm material section or subsection portland cement num fly ash num fine aggregate num water num air entraining agents num c. sampling and testing test clsm in accordance with the following methods conduct the flow test in accordance with astm d num .
provide a clsm spread diameter of num in num mm or greater .
conduct the unit weight mass tests in accordance with astm d num .
the resident engineer will reject batches with a unit weight mass that deviates num percent or more from the mix design value .
conduct the compressive strength tests in accordance with astm d num .
provide a clsm compressive strength at num days from num psi to num psi num kpa to num kpa .
earlier strength tests may be performed to confirm that the material reaches the minimum strength but are not required by the contract .
num portland cement concrete num num early strength concrete for bridge deck patching and overlays this subsection covers very early strength type i ves i very early strength type iii ves iii and rapid setting latexmodified concrete rslmc for bridge deck patching and overlays .
prepare and submit mix designs in accordance with subsection num.c proportioning .
a .
materials provide materials in accordance with the following subsections for early strength concretes material subsection portland cement num fine aggregate num coarse aggregate num water num concrete admixtures num concrete fibers num b .
classes of early strength concrete table num early strength concrete properties concrete class minimum cement content lbyd³ kgm³ air content a maximum watercement ratio b lblb kgkg slump c in mm minimum compressive strength at road opening d psi mpa ves i num num num num num num num num num num num ves iii num num num num num num num num num num num rslmc num num num num num num num num num num num a test air content in accordance with aashto t num or aashto t num. b using the weight of each material calculate the water to cement ratio wc by the following equation wc watercement cement substitutes the water used is determined by the water measured into the batch plus the free water on wet aggregate minus the water absorbed by dry aggregate plus water in admixture solutions not to exceed the limit required by the contract .
c test slump in accordance with aashto t num .
ensure the slump reflects a workability appropriate for the application .
d compressive strength is based on the average of three test cylinders tested in accordance with aashto t num .
refer to the contract for the class p concrete compressive strengths .
num very early strength type i ves i ensure the ves i mix reaches num psi num mpa at num hr .
use a type i cement for this concrete .
provide no .
num size coarse aggregate .
use a high range waterreducing admixture to obtain slump .
add no more than num galyd³ num lm³ calcium nitrite as a liquid admixture .
use an air entraining admixture to obtain the air content in accordance with table num early strength concrete properties .
supplementary cementitious materials num num the department will not allow fly ash substitution .
to improve mix durability add concrete fibers as directed by the resident engineer .
num very early strength type iii ves iii ensure the ves iii mix reaches num psi num mpa at num hr .
use a type iii cement for this concrete .
provide no .
num size coarse aggregate .
use a high range waterreducing admixture to obtain slump .
add at least num galyd³ num lm³ calcium nitrite as a liquid admixture .
use an air entraining admixture to obtain the air content in accordance with table num early strength concrete properties .
the department will not allow fly ash substitution .
to improve mix durability add concrete fibers as directed by the resident engineer .
num rapid setting latex modified concrete rslmc ensure the rslmc mix reaches num psi num mpa at num hr .
provide a rapid setting cement for rslmc in accordance with subsection num.a.num rapid setting cement .
provide no .
num size coarse aggregate .
use a latex emulsion admixture at num galyd³ num lm³ .
the department will not allow an air entraining admixture or fly ash substitution .
add foodgrade citric acid to delay the set time at a rate no greater than num lbyd³ num kgm³ .
dissolve the citric acid in water before adding to the mix in accordance with the manufacturer recommendations .
to improve mix durability add concrete fibers as directed by the resident engineer .
num magnesium ammonium phosphate concrete for concrete repair this subsection covers magnesium ammonium phosphate concrete mapc for repairing blockouts holes and defects in posttensioned boxes and girders .
follow the manufacturers recommendations for preparing surfaces mixing placing and curing concrete .
provide mapc in accordance with table num .
table num physical properties requirement test value test method strength at num day air curing instead of moist curing compressive num psi num mpa astm c num flexural num psi num mpa astm c num slant shear bond at num day air curing instead of moist curing num psi num mpa astm c num time of setting initial set at least numf numc num min astm c num scaling resistance no scaling astm c num maximum length change wet cure at num days num astm c num dry cure at num days num astm c num sulfate resistance after num weeks of immersion num astm c num maximum chloride absorption at num days use cubes meeting astm c num num nchrp tnum num supplementary cementitious materials num section num supplementary cementitious materials num fly ash a .
general fly ash .
a very fine fluid material with pozzolanic properties and possibly some cementitious properties that is a byproduct gathered by dust collection systems during the coal burning process at coal fired power plants .
the department will allow the substitution of a portion of the cement in portland cement concrete pcc with fly ash in accordance with subsection num mix design and proportioning .
the department will also allow the use of fly ash to stabilize or modify soils in accordance with ohd lnum and ohd lnum .
provide fly ash for pcc from one source power plant and soil stabilization or modification fly ash from one source .
protect fly ash from contamination and dampness .
the resident engineer will not accept lumpy contaminated or partially set fly ash .
b .
requirements for portland cement concrete use provide fly ash for pcc in accordance with aashto m num class c or class f. c. requirements for soil use provide fly ash for soil stabilization or modification in accordance with aashto m num class c. num ground granulated blast furnace slag a .
general ground granulated blast furnace slag ggbfs .
a glassy granular non metallic byproduct of iron production that is ground to various degrees of fineness and consists of silicates and aluminosilicates of calcium and other bases .
the department will allow the substitution of a portion of the cement in pcc with ggbfs in accordance with subsection num mix design and proportioning .
provide ggbfs from one source plant .
protect ggbfs from contamination and dampness .
the resident engineer will not accept lumpy contaminated or partially set ggbfs .
b .
requirements provide ggbfs in accordance with aashto m num grade num or grade num .
num cement kiln dust a .
general cement kiln dust ckd .
a very fine byproduct of portland cement manufacturing with particle sizes between num microns and num microns that is gathered by kiln dust collection systems during the cement clinker manufacturing process and consists of a particulate mixture of partially calcined supplementary cementitious materials num num supplementary cementitious materials gathered by kiln dust collection systems during the cement clinker manufacturing process and consists of a particulate mixture of partially calcined and untreated raw feed clinker dust and fuel ash enriched with alkali sulfates halides and other volatiles .
the department will allow the use of ckd to stabilize or modify soils in accordance with ohd lnum or ohd lnum .
provide ckd from one source plant .
protect ckd from contamination and dampness .
the resident engineer will not accept lumpy contaminated or partially set ckd .
b .
requirements test ckd in accordance with aashto t num to determine the total calcium oxide cao the alkali equivalent numknumonanumo the total sulfates sonum and the loss on ignition .
refer to table num for the chemical content limits based on average values of samples from the plant the month before shipment .
table num chemical content of ckd property limits total calcium oxide num alkali equivalent num total sulfates num loss on ignition num num silica fume a .
general silica fume .
a very fine pozzolanic byproduct of the production of elemental silicon and ferrosilicon alloys composed mostly of amorphous silica produced by electric arc furnaces also know as condensed silica fume and microsilica .
the department will allow the substitution of a portion of the cement in pcc with silica fume in accordance with subsection num mix design and proportioning .
provide silica from one source plant .
protect silica fume from contamination and dampness .
if storing in a liquid state continually mix during storage .
the resident engineer will not accept lumpy contaminated or partially set silica fume .
b .
requirements provide silica fume in accordance with of astm c num .
num bases and miscellaneous aggregates num section num bases and miscellaneous aggregates num aggregate for aggregate base a .
general requirements provide aggregate base course material consisting of a mixture of coarse and fine graded aggregate that is free of vegetation and other deleterious materials .
coarse aggregate is the material retained on a no .
num num mm sieve .
provide coarse aggregate consisting of the following durable particles or fragments gravel stone disintegrated granite crushed concrete or provide fine aggregate made of sand stone dust or other inert finelydivided mineral .
ensure at least num percent of the completed type a or type b mixture retained on the no .
num num mm sieve contains uniformly graded mechanically crushed particles with at least one fractured face .
ensure num percent of the completed type c or type d mixture retained on the no .
num num mm sieve contains uniformly graded mechanically crushed particles with at least two fractured faces .
ensure the completed type c mixture contains no more than num percent natural sand .
b .
physical properties ensure the coarse aggregate retained on the ⅜ in num mm sieve of the completed mixture has no more than num percent wear in accordance with the los angeles abrasion test in accordance with aashto t num .
ensure the aggregate has an aggregate durability index of at least num in accordance with aashto t num .
c. gradation and other requirements sample the uniform mixture from the project site before compacting .
ensure samples are in accordance with table num for gradation plasticity index and liquid limit for the provided aggregate base type .
table num aggregate base gradation percent passing per type sieve size type a type b type c type d num in num mm num num in num mm num num½ in num mm num num num num num num num in num mm num num num num ¾ in num mm num num num num ½ in num mm num num num num ⅜ in num mm num num num num no .
num num mm num num num num num num num num bases and miscellaneous aggregates num num table num aggregate base gradation percent passing per type sieve size type a type b type c type d no .
num num mm num num no .
num num mm num num num num num num no .
num num μm num num num num num num no .
num num μm a num num num num num num num num other requirements plasticity index b num num num liquid limit b num num num a ensure the material passing the no .
num num µm sieve comprises no greater than two thirds of the quantity of material passing the no .
num num µm sieve .
b the department will allow blending of separate aggregates to produce an aggregate mixture if no individual aggregate has a plasticity index higher than num .
bases and miscellaneous aggregates d. sampling and testing test aggregate in accordance with table num .
table num aggregate testing methods test item test method los angeles abrasion wear aashto t num sieve analysis aashto t num sampling aashto t num determining plastic limit plasticity index aashto t num fractured faces ohd lnum method of preparation of samples aashto t num determining liquid limit aashto t num maximum density aashto t num method d aggregate durability index aashto t num material passing no.num numµm sieve aashto t num soft particles ohd lnum num aggregates for econocrete base and cement treated base a .
general provide aggregates for econocrete base and cement treated base that meet the following requirements consists of a mixture of coarse and fine graded aggregate free of vegetation and other deleterious materials and meets the gradation requirements of subsection num.cnum option one or subsection num.cnum option two .
coarse aggregate is the material retained on a no .
num num mm sieve .
provide coarse aggregate consisting of the following durable particles or fragments crushed gravel crushed stone crushed concrete or a combination of these .
num bases and miscellaneous aggregates num num provide fine aggregate made of natural sand manufactured sand or stone dust .
b .
physical properties ensure at least num percent of the combined mixture retained on the no .
num num mm sieve contains mechanically crushed particles with at least one fractured face tested in accordance with ohd lnum .
ensure the coarse aggregate retained on the ⅜ in num mm sieve of the completed mixture has no more than num percent wear tested in accordance with the los angeles abrasion test aashto t num .
ensure the aggregate has an aggregate durability index of at least num tested in accordance with aashto t num .
provide combined aggregate with at least a num sand equivalent tested in accordance with aashto t num .
c. gradations sample and test the aggregate gradation in accordance with aashto t num t num and t num .
provide aggregates that meet the gradation requirements of subsection num.cnum option one or subsection num.cnum option two .
notify the engineer of the gradation option being used .
num option one provide aggregate composed of num to num percent fine aggregate meeting the gradation requirements of subsection num fine aggregate .
provide coarse aggregate meeting the gradation requirements of no .
num coarse aggregate in subsection num coarse aggregate .
num option two provide aggregate with a combined aggregate gradation in accordance with table num .
table num combined aggregate gradation sieve size percent passing num½ in num mm num num in num mm num num ½ in num mm num num no .
num num mm num num no .
num num µm num num no .
num num µm num num num aggregate for open graded portland cement concrete base provide aggregate for open graded portland cement base in accordance with aashto m num class a consisting of crushed gravel or stone or a combination of crushed gravel or stone except as modified by the following limit the los angeles abrasion percent wear to a maximum of num percent after num revolutions tested in accordance with aashto t num .
bases and miscellaneous aggregates num num ensure at least num percent of the coarse aggregate retained on the no .
num num mm sieve is crushed stone or mechanically crushed gravel with at least two fractured faces tested in accordance with ohd lnum .
ensure the aggregate has an aggregate durability index of at least num in accordance with aashto t num .
limit the quantity of flat or elongated pieces to num percent or less at a ratio of num tested in accordance with astm d num .
the engineer will not apply the sodium sulfate soundness requirements .
provide an aggregate gradation meeting table num sampled and tested in accordance with aashto t num t num and t num .
table num aggregate gradation sieve size percent passing num½ in num mm num num in num mm num num ½ in num mm num num no .
num num mm num num no .
num num mm num num no .
num num µm num num num cover aggregates for bituminous surface treatments a .
general requirements provide cover aggregate consisting of clean sound durable particles of mineral aggregates or manufactured lightweight cover aggregates lwca .
use the same source of cover aggregate throughout the project unless otherwise approved in writing by the resident engineer .
num mineral aggregates provide uniform mineral aggregate consisting of crushed gravel or crushed stone that is substantially free of organic material .
place substantially dry mineral aggregate on the bituminous binder unless using cationic emulsified asphalt .
num lightweight cover aggregates provide uniform lwca consisting of ceramic lightweight aggregate manufactured from kilnproduced expanded clay and shale that is substantially free of organic material .
ensure that absorbed moisture does not affect the quality of the aggregate .
b .
physical properties provide cover aggregate with physical properties in accordance with table num .
table num physical properties of cover aggregates property test method limits sampling aashto t num lost angeles abrasion wear aashto t num num durability dc factor aashto t num num flat and elongated pieces a astm d num num num bases and miscellaneous aggregates num table num physical properties of cover aggregates property test method limits clay lumps and friable particles astm c num num fractured faces two faces b ohd lnum num lwca dry loose bulk density pcf c aashto t num num num dust coating ohd lnum num num a a flat and elongated piece has a length greater than five times the average thickness .
b expanded clay and expanded shale aggregates contain angular particles with a rough micro surface texture and perform similarly to a mechanically crushed particle .
such angular particles may be considered as crushed .
c aashto t num shoveling procedure .
c. gradation provide cover aggregates with gradations in accordance with table num .
table num cover aggregate gradations percent passing per cover aggregate size number sieve size no.num no.num no.num no.numc ¾ in num mm num ⅝ in num mm num num ½ in num mm num num num num num num num ⅜ in num mm num num num num num num num num no .
num num mm num num num num num num num num no .
num num mm num num num num num num no .
num numµm num num num num num num num num other gradation requirement dust coating ohd lnum num num num num num num num num d. precoated cover aggregates if the contract requires precoated cover aggregates provide cover aggregate material in accordance with subsection num.a general requirements subsection num.b physical properties and subsection num.c gradation covered with bituminous material in accordance with subsection num asphalt materials .
apply bituminous material within num to num percent by weight mass of the untreated aggregate depending on the type and grade of bituminous material .
apply enough bituminous material for surface absorption dust dissipation and film coating durable and free of scales and blisters of the aggregate .
provide bituminous material that when applied to the road has no excess binder or moisture that may hinder handling spreading or rolling operations .
before starting production submit to the resident engineer the type grade and amount of asphalt treatment proposed .
ensure the producer consistently checks the aggregate to prevent surface or absorbed moisture that may interfere with binder absorption and adhesion or cause blisters or subsequent scaling of the treatment .
if it will facilitate uniform coating of the aggregate with the bituminous material the department will allow the producer to add water at the pugmill no more than num percent by weight mass of the aggregate .
when heating is used ensure the producer keeps the temperature of the bituminous bases and miscellaneous aggregates num num material below the flash point and temperatures that may affect the quality of the material .
ensure the asphalt material temperature remains within the mixing range for the type and grade in accordance with table num temperature ranges for use of asphalt materials while applying asphalt material to the aggregate .
ensure the treated aggregate flows so that it can be spread with mechanical spreading devices approved by the resident engineer .
determine the percent of asphalt for precoating the aggregate based on the type and grade of bituminous material and aggregate used .
num aggregates for trafficbound surface course ensure the trafficbound surface course material provides a bonded traffic surface consisting of a mixture of coarse and fine graded aggregate that is free of vegetation and other deleterious material .
the department defines coarse aggregate as material retained on a no .
num num mm sieve .
provide coarse aggregate consisting of durable particles or fragments of crushed gravel stone disintegrated granite recycled crushed concrete or a combination of these .
provide fine aggregate consisting of sand stone dust or other inert finely divided mineral material .
a .
physical properties ensure coarse aggregate retained on the ⅜ in num mm sieve of the finished mixture for type a type b type c type d or type e has a percent wear no greater than num when tested in accordance with the los angeles abrasion test .
b. gradation and other requirements select and use one of the six gradations or types of surface course .
if the contract does not require the surface course type select the gradation or type before construction .
ensure the gradation plasticity index and liquid limit of the produced or processed material is in accordance with table num for the type used .
use the same type of material throughout the project unless otherwise approved in writing by the resident engineer .
crush oversized particles or conglomerate materials delivered to the job site and incorporate them into the surfacing material .
table num aggregate gradation percent passing per type of aggregate sieve size type a type b a type c type d type e b type f c num½ in num mm num num num num in num mm num num num num num ¾ in num mm num num num num num num ½ in num mm num num ⅜ in num mm num num no .
num num mm num num num num num num num num num num num num no .
num num mm num num no .
num num µm num num no .
num num µm num num num num no .
num num µm num num num num num num num num num num other requirements plasticity index num num num num bases and miscellaneous aggregates num table num aggregate gradation percent passing per type of aggregate sieve size type a type b a type c type d type e b type f c liquid limit num num a type b material consists of disintegrated granite with natural binder .
b type e material meets the requirements for aggregate base type a in accordance with subsection num aggregate for aggregate base .
c type f material only temporarily in light traffic situations .
the los angeles abrasion test requirement does not apply to this material .
num num cover material for pipe underdrains provide cover material for pipe underdrains consisting of coarse cover aggregate and filter sand .
ensure the coarse cover aggregate consists of gravel or crushed stone and the filter sand is free of deleterious materials .
a .
physical properties provide coarse cover aggregate with a los angeles abrasion test percent wear of no greater than num and an aggregate durability index of at least num .
b. gradation num coarse cover aggregate provide course cover aggregate in accordance with table num .
table num coarse cover aggregate gradation sieve size percent passing ½ in num mm num ⅜ in num mm num num no .
num num mm num num no .
num num mm num num no .
num num mm num num no .
num num μm num num num filter sand provide filter sand in accordance with table num .
table num filter sand gradation sieve size percent passing ⅜ in num mm num no .
num num mm num num no .
num num mm num num no .
num num µm num num no .
num num µm num num bases and miscellaneous aggregates num num c. sampling and testing sample and test in accordance with subsection num.d sampling and testing .
num granular backfill a .
physical properties provide granular backfill material for structure excavation that is free of deleterious materials shale or soft low durability particles .
b. gradation and other requirements provide granular backfill material with a nonplastic plasticity index and with a gradation in accordance with table num .
ensure the granular backfill has an aggregate durability index of at least num .
table num granular backfill gradation sieve size percent passing num in num mm num num in num mm num num no .
num num µm num num no .
num num µm num num c. sampling and testing sample and test in accordance with subsection num.d sampling and testing .
num standard bedding material provide standard bedding material as required by the contract for the following classes of bedding material a .
class a bedding material provide class a bedding material consisting of a continuous encasement of controlled low strength material clsm in accordance with subsection num controlled lowstrength material or class a concrete in accordance with subsection num mix design and proportioning .
b .
class b bedding material provide class b bedding material consisting of crushed rock or stone in accordance with subsection num.bnum coarse cover aggregate or subsection num coarse aggregate size no .
num .
c. class c bedding material provide class c bedding material consisting of sand stone rock screenings or select sandy soil .
ensure the bedding material is free of organic material frozen lumps or moisture that may prevent the contract required compaction .
ensure the class c bedding material gradation is in accordance with table num .
table num class c bedding material gradation sieve size percent passing ⅜ in num mm num no .
num num µm num num num bases and miscellaneous aggregates num num d. class d bedding material provide class d bedding material consisting of native material with particles no larger than num in num mm in greatest dimension no frozen lumps or excess moisture that may prevent the contract required compaction .
num caliche base a .
general provide caliche base coarse material consisting of a mixture of coarse and fine graded aggregates intimately mixed with a calcareous binder that is free of vegetation and other deleterious materials .
provide caliche base material with the material retained on a no .
num num mm sieve consisting of the following durable particles crushed gravel crushed stone caliche type material or a combination of these .
the base material passing a no num num mm sieve may contain fine aggregate made of natural sand manufactured sand stone dust or other finely divided fragments provided at least num percent of this material is a caliche type material .
b .
physical properties ensure at least num percent of the combined mixture retained on the no num num mm sieve contains mechanically crushed particles with at least one fractured face tested in accordance with ohd lnum .
ensure the caliche base material has a liquid limit no greater than num percent tested in accordance with aashto t num .
ensure the caliche base material has a plasticity index no greater than num percent tested in accordance with aashto t num .
c. gradation sample the caliche base material from uniformly blended windrows and test in accordance with aashto t num and ohd lnum .
provide a combined base material that meets the gradation requirements of table num .
table num caliche base gradation sieve size percent passing num in num mm num no .
num num mm num num no .
num num µm num num select borrow num num section num select borrow select borrow num materials provide select borrow in accordance with table num .
table num select borrow requirements group classification a group index maximum value anum num anum num anum num a classify select borrow material in accordance with aashto m num .
provide select borrow that passes a num in num mm sieve and remove material from the rightofway that does not reduce to a size num in num mm or less .
ensure select borrow produced from rocks has a slake durability index of at least num .
if the contractor encounters a lens layer or stratum of unacceptable material in a borrow pit or roadway cut the department will allow the contractor to combine the unacceptable material with acceptable material as long as the resulting uniform mixture meets the contract requirements .
provide select borrow that is uniform in gradation and plastic properties .
unless otherwise required by the contract provide all materials for select borrow .
make preliminary investigations to locate and verify the proposed material source .
test select borrow in accordance with table num .
table num select borrow testing methods test item method sieve analysis aashto t num a preparing samples aashto t num liquid limit aashto t num plastic limit and plasticity index aashto t num slake durability astm d num a omit the hydrometer test num lime num section num lime num hydrated lime provide hydrated lime in accordance with aashto m num except ensure the available lime index expressed as caohnum is at least num percent in accordance with astm c num .
the department will not allow byproduct lime .
num quick lime provide quick lime in accordance with aashto m num except ensure the available lime index expressed as cao is at least num percent in accordance with astm c num .
the department will not allow byproduct lime .
num agricultural limestone provide high calcitic or dolomitic limestone for agricultural limestone that is free of toxic salts and other harmful matter .
test limestone in accordance with astm c num .
ensure the calcium carbonate equivalent is at least num percent .
ensure the gradation is in accordance with table num .
table num agricultural limestone gradation sieve size percent passing no .
num num mm num no .
num num mm num num no .
num num µm num num the department will not allow byproduct lime .
thin surface courses num num section num thin surface courses num materials a .
approval of materials prepare the mix design as required by the contract and at the contractor designated lab .
establish a job mix formula jmf which includes target gradations and specifies a percentage of residual asphalt for the mixture .
submit the mix design to the departments materials division with applicable worksheets and data for approval .
the department will allow the use of previous mix designs reviewed and approved in the current calendar year .
to substantiate the design produce and test trial mixtures before placement using the proposed project materials and equipment .
the resident engineer may waive trial mixtures if the design was previously proven to conform with these specifications .
if changing material sources establish a new mix design before using the new material .
the resident engineer may request a new mix design if unsatisfactory results or other conditions make it necessary .
the resident engineer will conditionally approve the following aggregate stockpiled at the plant asphalt at the source and the mixture after mixing pending the results of final acceptance tests .
b .
mineral aggregate provide mineral aggregate that is num percent crushed clean durable and composed of rhyolite granite sandstone or other approved aggregates in accordance with table num .
table num physical properties of aggregates property micro surfacing limit utbwc limit los angeles abrasion a wear num num microdeval loss num sand equivalent num num uncompacted void content num mechanically fractured faces ae num num aggregate durability index num insoluble residue num num flat and elongated pieces b num c num d natural sand and gravel num num clay balls and friable particles b num num soft particles num num num thin surface courses num table num physical properties of aggregates property micro surfacing limit utbwc limit sticks or roots num num a applies to each source .
b applies to combined aggregate .
c for micro surfacing a flat and elongated piece is longer than five times the thickness .
d for utbwc flat elongated pieces are longer than three times the thickness .
e in the mechanically fractured faces requirement format xxyy xx is the minimum percentage of coarse aggregate requiring one fractured face and yy is the minimum percentage requiring two fractured faces .
num c. emulsified asphalt for micro surfacing provide a polymer modified pmcssnumh cationic emulsified asphalt in accordance with table num requirements for polymer modified cationic emulsified asphalt .
provide asphalt used in utbwc for the polymer modified emulsion membrane in accordance with pmcrsnums in table num requirements for polymer modified cationic emulsified asphalt .
d. performance graded binder provide performance graded binder in accordance with section num plant mix bituminous bases and surfaces for pg num ok or pg num ok as shown on the plans .
e. mineral filler provide mineral filler for micro surfacing that is a recognized brand of portland cement free of lumps in accordance with aashto m num .
the resident engineer may visually inspect and approve mineral filler .
use acceptable mineral fillers such as rock dust hydrated lime fly ash and type num portland cement for utbwc if needed to meet the gradation requirements .
ensure the mineral fillers for utbwc have num percent passing the no .
num num µm sieve and at least num percent passing the no .
num num µm sieve .
f. water provide potable water free of harmful soluble salts .
the contractor may add water in accordance with the emulsion manufacturer recommendations .
g. other additives optionally use additives supplied and approved by the emulsion manufacturer in the emulsion mix to control the material in the field .
num composition of mixtures in order to allow traffic on the mat without causing damage formulate the micro surfacing mixture to ensure the placed mat will cure sufficiently within num hr of mixing under the job site conditions including time for transporting placement rolling and finishing .
the resident engineer will determine if additional curing is necessary at driveways intersections or other areas where sharp turns accelerations or decelerations thin surface courses num num occur .
refer to table num for the composition of micro surfacing and table num for the composition of utbwc .
table num micro surfacing aggregate gradations and composition requirements percent passing per type sieve size type i type ii type iii ⅜ in num mm num num num num num no .
num num mm num num num num num num no .
num num mm num num num num num num no .
num num mm num num num num num num no .
num num µm num num num num num num no .
num num µm num num num num num num no .
num num µm num num num num num num no .
num num µm num num num num num num composition requirements value residual asphalt by dry weight mass of aggregate num num mineral filler by dry weight mass of aggregate num num water as required to provide the specified properties .
additives as required to provide the specified properties .
table num utbwc aggregate gradations and composition requirements percent passing per type sieve size no .
num type a ⅜ in type b ½ in type c ¾ in num mm num ½ in num mm num num num ⅜ in num mm num num num num num no .
num num mm num num num num num num no .
num num mm num num num num num num no .
num num mm num num num num num num no .
num num µm num num num num num num no .
num num µm num num num num num num no .
num num µm num num num num num num no .
num num µm num num num num num num composition requirement asphalt content num num num num num num note mix at numf numc .
compact at numf numc .
determine the percent draindown in accordance with aashto t num .
test the drain down at the optimum ac content plus num percent at a temperature of numf numc .
allow a maximum of num percent .
determine stripping susceptibility in accordance with aashto t num .
ensure the tensile strength ratio is at least num .
the department will not allow reclaimed asphalt pavement rap in utbwc .
num tolerances provide microsurfacing material in accordance with subsection num composition of mixtures except the department will not allow the mixture residual asphalt content to vary by no more than num percent from the jobmix formula when measured by the tankstrap method .
num thin surface courses num num the department will allow the additional tolerances for utbwc specified in table num to modify the ranges specified in table num utbwc aggregate gradations and composition requirements .
these tolerances may extend outside the broad range in table num .
table num additional utbwc tolerances percent passing per type sieve size no .
num type a ⅛ in type b ½ in type c ¾ in num mm ½ in num mm num ⅜ in num mm num no .
num num mm num num num no .
num num mm num num num no .
num num mm num no .
num num µm no .
num num µm no .
num num µm no .
num num µm num num num composition requirement asphalt content num num num num sampling and testing sample and test in accordance with table num .
table num sampling and testing property test method sampling and testing aggregates sampling aashto t num material passing no .
num num µm sieve aashto t num sieve analysis aashto t num los angeles abrasion aashto t num sand equivalent aashto t num aggregate durability index aashto t num uncompacted void content of fine aggregate aashto t num method a aggregate degradation by microdeval aashto t num flat and elongated particles in coarse aggregate astm d num mud clay balls sand clusters sticks and roots retained on no .
num num mm sieve ohd lnum fractured faces ohd lnum insoluble residue ohd lnum soft particles ohd lnum testing asphalt materials solubility of bituminous materials aashto t num penetration of bituminous materials aashto t num ductility of bituminous materials aashto t num softening point of bitumen ringandball apparatus aashto t num standard test methods for emulsified asphalts aashto t num saybolt viscosity aashto t num plant mix bituminous bases and surfaces num num table num sampling and testing property test method distillation of cutback asphaltic bituminous products aashto t num viscosity of asphalts by vacuum capillary viscometer aashto t num specific gravity of semisolid bituminous materials aashto t num specific gravity by hydrometer astm d num elastic recovery test by means of ductilometer a astm d num elastic recovery test by means of ductilometer b ohd lnum a use astm d num for pg binders only .
b use ohd lnum for polymer modified emulsions only .
section num plant mix bituminous bases and surfaces num approval of materials the departments materials engineer must approve aggregate sources and blend percentages on a project basis before use .
stockpile the aggregate in accordance with subsection num .
the resident engineer may accept aggregates in stockpiles and plant mixed materials after blending and mixing at the plant .
obtain asphalt from an approved source in accordance with subsection num.b .
num mineral aggregate provide mineral aggregate composed of coarse aggregate fine aggregate and mineral filler in accordance with these specifications .
if crushing natural gravel for mixes the resident engineer may require a washing operation to separate fines from the gravel .
the department will not allow blending different materials in the same storage or feeder .
provide aggregates in accordance with table num .
num plant mix bituminous bases and surfaces num plant mix bituminous bases and surfaces table num physical properties of aggregates aggregates to be used in test superpave stone matrix asphalt permeable friction course rich bottom layer open graded friction course open graded bituminous base l.a. abrasion a wear num num num num num num microdeval a wear num num num numl sand equivalent b per traffic esals k num m num num num m num m num num num m num num mechanically fractured faces bci per traffic esals k depth from surface j in mm num num num num num m num num num num num num num num m num m num num num num num num num num m num m num num num num num num num num m num m num num num num num num num num m num num num num num num num aggregate durability index a num num num num num num insoluble residue de per traffic esals k num m num num num num num m num num num num flat and elongated pieces bcf num num num num num num natural sand and gravel b per traffic esals k num m num num num num num num num m num num num num num num clay balls and friable particles g num num num num num num soft particles a num num num num num num sticks or roots a num num num num num num uncompacted void content of fine aggregate bh per traffic esals k depth from surface j in mm num num num num num m num m num m num num num m num m num num num m num num plant mix bituminous bases and surfaces num num plant mix bituminous bases and surfaces table num physical properties of aggregates aggregates to be used in test superpave stone matrix asphalt permeable friction course rich bottom layer open graded friction course open graded bituminous base note for the purpose of this table million is abbreviated as m. a applies to each source .
b applies to the combined aggregate .
c applies to the aggregate retained on the no .
num num mm sieve .
d applies to the combined coarse aggregate .
e applies to the coarse aggregate in the surface course .
does not apply to shoulders driveways and temporary detours .
f a flat and elongated piece has a length greater than five times the thickness .
g applies to combined aggregate .
if the maximum for the combined aggregate is not exceeded the department will allow num for one source .
h applies to the aggregate passing the no.num num mm sieve .
i in the mechanically fractured faces requirement format xxyy xx is the minimum percentage of coarse aggregate requiring one fractured face and yy is the percentage requiring two fractured faces .
j if less than num of a layer is within num in num mm of the surface the layer may be considered to be below num in num mm for mixture design purposes .
k regardless of the actual design life of the roadway the design esals are based on num years .
l applies to projects with num million or more design esals .
ensure a crusher run or similarly graded aggregate is not the only source of crushed coarse aggregate in asphalt concrete .
a. coarse aggregate coarse aggregate is defined as that part of the aggregate retained on the no .
num num mm sieve .
provide coarse aggregate consisting of clean tough durable particles that are free of soft and disintegrated pieces shale clay organic or other deleterious material .
the department will not allow the use of natural gravel as a source of insoluble material unless it is crushed so that at least num percent of the material retained on the no .
num num mm sieve has at least two mechanically fractured faces .
b .
fine aggregate fine aggregate is defined as that part of the aggregate that passes the no .
num num mm sieve and consists of hard durable natural sand grains crushed stone stone dust crushed gravel mine chat jigsand or any combination of these .
produce crushed materials from a source that meets the requirements for coarse aggregate in table num .
c. mineral filler if required by the contract provide mineral filler in accordance with aashto m num .
num plant mix bituminous bases and surfaces num num asphalt materials provide asphalt cement in accordance with aashto m num and table num for the grade required by the contract .
table num additional requirements to aashto m num for asphalt cement test pg num ok pg num ok pg num ok elastic recovery at numf numc num num separation a num num original dsr gsinδ kpa num num num rtfo dsr gsinδ kpa num num num pav dsr change in testing temperature f c num num num num spot test b negative flash point f c num num num num num num solubility in trichloroethylene num num num note asphalt binder suppliers will provide handling requirements and recommended field mixing and compaction temperatures for their product to the hotmix producer .
a separation test samples are prepared in accordance with astm d num but are reported as the difference in g between the top and bottom samples .
b spot test using solvent blend of num percent heptane and num percent xylene by volume .
provide mediumcuring cutback asphalt in accordance with aashto m num for the asphalt type and grade required by the contract .
the spot test is required using a solvent blend of num percent heptane and num percent xylene by volume .
residue may also be obtained by evaporation .
provide emulsified asphalt in accordance with aashto m num for the asphalt type and grade required by the contract with the following exception the minimum saybolt furol viscosity for rsnum at num f num c is num .
residue may also be obtained by evaporation .
provide cationic emulsified asphalt in accordance with aashto m num for the asphalt type and grade required by the contract with the following exception the minimum saybolt furol viscosity for crsnum at num f num c is num .
perform the demulsibilty test within num days of shipment .
if the particle charge test is inconclusive the departments materials division will approve material with a maximum ph of num .
residue may also be obtained by evaporation .
provide polymer modified cationic emulsified asphalt in accordance with table num for the asphalt type and grade required by the contract .
plant mix bituminous bases and surfaces num num table num requirements for polymer modified cationic emulsified asphalt rapidsetting rapidsetting slowsetting test pmcrsnums pmcrsnums a pmcssnumh test on emulsions viscosity saybolt furol num f num c s num num viscosity saybolt furol num f num c s num num num num storage stability test num hr num num settlement test b num day num particle charge test positive positive sieve test num num num demulsibility num num distillation e oil distillate by volume of emulsion num num num residue num num num tests on residue from distillation test cd penetration num f num c num g num s num num num num num num ductility num f num c numcmmin cm num ductility num f num c num cmmin cm num softening point ring and ball f c num num num num elastic recovery num f num c num num tensile stress at num elongation num f num c num cmmin kpa num solubility in trichloroethylene f num num ash content num a provide a type b certification for each polymer modified asphalt lot in accordance with subsection num. b after the test cylinder stands undisturbed for num days ensure that there is no milky colored substance and there is a homogenous brown color throughout the cylinder .
c modify the distillation procedure as follows maintain a temperature from num f num c to num f num c on the lower thermometer for the last num min of the test .
maintain a test duration from num min to num min from the first application of heat .
d ensure the distillation residue of the modified emulsion contains at least num percent polymer solids by asphalt mass as determined by an analytical method approved by the department .
e residue may also be obtained by evaporation .
f an organic solvent may be used .
num plant mix bituminous bases and surfaces num num a .
handling handle load haul and transfer bituminous materials in accordance with ohd lnum .
the resident engineer will reject further shipments if materials fail to produce the results required by the contract .
the resident engineer will not accept further work until the department is satisfied that the material has been corrected so that it produces the results required by the contract .
b .
application temperature heat asphalt materials in accordance with table num unless otherwise required by the contract .
table num temperature ranges for use of asphalt materials type or grade mixture f c for mixing f c for spraying f c pgnum num num num num num num num num num num pgnum num num num num num num num num num num pgnum num num num num num num num num num num mcnum num num num num num num num num mcnum num num num num num num num num mcnum num num num num num num num num num num mcnum num num num num num num num num num num mcnum num num num num num num num num num num all emulsions num num num num num num num num num composition of mixtures a. asphalt mix design and initial jobmix formula prepare asphalt mix designs in general accordance with aashto r num except where modified by these specifications .
the asphalt mix design and initial jobmix formula jmf are the responsibility of the contractor .
submit the asphalt mix design and initial jmf to the departments materials engineer for review .
the departments materials engineer will determine if the mix design meets the design criteria .
provide one mix design for each asphalt concrete mixture required by the contract .
prepare the mix in a department approved laboratory .
the department will approve the laboratory based on the materials division policy for asphalt design laboratories .
ensure the initial jmf is in accordance with table num and table num or table num and table num for the type of mix required by the contract .
prepare a trial mixture in accordance with subsection num.c .
propose changes to the jmf if the trial prepared at the initial jmf proportions fails to meet the requirements of tables num num and num or tables num num and num .
if the changes do not produce a mix design in accordance with these tables the resident engineer will require a new mix design .
if the changes do produce a mix design in accordance plant mix bituminous bases and surfaces num num with these tables the departments materials engineer will approve the changes for adjustment of the jmf .
ensure the jmf establishes a percentage of aggregate passing each required sieve a percentage of asphalt contained in the mixture and a mixture temperature at the point of discharge from the plant .
the jmf with the allowable tolerances shown in table num establish the specification limits for each mixture .
these limits may be outside the range in table num or table num except for the following conditions the absolute maximum sieve size pfc and open graded friction surface course where the jmf with allowable tolerances must be within the broad range in accordance with table num .
when no tolerances are shown in table num the broad ranges given in table num are the specification limits .
b .
plant produced mixtures provide a uniform plant produced mixture of the combined aggregate and asphalt in accordance with tables num and num or tables num and num within the specification limits established by the jmf with allowable tolerances .
after the plant is in operation propose any necessary adjustments to the jmf in accordance with table num or table num .
if test results indicate the adjustments are in accordance with table num or table num adjust the jmf accordingly .
if a source of materials changes the resident engineer will require a new mix design before the use of the new materials .
if unsatisfactory results or other conditions make it necessary the resident engineer will require a new mix design .
the department defines the asphalt jmf as the target value .
attempt to incorporate that asphalt amount regardless of the allowable tolerances .
c. reclaimed asphalt pavement unless otherwise shown on the plans superpave mixtures containing reclaimed asphalt pavement rap will be accepted in accordance with table num if the mixture is not used in the surface layer and meets the contract requirements for the type or grade .
table num reclaimed asphalt pavements superpave with binder type maximum rap pg num ok num pg num ok num pg num ok num regardless of the layer or binder type the departments materials engineer will accept superpave mixtures with no greater than num percent rap for shoulders driveways layers serving as a bond breaker under pcc pavements and on roadways with less than num million esals if the mixture meets the contract requirements for the type or grade .
superpave mixtures containing up to num percent rap will be accepted in temporary detours if the mixture meets the contract requirements for the type or grade and if the mixture can be produced meeting air quality standards set forth by the oklahoma department of environmental quality .
temporary is defined num plant mix bituminous bases and surfaces num as any material that will not become part of any permanent pavement .
temporary material must be removed before the end of the project .
process rap by fractionating it into at least two stockpiles a coarse stockpile and a fine stockpile .
crush screen or size the coarse stockpile so that num percent passes through a num in num mm sieve .
crush screen or size the fine stockpile so that num percent passes through either a ⅝ in num mm ½ in num mm or ⅜ in num mm sieve .
if rap comes from an unknown source and documentation is unavailable the department will consider the insoluble residue content to be zero .
the department will reduce the amount of natural sand and gravel allowed in the combined aggregate by the amount of natural sand and gravel contained in the rap .
the department will not allow the use of rap in stone matrix asphalt sma permeable friction course pfc rich bottom layer rblopengraded friction surface course ogfsc or opengraded bituminous base ogbb mixes .
table num mixtures for superpave percent passing per superpave mixture type sieve size a snum snum snum snum snum num½ in num mm num num in num mm num num num ¾ in num mm num num num num num in num mm num num num num ⅜ in num mm num num num num no .
num num mm num num num num no .
num num mm num num num num num num num num num num no .
num num mm no .
num num mm no .
num num mm no .
num num mm no .
num num mm num num b num num b num num b num num b num num other mixture requirements nms c num in num mm ¾ in num mm ½ in num mm ⅜ in num mm no .
num num mm asphalt cement d of mix mass num num num num num performance grade asphalt cement e e e e e a table num reflects the sieve size boundaries for design and jmf purposes .
after the design is established the jmf will designate combined aggregate sieve requirements with tolerances in table num. b ensure the ratio of the percent passing the no .
num num µm sieve to the percent effective asphalt cement is from num to num. c nominal maximum size nms is defined as one size larger than the first sieve to retain more than num percent .
d the departments materials engineer may adjust the lower limit if the effective specific gravity of the combined aggregates is greater than num .
the departments materials engineer may allow adjustments if a theoretical lab molded specimen at the jmf asphalt content meets the vma requirement at num air voids .
e the contractor may substitute a higher grade of asphalt than that shown on the plans at no additional cost to the department .
plant mix bituminous bases and surfaces num num table num mixture for hot mix hot lay nonsuperpave percent passing per asphalt concrete mixture type sieve size a sma pfc b rbl ogfsc b c ogbb num ½ in num mm num num in num mm num num ¾ in num mm num num num ½ in num mm num num num num num num num num num ⅜ in num mm num num num num num num num num no .
num num mm num num num num num num num num num no .
num num mm num num num num num num num num no .
num num mm no .
num num mm no .
num num mm no .
num num mm no .
num num mm num num num num num num num num other mixture requirements nms d ½ in num mm ½ in num mm ½ in num mm ⅜ in num mm num in num mm cellulose fiber of mix mass num num num num asphalt cement e of mix mass num num num num numf numg performance grade asphalt cement pg num ok pg num ok h h h a table num reflects the sieve size boundaries for design and jmf purposes .
after the design is established the jmf will designate the combined aggregate sieve requirements with tolerances set in table num. b use an approved antistripping agent at the rate of num galnum gal num lnuml of asphalt cement .
c retain at least num percent of the aggregate between the ⅜ in num mm and the no .
num num mm .
d nominal maximum size nms is defined as one size larger than the first sieve to retain more than num percent .
e the departments materials engineer may allow the lower limit to be adjusted if the effective specific gravity of the combined aggregates is greater than num .
the departments materials engineer may allow adjustments if a theoretical lab molded specimen at the jmf asphalt content meets the vma requirement at num percent air voids .
f calculate the jmf for percent ac in the open graded friction course with the following equation ac num effective specific gravity gse num. g the departments material engineer may allow the amount of asphalt binder to be adjusted if the effective specific gravity of the combined aggregate is greater than num or less than num. h the contractor may substitute a higher grade of asphalt than that shown on the plans at no additional cost to the department .
num plant mix bituminous bases and surfaces num table num mix design properties of laboratory molded superpave specimens design esals a property num m num m num m num m num m num m num m num m compaction level b num num num num num number of sgc gyration nini num num num num num ndes num num num num num nmax num num num num num required density of gmm nini num num num num num num num num num num ndes num num num num num nmax num num num num num vma c superpave mix type snum num num num num num snum num num num num num snum num num num num num snum num num num num num snum num num num num num vfa d num e num num num num num f g num num f g num num f g apa rut depth mm num num num num num lab permeability cms num num num num num num tensile strength ratio num num num num num note for the purpose of this table million is abbreviated m. a regardless of the actual design life of the roadway the design esals are based on num years .
b mix designs for shoulders may be designed at one compaction level less than the num year flex esal level used for mainline construction .
design lifts below pcc pavements at the num year flex esal level or a lower compaction level .
mix designs for temporary construction such as crossovers and detours may be designed within two compaction levels of the designated num year flex esal level .
design snum mixtures at compaction level num unless the compaction levels of the designated num year flex esal level is less than num million in which case snum mixtures shall be designed at compaction level num. c vma is based on the bulk specific gravity of the aggregates .
d vfa is defined as the percentage of vma containing asphalt binder .
e for mix type snum the lower limit for num year flex esal levels num million is num. f for mix type snum the limits for num year flex esal levels num million are num to num g for mix type snum the limits for num year flex esal levels num million are num to num .
plant mix bituminous bases and surfaces num num table num field sample properties of laboratory molded superpave specimens design esals a property num m num m num m num m num m num m num m num m compaction level num num num num num number of sgc gyrations nini num num num num num ndes num num num num num nmax num num num num num required density of gmm nini num num num num num num num num num num ndes num num num num num num num num num num nmax vma b superpave mix type snum num num num num num snum num num num num num snum num num num num num snum num num num num num snum num num num num num vfa apa rut depth mm lab permeability cms num tensile strength ratio num num num num num note for the purpose of this table million is abbreviated m. a regardless of the actual design life of the roadway the design esals are based on num years .
b vma is based on the bulk specific gravity of the aggregates .
compute a new bulk specific gravity from each aashto t num test .
calculate the value by multiplying the aggregate effective specific gravity gse calculated from the latest aashto t num test by the aggregate bulk specific gravity gsb from the design .
afterwards divide the product by the aggregate gse from the design .
table num mix design properties of laboratory molded nonsuperpave specimens mix type property sma pfc rbl number of sgc gyrations num num num required density of gmm num num num vma a num num tsr minimum num num draindown num num permeability cms num num num num plant mix bituminous bases and surfaces num table num mix design properties of laboratory molded nonsuperpave specimens mix type property sma pfc rbl apa rut depth mm num num a vma is based on the bulk specific gravity of the aggregates .
table num field sample properties of laboratory molded nonsuperpave specimens mix type property sma pfc rbl number of sgc gyrations num num num required density of gmm num num num num num vma a num num tsr num num draindown permeability cms num apa rut depth mm a vma is based on the bulk specific gravity of the aggregates .
compute a new bulk specific gravity from each aashto t num test .
calculate the value by multiplying the aggregate effective specific gravity gse calculated from the latest aashto t num test by the aggregate bulk specific gravity gsb from the design .
afterwards divide the product by the aggregate gse from the design .
d. acceptance of combined cold feed aggregate gradation the resident engineer may use combined aggregate samples taken before asphalt coating for mixture gradation acceptance .
obtain the sample by an approved sampling device and perform a sieve analysis in accordance with subsection num aashto t num and aashto t num .
this method may be allowed if the asphalt mixture does not contain reclaimed bituminous materials and the aggregate does not appreciably degrade during the drying and mixing process .
the resident engineer may accept bituminous plant mix gradation results based on specified cold feed combined aggregate samples under the following conditions if the aggregate gradation test on extracted aggregates in accordance with aashto t num compares favorably with the results of cold feed aggregate gradation results .
if the independent assurance samples test results of extracted gradation analysis compares favorably with acceptance samples .
if test results do not compare favorably the resident engineer will base acceptance gradation tests performed in accordance with aashto t num on aggregate from extraction or ignition oven testing .
e. acceptance of bitumen content determine the bitumen content of plant produced mixtures in accordance with ohd lnum method of test .
determine the bitumen content of opengraded plant plant mix bituminous bases and surfaces num num produced mixtures pfc ogfsc ogbb using the tank strap method or a digital printout from the asphalt plant of the quantity used .
num tolerances apply the tolerances shown in table num to the jmf in accordance with subsection num .
table num jmf tolerances per mixture superpave stone matrix asphalt permeable friction course rich bottom layer open graded friction course open graded bituminous base sieve size percent passing no .
num num mm num num num num num no .
num num mm num num num num num no .
num num mm num num num no .
num num mm num num num no .
num num mm num num num no .
num num mm num num num no .
num num mm num num num num num other mixture tolerances asphalt cement of mix mass num num num num num num mix temperature as discharged from mixer f c num num num num num num num num num num num num num sampling and testing a .
testing methods sample and test in accordance with table num .
num plant mix bituminous bases and surfaces num table num sampling and testing of aggregates bituminous mixtures and asphalt materials materials testing method aggregates sampling aashto t num sieve analysis aashto t num material passing no .
num num μm sieve aashto t num specific gravity and absorption of fine aggregate aashto t num specific gravity and absorption of coarse aggregate aashto t num los angeles abrasion aashto t num sand equivalent aashto t num aggregate durability index aashto t num uncompacted void content of fine aggregate aashto t num method a aggregate degradation by microdeval apparatus aashto t num flat and elongated particles in coarse aggregate astm dnum mud clay balls sand clusters sticks and roots retained on no .
num num mm sieve ohd lnum fractured faces ohd lnum insoluble residue ohd lnum soft particles ohd lnum bituminous mixtures mechanical analysis of extracted aggregate aashto t num sampling bituminous mixtures aashto t num maximum specific gravity of bituminous paving mixtures aashto t num bulk specific gravity using paraffincoating specimens aashto t num resistance to moisture damage a g aashto t num draindown characteristics of uncompacted asphalt samples aashto t num preparing specimens by superpave gyratory compactorb aashto t num reducing samples of hma to testing size aashto t num superpave volumetric mix design aashto m num mixture conditioning of hotmix asphalt aashto r num superpave volumetric design for hmac aashto r num bulk impregnated specific gravity of aggregatesd ohd lnum specific gravity and unit weight of compressed bituminous mixtures ohd lnum bitumen content ohd lnum rutting susceptibility using the asphalt pavement analyzer ohd lnum water permeability of compacted paving mixtures ohd lnum specific gravity and unit weight using the corelok ohd lnum asphalt materials samping bituminous materials aashto t num solubility of bituminous materials aashto t num flash and fire points by cleveland open cup aashto t num penetration of bituminous materials aashto t num ductility of bituminous materials aashto t num softening point of bitumen ringandball apparatus aashto t num water in bituminous materials by distillation aashto t num standard test methods for emulsified asphalts aashto t num coating and retention testing for mixing grade emulsions aashto t num modified saybolt viscosity aashto t num distillation of cutback asphaltic bituminous products aashto t num flash points with tag opencup apparatus aashto t num plant mix bituminous bases and surfaces num num table num sampling and testing of aggregates bituminous mixtures and asphalt materials materials testing method spot test of asphaltic materials aashto t num inorganic matter or ash in bituminous material aashto t num ph of aqueous solutions with the glass electrode aashto t num kinematic viscosity of asphalts bitumens aashto t num viscosity of asphalts by vacuum capillary viscometer aashto t num specific gravity of semisolid bituminous materials aashto t num rolling thin film oven test aashto t num flexural creep stiffness using the bending beam rheometer aashto t num rheologial properties using a dynamic shear rheometer aashto t num viscosity determination using rotational viscometer aashto t num performancegraded asphalt binder aashto m num accelerated aging using a pressurized aging vessel aashto r num grading or verifying the performance guide aashto r num specific gravity by hydrometer astm d num separation type num polymer modified astm d num elastic recovery test by means of ductilometer e astm d num elastic recovery test by means of ductilometer f ohd lnum a run aashto t num on num in num mm diameter specimens compacted by the superpave gyratory compactor to an approximate height of num in num mm .
b mix design mixtures at num f num c and age at num f num c from num hr to num hr .
compact design mixtures at num f num c. no minimum aging period is required for field samples .
heat field samples uniformly to num f num c for no greater than num hr .
c compact labmolded specimens to ndes gyrations to determine the density at ndes percent of gmm .
backcalculate the density at nini percent of gmm from these specimens .
compact labmolded specimens to nmax gyrations to determine the density at nmax percent of gmm for mix designs and jmf changes only .
ensure reported values are the average of two specimens .
d use ohd lnum for ogfsc only .
e use astm d num for pg binders only .
f use ohd lnum for polymer modified emulsions only .
g use aashto r num for aging instead of the procedure outlined in aashto t num .
plant mix bituminous bases and surfaces b .
method and procedure for sampling bituminous materials sample bituminous materials in accordance with aashto t num .
sample bituminous materials at the project site or mixing plant in accordance with ohd lnum .
the department may modify the sampling methods testing and acceptance for the bituminous materials .
obtain copies of the procedure at the office of the departments materials engineer .
sample at the point of manufacture if the quantity shipped warrants testing .
alternatively take samples at the point of destination .
use bituminous materials only after the departments materials division conditionally approves them at the source .
num electrical conduit num section num electrical conduit num general ensure all conduits and fitting are liquidtight .
ensure outlet boxes fittings entrance caps and other accessories comply with current industry standards and are compatible with the conduit material used .
num metallic conduits a .
rigid provide a ulrated rigid galvanized steel conduit intermediate metallic conduit electrical metallic tubing or rigid aluminum conduit .
b .
flexible provide a liquidtight flexible steel conduit in accordance with ulnum .
num nonmetallic conduits a .
rigid provide rigid pvc schedule num conduit in accordance with ulnum .
for solvent cement to join conduit refer to astm d num .
b .
flexible provide a smoothwall coilable ulrated flexible plastic conduit in accordance with nema tcnum .
c. cableinduct provide ulrated factoryassembled cableinduct conduit .
ensure the duct is high density polyethylene .
identify the conductor by colorcoding the insulation with a continuous longitudinal stripe or provide colored insulation in addition to standard conductor markings .
delineators num num section num delineators num reflectors a .
general provide circular reflectors mounted on posts to form delineators with a mounting hole through the center .
ensure the reflector can accommodate a num in num mm nominal diameter blind rivet expanded to num in num mm without fracturing .
alternatively make the center mount reflectors with an aluminum housing .
b. definitions incidence angle .
the angle between the direction of light incident on the reflector and the direction of the reflectors axis .
divergence angle .
the angle between the observers line of sight and the direction of light incident on the reflector .
specific intensity .
the intensity in candelas that a reflector returns at the chosen divergence angle for each footcandle lux of illumination at the reflector .
lens .
reflective area of a reflector .
c. delineators for delineators on roadway shoulders and guard rail posts mount reflectors on galvanized steel posts .
for delineators on bridges mount reflectors on galvanized steel posts and brackets .
d. acrylic plastic reflector provide an acrylic plastic methyl methacrylate reflector in accordance with federal specifications lmnum type num class num .
provide reflectors with the following characteristics a colorless crystal amber or red transparent plastic face with a diameter of at least num in num mm a lens of at least num in² num mm² a heat sealable acrylic plastic or heat sealable metal foil back fused around the lens perimeter under heat and pressure and a central mounting hole sealed against water and water vapor .
provide embossed aluminum housing with a thickness from num in num in num mm num mm .
back center mount reflectors without aluminum housing with a vaportight hermeticallysealed plastic backing .
provide a lens with a smooth front surface free of projections or indentations except for the central mounting hole and identification with a rear surface bearing a prismatic configuration that will affect the total internal reflection of light .
mold the manufacturers name or trade mark into the lens face .
e. specific intensity use reflectors as delineators or markers in accordance with table num regardless of reflector orientation .
num delineators num num delineators table num minimum specific intensity for reflectors light angles specific intensity cdlx divergence incidence crystal amber red num num num num num num num num num num ⅓ num num num num ⅓ num num num num f. specific intensity test the department will determine the specific intensity in accordance with federal test method num .
the resident engineer will not accept reflectors that fail to meet the minimum specific intensity .
the resident engineer will not accept a lot or shipment if more than num percent of the reflectors fail or if the lot or shipment consists of num or fewer reflectors if more than one reflector fails .
g. seal test the department will use the following test to determine if a reflector is sealed against dust and water submerge the samples in water at room temperature subject the submerged samples to a vacuum of num psi num kpa for num min restore atmospheric pressure and leave the samples submerged for num min and examine the samples for water intake .
the intake of any water by the sample constitutes failure .
the resident engineer will not accept reflectors if tests show a failure rate of more than num percent .
num posts a. galvanized steel delineator posts cut drill punch fabricate and galvanize a finished channeltype or hattype delineator post as shown on the plans and in accordance with the following make the galvanized channeltype post from a num½ in ½ in ⅛ in num mm num mm num mm steel bar channel .
drill punch and cut to the length required by the contract .
ensure the post is compatible with the delineator type required by the contract .
optionally use an alternative galvanized steel hat section post rolled from sheet steel to the dimensions shown on the plans .
ensure the alternative steel post before galvanizing has a weight mass of num lb num kg per linear foot meter with a tolerance of num percent .
provide the correct size fasteners for the type of post .
cut drill and punch before galvanizing .
coat the posts with at least num ozft² num gm² of zinc coating in accordance with aashto m num .
b .
flexible delineator posts for a flexible delineator post use type iii retroreflective sheeting material .
delineators num num delineators the department will allow the sides of the post facing traffic to be flat or curved .
ensure the sides have at least num in num mm of wide flat surface to which the reflective sheeting can adhere .
provide posts at least num in num mm long .
ensure the lower end of the post facilitates installation and replacement .
attach reflective sheeting material to the post .
ensure sheeting is num in num in num mm num mm with num in num mm gaps beginning num in num mm below the top of the post and is white yellow or red as shown on the plans .
the department defines monodirectional delineator posts as posts with reflective sheeting material on one side and bidirectional delineator posts as posts with reflective sheeting material on both sides or with one to three reflective sheeting strips applied around the post .
num materials provide posts manufactured from any combination of thermosetting resins plasticizers coloring pigments and inert fillers .
provide type iii retroreflective sheeting material in accordance with aashto m num .
num performance ensure the posts are capable of remaining upright and in service at temperatures from numf to numf numc to numc and after ten vehicle impacts by midsized sedan traveling at num mph num kmh .
num additional testing a temperature resistance place a post inside a conditioning chamber for at least num hr at a temperature from numf to numf numc to numc .
secure a segment of post num in num mm long bend num and release .
perform the procedure three more times .
the resident engineer will not accept posts that crack are permanently deformed or do not straighten out within num sec after testing .
bweathering ensure posts do not change in color flexibility or integrity after exposure for num hr in an atlassunshine weatherometer fitted with a num cyclic gear .
num traffic stripe num section num traffic stripe num material for hotapplied thermoplastic compounds provide hotapplied thermoplastic compound in accordance with aashto m num .
provide binder component made of hydrocarbon based material .
num permanent pavement marking tape provide plastic striping tape free of cracks with straight and unbroken edges .
provide material in rolls with no greater than three splices per num ft num m. conform preformed words and symbols to the applicable shapes and sizes in accordance with the mutcd .
package plastic striping tape in standard commercial containers to prevent damage during shipment and storage .
ensure the plastic striping retains the properties required by the contract when stored at temperatures no greater than num f num c and for no longer than num year .
provide plastic striping tape in accordance with subsection num.a composition through subsection num.l effective performance life .
a .
composition uniformly distribute and firmly bond plastic materials pigments and glass beads on the top surface of retroreflective preformed pavement marking film .
provide precoat preformed plastic film with a pressuresensitive adhesive that is compatible with bituminous concrete and portland cement concrete road surfaces .
b. skid resistance ensure the retroreflective preformed film surface provides skid resistance value of at least num british pendulum number when tested in accordance with astm e num .
c. thickness provide a thickness from num in to num in num mm to num mm for preformed plastic film without adhesive for lane and edge lines .
d. tensile strength and elongation provide film with a tensile strength of at least num psi num kpa of cross section when tested in accordance with astm d num except test a num in num in num mm num mm sample from num f to num f num c to num c using a jaw speed from num in to num in num mm to num mm per minute .
provide the sample with an elongation of at least num percent at break when tested by this method .
e. conformability provide preformed film that conforms to pavement contours breaks and faults at normal pavement temperatures .
provide preformed plastic film that fuses with itself and previously applied marking film of the same composition .
f. removability provide plastic striping tape that can not be easily removed after application .
traffic stripe num num traffic stripe g. adhesive provide plastic striping tape for longitudinal and transverse markings with pressuresensitive backing without liner .
provide word and symbol tape with pressuresensitive backing and protective liner .
h. application properties ensure the material adheres to asphalt concrete and portland cement concrete pcc surfaces when applied according to manufacturers recommendations at surface temperature of at least num f num c. if applying the markings when the surface temperature is from num f to num f num c to num c apply in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations other special instructions or both .
i .
glass beads ensure the manufacturer incorporates glass beads for immediate and continuing retroreflection .
ensure the size quality and refractive index of the glass beads are such that the beads perform in accordance with subsection num.k reflectance .
provide bead adhesion so beads are not easily removed when scratching the material surface with a thumbnail .
j. pigmentation thoroughly blend color pigments to provide a pavement marking film that maintains uniform color under day and night lighting conditions throughout the expected life of the film .
provide white pavement marking film similar to federal standard color no .
num .
provide yellow pavement marking film similar to federal standard color no .
num .
k. reflectance provide white and yellow films with an initial reflectance value at observation angles of num and num and an num entrance angle measured in accordance with the federal test method num .
ensure the specific luminance is measured in millicandelas per square foot per footcandle mcdft²fc millicandelas per square meter per lux mcdm²lx .
perform the test on a num in num in num mm num mm sample from num ft num m away .
ensure the angular aperture of the photoreceptor and light projector is num min of arc .
ensure the reference center is the geometric center of the sample and is taken perpendicular to the test sample .
table num white and yellow film reflective properties property white yellow observation angle num num num num specific luminance mcdft²fc mcdm²lux num num num num num num num num l. effective performance life provide a film that leaves a neat durable marking that will not flow or distort due to temperature if the pavement surface remains stable .
ensure the department another state dot or the national transportation product evaluation program ntpep qualifies the tape using a performance test of at least num months .
provide a pliant polymer that supplies a cushioned resilient substrate that reduces bead crushing num traffic stripe num num and loss .
provide weather resistant film that does not fade lift tear roll back or shrink throughout the marking life .
num nonremovable temporary pavement marking tape a .
general provide traffic striping material with a white or yellow weather and traffic resistant reflective film on a conformable backing precoated with a pressuresensitive adhesive .
ensure the department or another state department of transportation qualifies the material through a performance test of at least num months .
provide white or yellow retroreflective striping tape as required by the contract .
ensure the tape reflects white or yellow respectively and is visible with automobile headlights at night .
provide striping tape with a precoated pressuresensitive adhesive that does not require activation procedures or a liner to protect from contamination preadhesion and blocking .
ensure the material adheres to asphalt concrete and pcc surfaces if applied in accordance with the manufacturer recommendations at surface temperatures of at least num f num c and does not require protective devices .
b. conformability provide thin flexible and formable striping material that conforms to the texture of the pavement surface after application .
ensure the average thickness of the material taken using five micrometer readings is from num mil to num mil num µm to num µm .
c. durability and wear resistance provide weather resistant striping material that will not fade lift or shrink .
d. packaging provide striping material packaged in standard commercial containers to prevent damage during shipment and storage .
e. storage provide striping material that will not deteriorate when stored for num year in temperatures no greater than num f num c. f. certification submit to the resident engineer a type d certification for the nonremovable temporary pavement marking tape in accordance with subsection num materials certifications .
num removable pavement marking tape a .
general provide removable pavement marking tape with a white or yellow allweather trafficresistant film on a reinforced conformable backing .
traffic stripe num num b. adhesive provide removable preformed pavement marking film precoated with a pressuresensitive adhesive that is immediately ready for traffic after application .
ensure the film adheres to asphalt concrete and pcc surfaces without heat solvents additional adhesives or activators .
provide adhesives that bond to pavement surfaces if applied at temperatures of at least num f num c without pickup or distortion by vehicular traffic .
c. color provide removable pavement marking tape in white or yellow that conforms to the standard highway color requirements of mutcd as required by the contract .
d. glass beads provide colorless glass beads with refraction index of at least num if tested using the liquid immersion method .
provide beads in the size and quantity that maintains retroreflectivity of the film as it wears through the surface course .
ensure the glass beads are uniformly distributed throughout the film for retroreflectivity .
e. removability provide preformed pavement marking film that can be removed intact or in large strips from asphalt concrete and pcc surfaces .
ensure removal of the film is possible manually or with a mechanical rollup device at temperatures above num f num c and without heat solvents grinding or sandblasting .
f. durability provide film that leaves a neat durable marking that will not flow or distort due to temperature .
ensure the department or another state department of transportation qualifies the material through a performance test of at least num months .
ensure the tape meets the removability requirements through the performance test in accordance with subsection num.e removability .
provide weather resistant film that will not fade lift or shrink .
g. certification submit to the resident engineer a type d certification for the removable pavement marking tape in accordance with subsection num materials certifications .
num glass beads for traffic paint a .
traffic paint provide glass beads for traffic stripe paint in accordance with aashto m num type i .
supply beads with a moistureresistant coating .
b .
glass beads for thermoplastic provide dropon glass beads in accordance with the following num appearance provide colorless clean and transparent glass traffic beads that are free of milkiness excessive air bubbles skins and foreign material .
num traffic stripe num num num moisture provide glass traffic beads with no greater than num percent moisture by weight mass .
num refractive index provide glass traffic beads with a refractive index of at least num when tested by the liquid immersion method at num f num c. num shape provide spherically shaped glass traffic beads free of sharp angular edges .
ensure the beads are free of scars and scratches .
num static charge provide glass traffic beads that do not create static electricity when flowing through a regular traffic bead dispenser .
num gradation provide oklahoma dot standard glass beads for thermoplastic with a gradation in accordance with aashto m num type i .
provide oklahoma dot large glass beads for thermoplastic with a gradation in accordance with table num .
table num large glass beads open u.s. standard sieves percent retained no .
num num no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num pan num num num roundness provide standard gradation glass beads that have at least num percent true spheres if tested in accordance with astm d num .
provide large gradation beads that have at least num percent true spheres .
the manufacturer will provide a type a certification for roundness with each shipment of large beads .
num coatings provide standard and large glass beads with an adhesion coating to promote adhesion in thermoplastic pavement marking material .
supply standard glass beads in accordance with aashto m num type i with a moistureresistant coating to prevent clumping .
num traffic stripe paint acrylic waterborne directly apply waterborne white and yellow traffic paint on asphalt concrete or pcc surfaces or existing traffic stripe composed of solvent based paint waterborne paint or thermoplastic compounds .
apply with spray equipment at application temperatures from num f to num f num c to num c. provide paint that receives and holds glass beads to produce reflectorized traffic markings .
traffic stripe num num a .
materials provide paint free of lead and chromium with a limited quantity of volatile organic compounds voc .
b .
general provide finished paint formulated and manufactured from firstgrade material listed in the standard formula .
the resident engineer must approve alternative materials before manufacture .
ensure the proposed materials equal the quality composition and the physical and chemical behavior of the materials on the standard formula after aging in the finished product .
c. pigment num titanium dioxide provide titanium dioxide in accordance with astm d num type ii rutile .
ensure the hiding power of the titanium dioxide is at least equal to the standard sample if tested in the standard formula .
num pigment yellow num provide yellow num pigment from hoechst celanese engelhard sun chemical or an equivalent approved by the resident engineer .
num calcium carbonate provide calcium carbonate in accordance with the astm d num type gc grade i with at least num percent calcium carbonate and type pc with at least num percent calcium carbonate .
d. vehicle num acrylic emulsion polymer provide rohm and haas enum acrylic emulsion polymer or an equivalent approved by the resident engineer .
ensure the nonvolatile portion of the vehicle is composed of a num percent acrylic polymer and is at least num percent by weight mass .
num methyl alcohol provide methyl alcohol in accordance with astm d num specific gravity num c from num to num .
num water provide potable water .
num miscellaneous materials provide the miscellaneous materials in accordance with table num .
table num miscellaneous materials material type tamol num dispersant colloids num triton cfnum surfactant colloids cta num foamaster num defoamer drew num num traffic stripe num table num miscellaneous materials material type defoamer colloids num natrasol num hbr hydroxy ethyl cellulose bermocoll enumfq coalescent texanol troy num dowicil num preservative nuosept num e. manufacture deliver ingredient materials in the original containers .
the manufacturer will provide the exact batch formula to manufacture the paint .
the department will not allow changes to the formula without resident engineer approval .
the resident engineer will not approve changes that adversely affect the quality or serviceability of the paint .
the department will use the standard formulas as specified in table num as the basis for the paint .
the department will not allow variations from the standard formula except for the replacement of volatiles lost in processing or variations reviewed by the departments materials engineer and approved by the resident engineer .
table num standard paint formulas material white lb kg yellow lb kg c.i .
pigment yellow num engelhard num num num titanium dioxide rutile type ii kerr mcgee crnum num num num num calcium carbonate type pc miss.mnum num num num num calcium carbonate type gc hubercarb qnum num num num num hydroxy ethyl cellulose natrasol numhbr a num num num num acrylic emulsion num solids enum num num num num texanol eastman num num num num defoamer colloids num num num num num dispersant tamol num num num num num surfactant triton cfnum num num num num methyl alcohol num num num num preservative troy num num num num num water num num num num total num num num num a the department will allow the amount of hydroxy ethyl cellulose to vary up to num lb num kg to adjust viscosity to desired range .
f. mixed paint if the resident engineer allows variations in materials ensure the mixed paint equals the test results on a standard prepared from the standard formula and tested by the manufacturer under parallel conditions for the listed requirements .
before filling strain the paint with a screen no coarser than no .
num mesh num µm or a sieve meeting the resident engineers approval .
traffic stripe num num provide finished paint with no greater than num lb num g of voc per gallon liter of total nonvolatile paint in accordance with astm d num .
provide paint in accordance with subsection num.fnum pigment composition through subsection num.fnum dry through time .
num pigment composition analyze the extracted pigment in accordance with table num .
table num pigment composition material white yellow organic yellow num a num titanium dioxide num num calcium carbonate num num a to be determined by xray florescence color spectrophotometry or any other method the department may choose .
this may be sent to an outside agency or organic pigment manufacturer .
it also may include audit of the manufacturers invoices batch tickets inventory or other means determined by the department .
num physical properties table num mixed paint physical properties property value total solids by weight mass num volume solids num pigment by weight mass num num vehicle by weight mass num num nonvolatile in vehicle by weight mass num weight mass per unit volume from theoretical num lbgal num gl viscosity at num f num c num ku num ku grind hegman gauge num laboratory dry time astm d num num min dry through time num min of standard formula num color provide white paint that dries to a flat white color is free of tint and has opacity and visibility in both day and artificial light .
provide yellow paint that matches color chip num of federal standard num and is within num percent of the pr num chart central color when read over the black portion of a numa leneta chart .
num flexibility provide paint that is flexible and will not crack or flake if tested in accordance with federal specification ttpnumb .
num water resistance provide water resistant paint in accordance with federal specification ttpnumb .
ensure the paint does not blister lose adhesion soften or deteriorate after the examination .
num traffic stripe num num freezethaw stability provide freezethaw stable paint that does not coagulate discolor or change in viscosity greater than num ku if tested in accordance with federal specification ttpnumb .
num heat stability provide heat stable paint that does not coagulate discolor or change in viscosity greater than num ku if tested in accordance with federal specification ttpnumb .
num dilution test provide paint that can be diluted with water without curdling or precipitation so that wet paint can be cleaned with water .
num storage stability provide paint that will not cake skin liver curdle or hard settle after num days in a closed container filled threequarter full .
ensure the paint can be remixed to a smooth homogeneous state .
ensure the viscosity does not differ from the original sample by greater than num ku .
ensure the pigment will not settle or cake .
provide paint that will not skin thicken spoil or change in consistency after nine months in storage from the packaging date .
provide paint that can be redispersed with a paddle to a smooth homogeneous condition .
numcontrast ratio provide paint with a blackwhite contrast ratio of at least num if applied at a wet film thickness of num mil num µm on a numa leneta chart or equivalent and air dried for num hr .
the department defines the contrast ratio as black over white .
numreflectance ensure the daylight directional reflectance is at least num percent for white paint and at least num percent for yellow paint of a num mil num µm wet film applied to a numa leneta chart or an equivalent .
after drying for num hr use a colorimeter and astm e num to measure the reflectance of the paint over the black portion of the chart .
numbleeding provide paint with a bleeding ratio of at least num if tested in accordance with federal specifications ttpnumb .
provide asphaltsaturated felt in accordance with astm d num type i .
numabrasion resistance provide at least num gal num l of sand to remove paint film if tested in accordance with federal specification ttpnumb .
numnotracking time field test dry the paint to a nontracking condition in no greater than num min if applied at num mil num mil num µm num µm wet film thickness plus num lbft³ num kgm³ of glass beads at the specified application temperature .
the department defines no tracking as the period when the line dries so a vehicle can run over the line at construction fabrics num num num mph num kmh without tracking the reflectorized line when viewed from num ft num m away .
numdry through time apply the paint to a nonabsorbent substrate at a wet film thickness from num mil num mil num µm num µm .
place the paint in a humidity chamber controlled num num percent relative humidity and from num f num f num c num c. determine the drythrough time in accordance with astm d num except that the pressure exerted is the minimum amount to maintain contact with the thumb and film .
section num construction fabrics num fabric reinforcement for asphalt concrete pavement a .
general this subsection covers fabrics for hot mix asphalt pavement reinforcement .
b .
requirements provide fabric in accordance with aashto m num meeting the paving fabric requirements .
c. packaging and storing obtain fabric rolls of standard width and length from the manufacturer .
ensure the manufacturer uniformly winds the fabric on cylinders or cores for mechanical laydown equipment .
ensure the rolls provide full pavement coverage with minimal joint splices .
protect the fabric from sunlight and moisture by wrapping the rolls .
if stored outdoors elevate the rolls and cover .
num geotextiles for erosion control a .
general this subsection covers pervious fabric under riprap for slope protection and gabions for separation .
b .
requirements provide fabric for erosion control in accordance with aashto m num permanent erosion control geotextile requirements .
num geotextiles for subsurface drainage purposes a .
general this subsection covers geotextiles for pipe underdrain and drainage systems .
num construction fabrics num num construction fabrics b .
requirements provide fabric for subsurface drainage in accordance with aashto m num subsurface drainage geotextile requirements .
in addition use aashto m num table num with from num to num percent of insitu soil passing the no .
num num µm sieve .
num geotextiles for subgrade reinforcement a .
general this subsection covers fabric for subgrade reinforcement under pavement structures .
b .
requirements provide fabric for subgrade reinforcement in accordance with aashto m num stabilization geotextile property requirements .
num geotextiles for bases a .
general this subsection covers a pervious fabric under base courses for separation .
b .
requirements provide a nonwoven fabric for base course separation in accordance with aashto m num separation geotextile property requirements with a class num degree of survivability .
num filter fabric for silt fence a .
general this subsection covers fabric for soil removal from water .
b .
requirements provide fabric for temporary silt fence in accordance with aashto m num temporary silt fence property requirements for unsupported silt fence with less than num percent elongation .
num geogrid subgrade reinforcement of pavement structures a .
general this subsection covers geogrid properties for subgrade reinforcement .
b .
requirements provide longchain synthetic polymers for geogrids .
form the polymers into a network so the ribs filaments or yarns retain dimensional stability relative to each other and selvages .
provide the type of geogrid for subgrade reinforcement as required in the contract in accordance with table num type num geogrid property requirements or table num type num geogrid property requirements .
a geogrid consists of a regular network of integrally connected tensile elements with apertures that allow construction fabrics num num interlocking with surrounding soil rock or earth forming a biaxial polymeric grid .
the department will not allow polyester geogrid .
table num type num geogrid property requirements property test method value a reinforcement properties num and num tensile modulus astm dnum b num lbft junction strength per junction gri ggnum num lb aperture size direct measure num in num in rib thickness direct measure num in percent open area coe cwnum num aperture stability coe method num kgcmdeg survivability index values ultimate tensile strength astm dnum b num lbft junction efficiency gri ggnum num flexural stiffness astm dnum num mgcm a values except ultraviolet stability aperture size and coefs are marvs .
b modified test method for geogrids .
table num type num geogrid property requirements property test method value a reinforcement properties num and num tensile modulus astm dnum b num lbft junction strength per junction gri ggnum num lb aperture size direct measure num in num in rib thickness direct measure num in percent open area coe cwnum num aperture stability coe method num kgcmdeg survivability index values ultimate tensile strength astm dnum b num lbft junction efficiency gri ggnum num flexural stiffness astm d num num mgcm a values except ultraviolet stability aperture size and coefs are marvs .
b test method for geogrids .
c. packing shipment and storage label ship and store geogrids in accordance with astm dnum .
label the product with the manufacturer or supplier name style name and roll number .
num fabric for turbidity curtain a .
general provide fabric for turbidity curtain that meets the following requirements sew or heatbond hemmed pockets for flotation devices and bottom weights .
place metal grommets through reinforced hems on panel ends .
tie connections between panels with synthetic or wire rope to prevent flow through the joint .
num construction fabrics num num construction fabrics b .
requirements provide fabric in accordance with table num .
if the provided fabric is polymer impregnated negate the permittivity and opening size requirements .
table num property requirements property astm test method value a grab tensile strength dnum num lb num kn trapezoidal tear strength dnum num lb num n puncture strength dnum num lb num n mullen burst strength b dnum num psi num kpa permittivity dnum num per second apparent opening size c dnum num psi num kpa a minimum average roll value .
b astm dnum .
the fluid displacement rate for the mullen burst test equipment must be from num mlmin to num mlmin .
subtract tare strength from the ultimate burst strength in accordance with astm .
c the department will allow filtration opening size fos canadian general standards board method num no .
num as an alternative test method to astm dnum for nonwoven geotextiles .
num waterproof membrane for asphalt overlay a .
general this subsection covers the polymer type geotextile fabric backed waterproof membrane properties for use when placing an asphalt concrete overlay on a concrete bridge deck .
b .
requirements provide a nonwoven polypropylene backing fabric with rubberized asphalt as the waterproofing agent and meeting the requirements of table num .
ensure the membrane can withstand the temperatures obtained during the application of super pave asphalt concrete which can briefly reach num ºf .
table num waterproof membrane for concrete bridge deck overlays property test method value thickness astm dnum num mil num mm tensile strength average of machine and cross machine directions astm dnum method a num lbin num knm of width puncture resistance astm enum num lb num n permeance perms astm enum method b num softening point of waterproofing compound astm dnum num ºf num ºc pliability at num ºf num ºc using a ¼ in num mm mandrel and numº bend astm dnum modified no cracks in fabric or rubberized asphalt erosion control stone num num section num erosion control stone num riprap stone determine the bulk specific gravity and absorption in accordance with astm d num .
ensure the bulk specific gravity is at least num and the maximum absorption is num percent .
ensure the loss of soundness after num cycles is no greater than num percent when tested in accordance with the u.s. army corps of engineers test method crdc num .
provide riprap pieces with a width and thickness at least onethird the length .
if placed on the embankment distribute smaller stones throughout the mass .
provide the stone sizes specified in table num table num and table num table num stone for plain riprap type i sizes lb kg riprap thickness in mm maximum average more than num of the riprap stone num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num table num stone for special plain riprap type ii percent of total volume volume of each stone ft³ m³ num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num table num stone for laid up type iii or grouted riprap type iv sizes lb kg riprap thickness in mm range num or more of the riprap stone num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num note the department will not allow slabs or slivers .
use well graded appropriately sized spalls .
num filter blanket material provide material for a filter blanket consisting of sand gravel or crushed stone that has been processed blended or naturally combined .
limit deleterious materials to no greater than num percent .
provide filter blanket material containing num percent or less flat or num erosion control stone num num erosion control stone elongated particles at a ratio of num if tested in accordance with astm d num .
provide filter blanket within the gradation limits specified in table num or table num table num single course filter blanket gradation sieve size percent passing num in num mm num num in num mm num num num in num mm num num ⅜ in num mm num num no .
num num mm num num table num two course filter blanket gradation percent passing sieve size lower course upper course num in num mm num num in num mm num num num in num mm num num num in num mm num num ⅜ in num mm num num num no .
num num mm num num num num no .
num num mm num num no .
num num mm num num no .
num num μm num num no .
num num μm num num no .
num num μm num num num gabions revetment mattresses and rock filter dams provide stone fill for gabions revetment mattresses and rock filter dams that is roughfractured cubical and has the following characteristics a soundness loss of no greater than num percent after num cycles when tested in accordance with the u.s. army corps of engineers test method crdc num .
a bulk specific gravity of at least num in accordance with astm d num .
dimensions in accordance with table num table num stone dimensions structure type dimension gabions a rock filter dam num in num in num mm num mm revetment mattresses b num in num in num mm num mm a if the gabion height exceeds num in num mm the department will allow num percent of the stone to have a maximum dimension of num in num mm .
b for num in num mm revetment mattresses the department will allow the stone to have a maximum dimension of num in num mm .
signs num num signs section num masonry brick num masonry brick made from clay or shale unless otherwise shown on the plans provide grade mw or sw masonry brick made from clay or shale in accordance with aashto m num except the requirements for maximum water absorption by fivehour boiling and maximum saturation coefficient do not apply .
use grade mm or grade ms bricks for manhole brick in accordance with aashto m num .
num concrete building brick provide normal weight concrete building brick in accordance with astm c num except the requirements for water absorption moisture content and linear shrinkage do not apply .
section num signs num panels a .
aluminum num sheet aluminum provide sheet aluminum signs in accordance with astm b num alloy numtnum or alloy numhnum with mill finish .
use the dimensions hole sizes and hole locations shown on the plans .
ensure panels are flat and straight within commercial tolerances .
treat sheet aluminum signs with a chromate type chemical conversion coating in accordance with astm b num class ii .
num extruded aluminum provide extruded aluminum panel signs in accordance with astm b num alloy numtnum with the dimensions hole sizes and hole locations shown on the plans .
keep panels flat and straight within commercial tolerances .
ensure extruded aluminum is free of corrosion white rust and dirt .
provide aluminum edge strip in accordance with astm b num alloy numtnum .
place aluminum sheet metal screws with slotted pan heads on centers no greater than num in num mm to secure the edge strips to the sign panels .
on signs less than num in num mm wide use at least three screws .
b .
sign faces make sign faces in accordance with the drawings in the latest revision of the mutcd and as shown on the plans .
num signs num signs num support arms and fittings a .
materials for sign supports for sheet signs use structural steel in accordance with aashto m num grade num or aluminum alloy in accordance with astm b num alloy numtnum .
b .
fabrication provide prefabricated sign supports bracket arms and fittings that are cut to the shapes and dimensions shown on the plans before degreasing etching and applying reflective sheeting .
ensure parts are free of buckles warp dents cockles burrs and defects .
num sheet and extruded aluminum sign fasteners for bolts for fastening sheet aluminum signs to sign bracket arms use aluminum fasteners and collars sized as shown on the plans .
for panel bolts hex nuts post clip bolts stop nuts and flat washers use aluminum astm b num alloy numtnum .
attach extruded aluminum signs to posts on each side with post clips post clip bolts and nuts and flat washers as shown on the plans .
use flat washers under nuts to prevent gouging .
num retroreflective sheeting a .
description use retroreflective sheeting to make reflectorized sign faces as shown on the plans .
provide type ii retroreflective sheeting unless otherwise required by the contract .
b .
requirements provide materials for retroreflective sheeting in accordance with astm d num and the supplementary specifications of snum .
provide sheeting with a class num adhesive backing .
perform outdoor weathering on an aashto national transportation product evaluation program test deck .
the resident engineer will inspect completed signs and will not accept sign faces with faults or blemishes that impair serviceability or mismatched colors visible from a distance of num ft num m under day or night light conditions .
num sign copy screen copy a .
direct screening process the department will allow the direct screening process for applying a nonreflectorized copy on reflectorized or nonreflectorized backgrounds .
this process normally applies to black copy .
b .
reverse screening process use the reverse screening process to provide reflectorized messages on colored backgrounds with transparent color stencil paste applied to a silver white sheeting background .
this process normally applies to white copy for example the stop sign .
signs num num signs c. material and application for the silk screen method apply a top quality exterior baking screen enamel or stencil paste designed for roadway signs and compatible with the type of background material .
apply and cure the screened copy in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations for the background material .
use durable colors in accordance with the fhwa standards colors charts for signs .
ensure the colors appear uniform in hue when viewed in daylight and under normal headlights at night .
d. final finish treat signs after completion in accordance with subsection num.c finishing signs .
e. tests ensure screening enamel stencil pastes and process inks do not discolor crack craze blister or lift when applied and exposed to accelerated weathering for num hr in accordance with federal test method num .
num retroreflective and nonretroreflective cutout letters numerals arrows symbols and borders design letters in accordance with the num fhwa standard alphabets as revised .
for retroreflective cutout letters use type iii or type iv retroreflective sheeting in accordance with subsection num retroreflective sheeting .
num overhead sign structures num section num overhead sign structures num aluminum a .
aluminum alloy extruded tube provide aluminum alloy extruded tube in accordance with astm b num alloy num tnum .
b .
aluminum alloy permanent mold castings provide aluminum alloy permanent mold castings in accordance with astm b num alloy sc numa f or t num .
c. aluminum alloy sand castings provide aluminum alloy sand castings in accordance with astm b num alloy sc numa f or tnum .
d. aluminum alloy plate provide aluminum alloy plate in accordance with astm b num alloy num tnum .
e. aluminum alloy bolts provide aluminum alloy bolts consisting of rod in accordance with astm b num alloy num tnum .
provide bolt heads in accordance with american standard regular hexagon asa bnum .
ensure the threads are in accordance with class num or class numa .
give the finished bolt an anodic coating in accordance with a no .
num aluminite finish .
as an alternative the department will allow the use of stainless steel bolts in accordance with astm f num .
f. nuts provide selflocking nuts in accordance with the air forcenavy aeronautical nuts selflocking annnumb or an equivalent approved by the resident engineer .
as an alternative the department will allow the use of stainless steel nuts in accordance with astm f num .
g. aluminum alloy washers provide aluminum alloy washers made from sheet in accordance with astm b num alloy num tnum .
as an alternative the department will allow stainless steel washers in accordance with astm f num .
h. aluminum and aluminum alloy welding rods and bare electrodes provide filler wire for welding in accordance with aws anum .
i .
aluminum extruded shapes provide aluminum extruded structural shapes in accordance with astm b num alloy num tnum .
overhead sign structures num num overhead sign structures j .
aluminum alloy pipe provide aluminum alloy pipe for handrail in accordance with astm b num schedule num alloy num tnum .
k. anchor bolts nuts and washers provide anchor bolts nuts and washers in accordance with astm a num for steel machine bolts nuts and tap bolts .
ensure the exposed portion plus num in num mm of steel anchor bolts nuts and washers are zincplated .
as an alternative the department will allow stainless steel bolts nuts and washers in accordance with astm f num and astm f num .
num steel a .
tube or pipe members provide round tube or pipe members in accordance with astm a num grade b .
galvanize both horizontal truss units and the vertical end support units in accordance with aashto m num after welding and punching or drilling holes .
b. bolts nuts and plain washers provide bolts nuts and plain washers of the size required by the contract in accordance aashto m num .
galvanize bolts nuts and plain washers in accordance with aashto m num .
num welding requirement a. welding requirements for aluminum provide welding aluminum alloys for sign structures bridge rails and lamp posts .
ensure welding terms are interpreted in accordance with the definitions in aws definitionswelding and cutting aws anum .
the welding symbols shown on the plans are shown in the standard welding symbols aws anum .
explain special conditions in added notes or details .
weld in accordance with ansiaws dnum .
num qualification of procedures welders and welding operators before beginning welding operations ensure joint welding procedures welders and welding operators are qualified by tests in accordance with ansiaws dnum aluminum structural welding code .
the resident engineer may accept evidence of previous qualification of the joint welding procedures welders and welding operators .
use the same process and equipment required by the contract for the work to qualify welders and welding operators .
num identification marks use lowstress stencils to make identification marks .
ensure the fabricators mark is adjacent to the item number on each structure .
ensure the welders identification is placed with lowstress steel dyes .
ensure the figures on the tags are at least ½ in num mm high .
place the area adjacent to primary member welds .
highlight the area to facilitate inspection .
num overhead sign structures num num num weld quality ensure welds are in accordance with ansiaws dnum .
to avoid rejection of an entire piece or member that contains unacceptable welding correct defective welds in accordance with ansiaws dnum .
repair defective welds if approved by the resident engineer at no additional cost to the department .
num inspection to determine compliance for weld quality the resident engineer will visually inspect welds .
the resident engineer will also inspect welds subjected to computed stress by the dye penetrant method except for the following for highway sign structures use the dye penetrant method on fillet welds that connect columns to bases and main chord members including the associated flanges gussets or main loadcarrying brackets or members as well as on fillet welds connecting flanges to the main truss chord members .
the resident engineer will perform dye penetrant tests in accordance with astm e num method b procedure bnum or procedure bnum .
the resident engineer may omit the dye penetrant inspection if the inspector uses a numx magnifier to examine each layer of weld metal before the next layer is deposited .
b. welding requirements for steel ensure welding material and methods including welder qualification are in accordance with ansiaws dnum .
num fabrication submit to the resident engineer a type a certification in accordance with subsection num material certifications that covers each component part of the structure before fabrication .
ensure the structure has no sharp edges irregularities misfits or structural deficiencies .
ensure each member fits and can be quickly erected .
before shipment the resident engineer will inspect the completed structure at the fabrication site .
num shipping and erection protect the structures to prevent damage or defacement during transportation or handling .
the resident engineer will visually inspect the structure when delivered to the project .
repair or replace defects as approved by the resident engineer at no additional cost to the department .
the department will not allow the use of metal tiedowns in direct contact with the structure .
the resident engineer will not accept damaged or defaced galvanized steel structures unless in the opinion of the resident engineer the injury or defacement is so slight that it can be quickly and efficiently regalvanized or metalized in accordance with aws cnum .
num electrical requirements provide electrical equipment materials and installation methods in accordance with nec and the electrical code in the appropriate jurisdiction .
galvanized steel sign posts num num if power is not present at the project site provide temporary power to the site to demonstrate proper installation of fixtures and equipment .
section num galvanized steel sign posts num pipe posts provide posts made of new galvanized steel pipe in accordance with astm a num or astm f num .
use standard weight schedule num pipe .
provide cap plates made of aashto m num grade num structural steel galvanized in accordance with aashto m num .
galvanize pipe posts after fabrication hole punching or drilling except for signs that are minor items or incidental construction drill or punch sign post holes and cut one end to length after galvanizing as approved by the resident engineer .
treat the exposed metal surfaces of these minor items or incidental construction by regalvanizing metalizing or painting with at least num percent zincrich paint .
num wide flange beam posts provide galvanized steel wide flanged beams in accordance with aashto m num grade num .
galvanize in accordance with aashto m num after cutting punching or drilling holes .
num square tube posts provide square tube posts made from new hotrolled carbon sheet steel structural quality astm a num .
provide a finish that is inline hotdip galvanized zinc coating in accordance with aashto m num followed by a chromate conversion coating and a clear organic exterior coating .
provide posts with num in num mm diameter holes or perforated holes spaced num in num mm on center along the center of each of the four sides .
num flange channel posts provide new galvanized flange channel posts of the size shown on the plans and in accordance with aashto m num grade num .
galvanize posts in accordance with aashto m num after cutting punching or drilling holes .
num reinforcing steel num section num reinforcing steel num bar steel reinforcement billet steel provide plain or deformed billet steel bars for concrete reinforcement and dowels in accordance with aashto m num grade num num except provide deformed billet steel bars for bent tie bars used in concrete paving in accordance with aashto m num grade num num .
num welded steel wire fabric provide cold drawn steel wire fabric for concrete reinforcement in accordance with aashto m num or aashto m num .
provide the wire size and spacing as shown on the plans .
provide reinforcing fabric in flat sheets or rolls .
straighten bent or distorted materials before use .
ensure the fabric is free of excessive rust scale or coating that may impair the concrete bond .
num steel wire strand for prestressing provide steel wire strands for prestressing in accordance with aashto m num grade num num for lowrelaxation and stressrelieved normalrelaxation .
provide lowrelaxation strand in accordance with the supplementary requirements in aashto m num .
num bars for posttensioning provide high strength alloy steel bars in accordance with aashto m num .
num posttensioning steel wire provide steel wire strands for posttensioning in accordance with aashto m num type ba or type wa .
if required by the contract provide lowrelaxation wire in accordance with the supplementary requirements in aashto m num .
num anchorages for posttensioned tendons provide anchorages for posttensioned tendons with the following characteristics capable of detensioning or retensioning prestressing steel at any time before grouting .
capable of distributing the load from the anchoring device to the concrete using devices approved by the resident engineer .
capable of developing the ultimate tendon strength required by the contract without exceeding anticipated set .
ensure bending stresses in the plates or assemblies induced by the pull of the prestressing steel do not exceed the material yield point .
ensure anchoring device parts are at least num in num mm inside the member final end surfaces .
structural steel num num num cold drawn steel wire provide cold drawn steel wire in accordance with aashto m num for spiral ties and other reinforcing shown on the plans as w wire sizes .
num epoxy coated reinforcing bars provide epoxy coated an electrostatically applied organic coating reinforcing bars and epoxy coating material in accordance with aashto m num except for the following provide reinforcing steel bars in accordance with subsection num bar steel reinforcement billet steel .
provide finished epoxy coating in a color and tone that easily gives visual indications of holidays damage or corrosion staining .
section num structural steel num structural steel provide steel grades as required by the contract .
if the structural steel grade is not specified by the contract provide high strength low alloy structural steel in accordance with aashto m num astm a num grade numw numw .
provide steel for main loadcarrying member components in accordance with the charpy vnotch cvn impact test requirements of aashto m num for zone num .
components subject to the cvn requirements include but are not limited to the following flanges and webs of welded plate girders rolled beams cover plates stiffeners longitudinal intermediate or bearing diaphragm and crossframe components in curved girder bridges connection plates for main loadcarrying components such as splice plates and filler plates over ¼ in num mm thick and steel welded to any of these components .
steel components not subject to cvn requirements include shoes diaphragm and crossframe components in straight girder bridges lateral bracing diagonals armor joints finger joints expansion devices handrails and guardrails .
num structural steel num num structural steel provide rolled steel plates shapes sheet piling and bars for structural steel in accordance with aashto m num .
provide permanent sheet piling in accordance with aashto m num grade numw numw .
provide temporary sheet piling in accordance with aashto m num grade num num .
provide mill test reports for each heat of material .
provide structural steel materials in accordance with table num .
table num structural steel requirements material requirement carbon steel aashto m num grade num num high strength low alloy structural steel aashto m num grade num num or grade numw numw high strength low alloy high performance structural steel plate aashto m num grade hps numw hps numw high yield strength quenched and tempered alloy steel plate aashto m num grade num num or grade numw numw quenched and tempered alloy steel structural shapes and seamless mechanical tubing a aashto m num grade num num or grade numw numw coldformed welded or seamless structural tubing astm a num grade b hotformed welded or seamless tubing astm a num plain steel sheet for reinforcement in elastomeric bearing pads astm a num grade num num type num or grade num num a the department will consider structural shapes with maximum tensile strength of num ksi num mpa and seamless mechanical tubing with maximum tensile strength of num ksi num mpa to be aashto m num astm a num grades num num or grade numw numw steel provided all other requirements of the specification are met .
num high strength fasteners a .
general material requirements provide high strength bolts for structural steel joints in accordance with aashto m num astm a num or aashto m num astm a num .
provide type num high strength bolts when used with weathering grades of steel .
ensure the supplier provides a lot number on the shipping package and a certification with the following information testing time and location the rotational capacity tests and zinc thickness if using galvanized bolts and nuts .
the department requires proof load tests for bolts in accordance with astm f num method num .
wedgetest full size bolts when performing proof load tests in accordance with aashto m num astm a num .
wedgetest galvanized bolts after galvanizing .
for nuts perform proof load tests in accordance with aashto m num astm a num .
perform proof load tests for nuts to be used with galvanized bolts after galvanizing overtapping and lubricating .
provide nuts for corresponding bolts in accordance with table num .
structural steel num num table num specifications for nuts bolt classifications nut classifications for aashto m num astm a num bolts aashto m num astm a num property class nums numsnum nums or numsnum for aashto m num astm a num bolts galvanized hotdip or mechanical aashto m num astm a num property class nums for aashto m num astm a num bolts type num weathering aashto m num astm a num property class numsnum or numsnum for aashto m num astm a num bolts aashto m num astm a num property class nums or numsnum for aashto m num astm a num bolts type num weathering aashto m num astm a num property class numsnum deliver and install black bolts that are oily to the touch .
clean and relubricate weathered or rusted bolts before installation .
provide hardened steel washers in accordance with aashto m num astm f num and subsection num.fnumdnum washers .
use type num washers with type num weathering bolts .
b. galvanized high strength fasteners do not galvanize aashto m num astm a num bolts .
provide hotdip galvanized fasteners in accordance with aashto m num astm a num class c or provide mechanically galvanized fasteners in accordance with aashto m num astm b num class num .
ensure bolts to be galvanized are in accordance with aashto m num astm a num type num or type num and direct tension indicators dtis are in accordance with subsection num.d direct tension indicators .
when the contract requires type num bolts and dtis to be galvanized mechanically galvanize in accordance with aashto m num astm b num class num .
tensiontest galvanized bolts after galvanizing .
galvanize washers nuts and bolts using the same process hotdip or mechanical .
overtap the nuts to the minimum amount required for fastener assembly .
lubricate galvanized nuts with a lubricant containing a visible dye .
c. alternative fasteners the resident engineer may approve alternative fasteners that differ in some dimensions from those required in subsection num.a general material requirements .
d. direct tension indicators the department will allow direct tension indicators dtis with bolts nuts and washers in accordance with subsection num.a general material requirements .
provide dtis in accordance with astm f num .
ensure dtis used with weathering steel are manufactured from steel in accordance with the chemical specifications of aashto m num for type num and astm f num .
num structural steel num num welding a .
general for shop and field welding arc weld in accordance with ansiaashtoaws dnum bridge welding code .
ensure the welding inspector is an aws certified welding inspector in accordance with aws qci standard for qualification and certification of welding inspectors .
the department will allow the fabrication of the following ancillary products without performing the welding procedure specification wps described in the bridge welding code and without an aws certified welding inspector bearing plates expansion joints hand rails sheet piling and other products not subject to calculated tensile stress from live load and not welded to main members in tension areas as determined by the resident engineer .
weld pile splices excluding sheet piling in accordance with subsection num.enum steel piles .
the department will not allow welding when the air temperature is less than numf numc or when surfaces are wet or exposed to rain or snow .
ensure welding is not performed when operators are exposed to high winds or inclement conditions that will hamper good workmanship except as approved by the resident engineer .
use heat to dry surfaces before welding .
provide wind breaks to protect welding operations .
use a lowstress stencil to place a permanent identification mark adjacent to welds immediately after welding .
b. qualification of welders num field welders field welder refers to the welder the welding machine and a class or group of manual shielded electrodes for welding structural grades of steel .
the departments materials division will qualify field welders in accordance with the current ansiaashtoaws dnum bridge welding code and the departments materials engineer instructions .
the departments materials laboratory will provide test plates .
ensure the welder applicant pays for cutting and machining test specimens from the test weld plates .
the department will issue qualification certificates to field welders based on satisfactory test results .
the department will void qualification certificates if the field welder does not accomplish satisfactory welding on a department project in a num month period .
submit qualification evidence of each field welder to the resident engineer before welding .
num shop welders and welding operators the departments shop inspection testing laboratory will qualify shop welders and welding operators at the shops expense in accordance with the section on qualification in the ansiaashtoaws dnum bridge welding code and the departments materials engineer instructions .
the shop will provide the base structural steel num num material test plates for the qualification tests at no additional cost to the department .
the department or its representative will issue qualification certificates to shop welders based on satisfactory examination results .
ensure the welder is prequalified within num months before starting work on the subject structure .
the resident engineer may accept the welder as qualified if the examination was provided by another state dot .
ensure the welder welding operator or tacker has performed satisfactory welding of the required type within num months before the subject work .
submit a certification for each welder welding operator or tacker stating the following name of the welder welding operator or tacker name and title of the person who conducted the examination kind of specimens weld positions test results and examination date .
c. procedure num general make beam and girder splices using a sequence of alternating weld passes from side to side to prevent heat buildup on one flange edge .
progress upward on passes in the vertical position .
num welding procedure for splices begin and terminate groove welds at the ends of a joint on extension bars .
ensure edge preparation and thickness of extension bars are the same as the welded member and extend at least ¾ in num mm beyond the joint .
after the welding cools remove extension bars with a cutting torch .
grind the flange edges smooth .
smoothfinish welded flange splices flush with the base metal on surfaces by grinding in the direction of applied stress along the longitudinal axis of the girder leaving surfaces free of depressions .
d. filler metal if the contract requires bare and unpainted structural steel ensure the deposited weld metal has an atmospheric corrosion resistance and coloring characteristics similar to the base metal .
comply with the steel manufacturers recommendations table num and ansiaashtoaws dnum bridge welding code paragraph num .
num structural steel num num table num filler metal specifications filler metal specification shielded metal arc welding smaw electrodes ansiaws anum or anum electrodes and fluxes for submerged arc welding saw ansiaws anum electrodes for gas metal arc welding gmaw ansiaws anum electrodes for fluxcored arc welding fcaw ansiaws anum ensure electrodes and electrodeflux combinations are compatible with the type and thickness of the welded steel .
use electrodes and electrodeflux combinations with the type current polarity and positions in accordance with ansiaashtoaws dnum .
num welded stud shear connectors a .
general provide install and inspect endwelded stud shear connectors that are welded to steel beams girders or plates to connect them to concrete in composite steelconcrete construction in accordance with the ansiaashtoaws dnum bridge welding code .
before ordering studs submit the following to the resident engineer the stud manufacturers name a description of the stud and arc shield a certification from the manufacturer that the stud base is qualified and a copy of the qualification test report as certified by the testing laboratory .
b .
materials ensure shear connector studs are in accordance with the requirements for cold finishedcarbon steel bars and shafting aashto m num astm a num cold drawn bars grade num grade num or grade num semikilled or fully killed deoxidation .
if using fluxretaining caps provide a low carbon grade steel for caps in accordance with the requirements for coldrolled carbon steel strip astm a numm .
perform tests of bar stock after drawing or of finished studs to ensure the tensile properties are in accordance with table num .
table num tensile properties of shear connectors property minimum tensile strength num ksi num mpa yield strength a num ksi num mpa elongation num in num in num mm reduction of area num a determine the yield strength by a num offset method .
c. test methods determine tensile properties in accordance with aashto t num astm a num .
test finished studs welded to test plates using a test fixture similar to figure num of ansiaashtoaws dnum bridge welding code .
if a fracture occurs outside of the middle half of the gauge length repeat the test .
structural steel num num structural steel d. finish provide finished studs of uniform quality and condition that are free of defects .
provide a stud finish produced by cold drawing cold rolling or machining .
e. certification provide certification from the manufacturer that the studs are in accordance with subsection num.b materials .
provide certified copies of inplant quality control test reports to the resident engineer .
f. installation testing when the first two studs welded on each beam or girder cool bend to num by striking the studs with a hammer .
if failure occurs in the weld of either stud correct the welding procedure .
continue to correct the procedure until satisfactory test results are obtained for two successive studs before continuing welding operations .
promptly notify the resident engineer of procedure changes .
in addition to the first bent studs bend one of every hundred studs to num when the temperature of the base metal is below numf numc .
num stainless steel for bridge bearing assemblies for bridge structure anchor plates provide stainless steel plate in accordance with astm a num uns designation snum type num .
for bridge structure anchor bolts provide continuously threaded austenitic stainless steel bars in accordance with astm a num class num grade bnumm uns designation s num type num with metric coarse thread series ansi bnumm for the bolt size required by the contract .
provide austenitic stainless steel nuts for anchor bolts in accordance with astm a num grade numm .
provide austenitic stainless steel hardened washers for anchor bolts in accordance with astm a num .
num galvanizing galvanize fasteners and hardware in accordance with aashto m num astm a num except for the modifications in subsection num high strength fasteners .
galvanize ferrous metal products other than fasteners and hardware in accordance with aashto m num astm a num .
num miscellaneous metals num section num miscellaneous metals num steel forgings provide steel forgings in accordance with aashto m num astm a num class c class d class f or class g. num steel castings provide castings that are true to pattern in form and dimensions and free of defects that affect strength and value for the service intended .
provide covers and gratings that fit into frames and seat uniformly and solidly .
sandblast or clean castings of scale and sand to present a smooth clean uniform surface .
provide steel castings in accordance with table num .
table num steel casting requirements material requirement mild steel castings aashto m num astm a num class num num or aashto m num astm a num grade num num chromium alloysteel castings aashto m num astm a numm grade canumm num iron castings provide iron castings in accordance with aashto m num .
boldly fillet castings at angles and make the arises sharp and perfect .
ensure components are wellmated nonrocking and nonrattling .
ensure covers and grates fit tightly into frames and seat uniformly and solidly .
identify castings in an area shown on the plans or in an area visible when the unit is installed .
recess the lettering num in num mm from the surrounding surface .
if a surface has a grid pattern recess the lettering into a nongridded area .
provide lettering content that includes the following manufacturer or distributor heat pour number or both and casting date .
provide iron castings in accordance with table num table num iron casting requirements material requirement class numb gray iron casting aashto m num ductile iron casting a astm a num grade num num malleable iron casting astm a num grade num a in addition to contract required test coupons test specimens from parts integral with the castings for castings with a mass greater than num lb num kg to determine if finished castings obtain the specified quality .
miscellaneous metals num num miscellaneous metals num accessories for castings and special fabricated units a .
accessories for castings provide galvanized zinccoated cadmium plated or stainless steel machine bolts for casting assemblies in accordance with aashto m num .
provide support beams for casting assemblies in accordance with aashto m num grade num .
b .
special fabricated drainage grates provide welded steel drainage grates with the load bearing members of the grates made with steel in accordance with aashto m num grade num .
provide stiffeners as recommended by the manufacturer .
weld in accordance with section num structural steel .
provide pipe for fabricated pipe grates in accordance with astm a num in standard mass unthreaded mill finish .
the department will waive hydrostatic pressure testing .
clean the grate units after welding .
for galvanized units punch or drill a pressure vent at the location shown on the plans to prevent welded pipes from bursting during the galvanization process .
provide angle iron and strap iron for end members or spacers in accordance with aashto m num grade num millfinish .
the department will allow butt welded pipe for use as grate members .
provide welded steel drainage grate units galvanized after fabrication or painted with an inorganic zinc ethyl silicate base primer and vinyl finish coat .
galvanize in accordance with aashto m num .
clean grate units and apply paint in accordance with section num painting .
use shopapplied paint for both coats .
num bronze castings provide bronze castings in accordance with aashto m num copper alloy uns no .
cnum .
provide bronze bearings and expansion plates in accordance with aashto m num copper alloy uns no .
cnum .
num drainage conduits num section num drainage conduits num rigid conduits a .
rigid conduit materials this subsection covers the following materials nonreinforced concrete pipe drain tile porous and perforated pipe circular reinforced concrete pipe arched reinforced concrete pipe elliptical reinforced concrete pipe precast reinforced concrete manhole sections precast reinforced concrete curb inlet boxes precast reinforced concrete junction boxes precast reinforced concrete box sections and cast ductile iron pipe .
provide the material required by the contract in accordance with table num .
table num rigid conduit material specifications material requirement concrete culvert storm drain and sewer pipe aashto m num drain tile porous and perforated pipe aashto m nummm num reinforced concrete culvert storm drain and sewer pipe a circular aashto m num arch aashto m num elliptical aashto m num dload aa.shto m numm num precast reinforced concrete manhole sections aashto m nummm num curb inlet boxes odot approved shop drawings junction boxes odot approved shop drawings boxes for culverts storm drains and sewers with num ft num mm or more of cover subject to highway loading aashto m num boxes for culverts storm drains and sewers with less than num ft num mm of cover subject to highway loadings aashto m num ductile iron culvert pipe aashto m num a for reinforced concrete culvert storm drain and sewer pipe the department will allow a special design class ivv pipe in accordance with aashto m numm in addition to the pipe classes specified .
design criteria for class ivv is a midline interpolation between the design criteria for class iv table num and class v table num of aashto m num .
drainage conduits b .
joint filler num cold applied mastic joint filler apply cold applied mastic joint filler in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations to ensure it is resilient adhesive and maintains a seal through drainage conduits num num repeated cycles of expansion and contraction .
the department will not allow the use of cold applied mastic joint filler for pipes larger than num in num mm in diameter or precast concrete boxes .
provide material in accordance with table num table num cold applied mastic type joint filler property test value test method soluble in trichloroethylene num aashto t num ash num num aashto t num penetration num g for num sec at numf numc num num aashto t num a a ensure penetration is in accordance with aashto t num except use a penetration cone in place of a standard penetration needle .
provide a cone in accordance with astm d num .
num flexible watertight gaskets provide flexible watertight gaskets that fit to create a seal in accordance with aashto m num .
use butyl rubber sealant for pipes greater than num in num mm in diameter .
num flexible cellular seals provide flexible cellular seals in accordance with astm d num type numcnum .
place the joint material in one continuous piece in accordance with the manufacturer recommendations .
num flexible conduits this subsection covers the following materials steel conduits type i circular or type ii arch coated and clad steel conduits structural plates aluminum conduits clad aluminum conduits and nonmetallic conduits .
provide the material required by the contract in accordance with table num .
table num flexible conduit material specifications material requirement steel conduitsculverts metallic coated corrugated steel culverts aashto m num zinc coated galvanized sheet steel aashto m num aluminum coated type ii hotdipped sheet steel aashto m num aluminumzinc alloy coated sheet steel aashto m num externally coated or clad culverts bituminous coated corrugated metal culvert pipe and pipe arches a aashto m num precoated corrugated steel culverts aashto m num polymer coated sheet aashto m num aluminum conduitsculverts corrugated aluminum alloy culverts b aashto m num clad aluminum alloy sheets for culverts aashto m num num drainage conduits num table num flexible conduit material specifications material requirement nonmetallic conduitsculverts non corrugated polyvinyl chloride pvc pipe aashto m num corrugated polyethylene pipe aashto m num nonmetallic conduitsunderdrain pvc pipe non corrugated pvc pipe aashto m num corrugated pvc pipe astm f num polyethylene drainage tubing corrugated aashto m num type c or type cp smooth interior corrugated c aashto m num type s or type sp or aashto m num type s structural plate for pipe pipe arches and arches d corrugated galvanized or coated steel aashto m num aluminum alloy aashto m num a use type a bituminous coating unless the contract requires type b type c or type d. b if required by the contract provide a type a bituminous coating in accordance with aashto m num. c ensure polyethylene pipe is manufactured from high density polyethylene virgin compounds in accordance with astm d num cell class num c. provide type sp conduit with class num perforations .
d fabricate in accordance with the applicable section of the aashto standard specifications for highway bridges .
num drainage conduits num steel end sections provide materials for steel end sections in accordance with aashto m num .
manufacture steel end sections as integral units for ready assembly and inplace erection .
use galvanized bolts for end section assembly if skirts are made of more than one piece and sections are not riveted together .
the resident engineer will reject materials for the following reasons nonconformance to the shapes or dimensions shown on the plans uneven laps ragged sheared edges loose unevenly lined or spaced rivets poorly formed rivet heads illegible brands lack of rigidity or dents or bends in the metal .
paint for structural steel num num section num paint for structural steel num general requirements a .
general provide a paint system from the departments materials division approved products list apl .
b .
paint system acceptance for each paint system the paint manufacturer must submit a type a certification in accordance with subsection num materials certification showing test results from an approved testing laboratory .
ensure the certification includes the following the manufacturers name system performance test results dates paint test results and dates paint brand name lot number and manufacture date .
the materials engineer will require a new certification if the following conditions occur the manufacturing process or paint formulation changes testing indicates nonconformance to the specifications or the certification is older than num years .
c. general system performance requirements evaluate paint systems in accordance with aashto rnum .
provide paint in strong tightly sealed containers .
label containers with the following manufacturers name paint type volatile organic compounds voc content manufacture date lot number mixing instructions and equipment cleanup instructions .
provide copies of the material safety data sheets msds and product data sheets pds for all components of each paint system to the engineer and post on the project site before painting .
do not use paint coatings and compounds with more than num percent lead by weight mass of the total nonvolatile paint content .
the department will not allow the use of paints containing leachable hazardous elements exceeding the limits specified in table num leachable hazardous num paint for structural steel num num paint for structural steel material limits when tested in accordance with the toxicity characteristic leaching procedure tclp num cfr num identification and listing of hazardous waste .
include the tclp test with the type a certification .
table num leachable hazardous material limits hazardous material limit ppm arsenic num barium num cadmium num chromium num lead num mercury num selenium num silver num ensure the maximum voc content of paint thinned for application is num lbgal num gl when tested in accordance with astm dnum .
voc regulations of the epa or odeq may be stricter than department regulations .
comply with the most restrictive voc regulations .
num requirements for paint systems a. inorganic zincepoxyurethane system provide an inorganic zincepoxyurethane izeu system that meets the requirements of table num .
table num inorganic zincepoxyurethane coating properties property test value test method slip coefficient class b not less than num salt fog resistance delamination none rust criteria num hours num mm maximum creep and num mm average creep blister criteria num hours blister conversion value of num cyclic weathering resistance delamination none rust criteria num hours num mm maximum creep and num mm average creep blister criteria num hours blister conversion value of num gloss value report value only gloss retention report value only color change δe report value only abrasion resistance weight loss and wear index report only adhesion num psi num mpa freeze thaw stability num psi num mpa b. organic zincepoxyurethane system provide an organic zincepoxyurethane ozeu system that meets the requirements of table num .
paint for structural steel num num table num organic zincepoxyurethane coating properties property test value slip coefficient class b not less than num salt fog resistance delamination none rust criteria num hours num mm maximum creep and num mm average creep blister criteria num hours blister conversion value of num cyclic weathering resistance delamination none rust criteria num hours num mm maximum creep and num mm average creep blister criteria num hours blister conversion value of num gloss value report value only gloss retention report value only color change δe report value only abrasion resistance weight loss and wear index report only adhesion num psi num mpa freeze thaw stability num psi num mpa c. singlecomponent moisturecured urethane system provide a singlecomponent moisturecured urethane scmcu system that meets the requirements of table num .
use a zincrich or zinc and micaceous iron oxide mio primer for the first coat .
formulate the primer with either synthetic or natural mio .
provide a singlecomponent or twocomponent primer .
formulate the intermediate coat and topcoat with natural mio .
provide an mio intermediate coat that is a singlecomponent moisturecured urethane paint .
provide a top coat that is an miobased singlecomponent moisturecuredaliphatic urethane paint .
num paint for structural steel num paint for structural steel table num singlecomponentmoisturecuredurethane coating properties property test value slip coefficient class b not less than num salt fog resistance delamination none rust criteria num hours num mm maximum creep and num mm average creep blister criteria num hours blister conversion value of num cyclic weathering resistance delamination none rust criteria num hours num mm maximum creep and num mm average creep blister criteria num hours blister conversion value of num gloss value report value only gloss retention report value only color change δe report value only abrasion resistance weight loss and wear index report only adhesion num psi num mpa freeze thaw stability num psi num mpa d. repair paint systems provide coating systems for category r and category o applications defined in subsection num.a b or c in accordance with table num .
a repair system may be applied with either two or three coats .
table num repair coating properties property test value slip coefficient report value only salt fog resistance delamination none rust criteria num hours num mm maximum creep and num mm average creep blister criteria num hours blister conversion value of num cyclic weathering resistance delamination none rust criteria num hours num mm maximum creep and num mm average creep blister criteria num hours blister conversion value of num gloss value report value only gloss retention report value only color change δe report value only abrasion resistance weight loss and wear index report only adhesion num psi num mpa freeze thaw stability num psi num mpa timber preservatives and treatment num num section num timber preservatives and treatment num materials provide timber preservative in accordance with aashto m num .
num preparation for treatment a .
general requirements the departments shop inspection testing laboratory will inspect all lumber and timber products at the treatment facility .
ensure the treatment facility is equipped with the necessary gauges appliances and facilities and make available to the departments representative .
b .
inspection notify the departments shop inspection testing laboratory immediately before treatment of lumber timber piling and posts .
the departments representative will inspect the following lumber timber piling and posts for the grades and sizes required by the contract and materials and processes used in the treatment in accordance with awpa mnum .
num storing and handling after treatment store the lumber or timber on dunnage to prevent contact with the ground or paved surfaces and allow to thoroughly dry .
num materials for guard rail guide posts bridge rail misc railing fences num section num materials for guard rail guide posts bridge rail misc railing fences materials for guard rail guide posts bridge rail miscellaneous railing and fences num metal guard rail provide guard rail items in accordance with the testing and performance requirements of nchrp num and the following a. beams provide corrugated steel beams in accordance with aashto m num type i or type ii .
b .
guard rail posts num steel posts provide hot rolled forged steel shapes in accordance with aashto m num grade num .
provide shapes that are galvanized in accordance with aashto m num .
complete punching drilling cutting shearing and grinding before galvanization .
repair surface defects by grinding cutting or welding .
ensure surfaces are coated with two coats of zincdust zincoxide primer in accordance with section num paint for structural steel .
perform alternative repairs in accordance with astm a num .
alternatively the department will accept steel posts fabricated in accordance with astm a num .
ensure fabricated posts do not vary more than num percent from the mass dimensions and section properties for hot rolled shapes .
ensure dimensions mass and section properties are in accordance with the american institute of steel construction aisc steel construction manual or the suppliers technical publications endorsed by the aisc .
provide fabricated posts with sharp sheared edges that are dulled in the upper num in num mm of the post using grinding secondary rolling or sand or shotblasting .
complete dulling operations in accordance with aashto m num before galvanization .
provide steel base plates and miscellaneous fabricated guard rail hardware in accordance with aashto m num grade num and galvanized in accordance with aashto m num .
galvanize after cutting welding punching and drilling .
num wood posts provide wood posts of the length and size shown on the plans .
provide sawed and round posts cut from live trees with close grain .
a sawed and treated posts provide sawed and treated posts in accordance with aashto m num and section num timber preservative and treatment .
materials for guard rail guide posts bridge rail misc railing fences num num materials for guard rail guide posts bridge rail misc railing fences bpost weakening weaken the leading posts in the approach anchor unit by drilling holes at the ground line as shown on the plans .
uniformly treat groundline and enlarged holes by pulling or pushing a rag saturated with preservative solution through the holes to reach the same treatment level as the rest of the post .
c. spacer blocks provide spacer blocks made of plastic .
d. guard rail hardware provide fittings bolts washers and other accessories in accordance with the guard rail manufacturers recommendations .
galvanize them in accordance with aashto m num or aashto m num whichever applies .
num guide posts provide round wood posts for guide posts and underdrain marker posts in accordance with subsection num.bnum wood posts .
provide unslabbed and undrilled posts .
num metal bridge railing materials a .
structural steel shapes for posts and rails provide structural steel shapes for posts and rail in accordance with section num structural steel .
b .
metal beams provide metal beams in accordance with subsection num metal guard rail .
c. aluminum alloy tubes provide aluminum alloy tubes for bridge railing in accordance with astm b num alloy num or num tnum .
if shown on the plans weld in accordance with subsection num.a welding requirements for aluminum .
num pipe railing provide galvanized or black steel pipe and fittings in accordance with astm a num for standard weight pipe except for the requirement for hydrostatic testing .
provide galvanized steel pipes and fittings in accordance with aashto m num or aashto m num .
num wire cable and fittings provide wire cables and fittings in accordance with aashto m num .
num fence style wwf or fence style swf a .
description provide fabric strand wire wire items framework for fence and gates and fastening and bracing hardware for constructing woven wire or strand wire fence as required by the contract .
num materials for guard rail guide posts bridge rail misc railing fences num b .
materials num wire items a woven wire provide woven wire in accordance with aashto m num design number num½ grade num with a type z class num zinc coating or a type a aluminum coating .
bbarbed wire provide barbed wire in accordance with aashto m num design number numr or numh with a type z class num zinc coating or a type a aluminum coating .
c smooth or tension wire provide smooth wire in accordance with the astm a num and table num table num smooth or tension wire properties wire gauge wire diameter in mm temper tensile strength ksi mpa zinc coating num num num soft num num class num num num num medium or hard num num class num dbarbless wire provide wire in accordance with subsection num.bnumb barbed wire without the barbs .
e post ties wire ties provide post ties in accordance with aashto m num .
num posts gates and hardware a fan corner end stretcher and gate posts provide straight wood or steel posts for fans corners ends and gate posts .
num wood posts treat wood posts in accordance with section num timber preservatives and treatment .
ensure the wood post quality standard grades are in accordance with astm f num .
num steel posts provide steel posts in accordance with astm f num standard weight schedule num steel pipe .
ensure the posts are pipe with at least num in num mm outside diameter and a wall thickness of num in num mm .
the resident engineer will accept pipe in accordance with the substitute pipe equation in subsection num.cnum framework items .
if welding steel posts apply at least a num percent zinc rich paint to the weld .
materials for guard rail guide posts bridge rail misc railing fences num num bline posts provide line posts of either preservative treated wood or steel .
use the same post material throughout the project unless the resident engineer approves a mixture of materials in writing .
provide wood line posts in accordance with astm f num treated with preservative in accordance with section num timber preservatives and treatment .
provide galvanized or painted steel posts in accordance with aashto m num .
if steel posts do not have deformable clip protrusions on the post provide the same number of wire ties as the number of strands joined to the posts .
c gates provide gates with a pipe or tubular framework covered with the same type strand or woven wire as the fence .
provide the pipe or tubing in accordance with astm f num schedule num steel pipe .
provide pipe with at least num in num mm outside diameter and a wall thickness of num in num mm .
cover and brace the frame as shown on the plans .
the resident engineer will accept pipe in accordance with subsection num.cnum framework items for steel posts .
alternatively the resident engineer will accept commercially available ranchtype metal panel gates .
provide ranchtype gates made of aluminum coated steel aluminum alloy or galvanized steel mill finished or painted .
dhardware provide hardware hinges fittings and gate latches in accordance with the gate manufacturer recommendations .
ensure hardware hinges fittings and gate latches are galvanized in accordance with aashto m num or have a protective coating compatible with the gate coating or alloy .
provide galvanized eye bolts for fastening fence to existing headwalls or wingwalls on culverts .
provide staples for fastening wire to wood made of num gauge num in num mm galvanized wire .
ensure staples are at least num½ in num mm long .
provide galvanized nails made of round or oval steel wire .
ensure nails are num pwt nails or num pwt spikes .
num fence style clf a .
description provide chain link fabric other wire items framework for fences and gates and fastening and bracing hardware to construct chain link fence .
ensure the height of the fence fabric the width and height of the gate openings the size shape and length of posts and the size and shape of framework members are as shown on the plans .
b. classifications the department defines class a as fence or gate without climb barrier and class b as fence or gate with climb barrier .
provide the following types as class a or class b num materials for guard rail guide posts bridge rail misc railing fences num type i galvanized steel wire fabric on a steel or aluminum mounting system type ii aluminumcoated steel wire fabric on a steel or aluminum mounting system type iii aluminum alloy fabric on a steel or aluminum mounting system and type iv vinylcoated or pvc plastic coated galvanized steel wire fabric on a zinccoated steel or aluminum mounting system of the same color or a harmonizing color .
c. materials num wire items a fabric provide num gauge num in num mm wire woven into fabric in num in num mm mesh in accordance with aashto m num. btension wire provide tension wire in accordance with aashto m num with a coating that matches the fence required by the contract .
c barbed wire provide barbed wire in accordance with subsection num.bnumb barbed wire .
dpost ties provide post ties and clips in accordance with astm f num .
num framework items provide posts rail and gate frames in the sizes and shapes shown on the plans .
provide steel pipe for posts in accordance with aashto m num grade num or grade num .
provide pvc coated steel pipe for type iv fence in accordance with aashto m num grade num or grade num with pvc coating in stead of organic exterior coating on grade num pipe .
alternatively use thin walled pipe with the outside diameter and coating for grade num pipe in accordance with aashto m num .
test the pipe or tubing to determine the tensile and yield strengths .
if using substitute pipe ensure the product of the substitute section modulus and the yield strength equals or exceeds the section modulus schedule shown on the plans multiplied by num psi num mpa the minimum yield strength for schedule num pipe .
ensure steel used in substitute pipe has a yield strength of at least num psi num mpa .
determine the section modulus of the pipe using the following equation od id od sm num num num π where sm section modulus od outside diameter id inside diameter and π num .
materials for guard rail guide posts bridge rail misc railing fences num num num fence fittings ensure the materials requirements coating specifications and inspection procedures of the following items for clf are in accordance with astm f num post and line post caps rail and brace ends sleeves for top rail tension and brace bands tension bars truss rods and barb arms .
num fence style gdf a .
description provide fence fabric other wire items fence framework and fastening and bracing hardware to construct glare deflector fence .
b. classifications the department defines class r as gdf mounted on a guardrail class p as gdf mounted on groundmounted posts and class w as gdf mounted on a parapet wall or median barrier .
provide the following types as class r class p or class w type i galvanized steel wire fabric on a steel or aluminum mounting system type ii aluminumcoated steel wire fabric on a steel or aluminum mounting system type iii aluminum alloy fabric on a steel or aluminum mounting system and type iv vinylcoated or pvc plasticcoated galvanized steel wire fabric on a zinccoated steel or aluminum mounting system of the same color or a harmonizing color .
c. materials num wire items a fabric provide fabric of num gauge num in num mm wire woven in num in num mm mesh .
provide other material in accordance with subsection num.cnuma fabric .
btension wire provide tension wire in accordance with subsection num.cnumb tension wire .
c post ties wire ties provide post ties in accordance with subsection num.cnumd post ties .
num framework items provide framework items posts line posts top rail and brace rail in accordance with subsection num.cnum framework items .
num fence fittings provide fittings in accordance with subsection num.cnum fence fittings .
num materials for guard rail guide posts bridge rail misc railing fences num num wire baskets for gabions and revetment mattresses a .
general provide wire baskets constructed of double twisted hexagonal wire mesh or if shown on the plans weldedwire mesh .
use nonraveling wire mesh that will not separate at twists or detach at welds if a wire in the mesh is cut .
b .
wire requirements provide mesh selvage lacing internalconnecting and spiral wires in accordance with astm a num class num soft tensile strength from num ksi to num ksi num mpa to num mpa and astm a num .
provide wire with high grade or special high grade zinccoating in accordance with astm b num table num .
for weldedwire mesh ensure the coating uniformity equals or exceeds four num min dips by the preece test in accordance with astm a num .
c. twistedwire mesh baskets num general provide mesh wires wrapped around the selvage wire with the number of turns necessary to interconnect each of them with adjacent mesh wires .
ensure wire is galvanized before mesh fabrication .
num gabions provide galvanized baskets manufactured from num gauge num mm mesh wires and num gauge num mm selvage wires .
provide pvccoated baskets manufactured from num gauge num mm mesh wire and num gauge num mm selvage wire .
num revetment mattresses for num in num mm thick revetment mattresses provide baskets manufactured from num gauge num mm mesh wires and num gauge num mm selvage wire .
for thinner revetment mattresses provide baskets manufactured from num gauge num mm mesh wires .
d. weldedwire mesh baskets num general provide weldedwire mesh baskets with resistance welds .
ensure mesh is in accordance with astm a num .
num gabions provide baskets manufactured from num gauge num mm wire .
provide pvccoated baskets manufactured from num gauge num mm wire .
num revetment mattresses for num in num mm thick revetment mattresses provide baskets manufactured from num gauge num mm mesh wires .
for thinner revetment mattresses provide baskets manufactured from num gauge num mm mesh wires .
e. connection wires provide connection wires of the sizes specified in table num .
materials for guard rail guide posts bridge rail misc railing fences num num table num connection wire sizes wire type minimum wire size lacing wire num gauge num mm spiral wire num gauge num mm internal connecting wire num gauge num mm provide enough lacing and connection wire to fasten gabion basket and diaphragm edges .
f. basket strength and flexibility requirements num elongation before basket fabrication ensure elongation tests are made on a wire sample num in num mm long .
ensure elongation is at least num percent in accordance with astm a num .
num punch test ensure the num in num in num mm num mm wire mesh will not rupture when a num lb num kn load is applied as follows place a num ft num m long num ft num m wide or wider section of wire mesh in testing machine seats without binding individual wires .
ensure the sample includes the selvedge bindings along the width or in the middle for widths greater than num ft num m. apply tension to elongate the section num percent .
apply a num lb num kn load to num ft² num m² located in the center of the sample between the clamps .
ensure the load is perpendicular to the elongation tension force direction .
apply it with a circular ram head with beveled or rounded edges to prevent cutting the wires .
num strength ensure wire strength is in accordance with subsection num.fnum punch test and table num wire mesh strengths when tested in accordance with the colorado procedure for methods of conducting strength tests of gabions cp inum .
table num wire mesh strengths wire strength lbft knm wire mesh galvanized gabions pvc coated gabions revetment mattresses pulled parallel to wire twist num num num num num num pulled perpendicular to wire twist num num num num num num connection to selvedges num num num num num num joint connection strengthlacing wire or ring wire fastener num num num num num num num materials for guard rail guide posts bridge rail misc railing fences num g. pvc coating provide wire with pvc coating .
ensure the pvccoated wire is in accordance with the table num .
table num pvc coating properties property test value coating thickness nominal num mil num µm num mil num µm specific gravity a astm d num astm d num num num tensile strength a astm d num num psi num mpa modulus of elasticity a num psi num mpa brittleness temperature astm d num numc abrasion resistance a csia abrader tape num grit astm d num method d method b at num cycles num weight loss salt spray test b astm b num num hr ultraviolet light exposure b apparatus type e at numf numc astm d num astm g num num hr a after salt spray and ultraviolet light testing reject the pvc coating if specific gravity changes more than num tensile strength more than num modulus of elasticity more than num or resistance to abrasion more than num. b reject the pvc coating if after salt spray and ultraviolet light testing the coating is cracked blistered split or shows color change .
materials for guard rail guide posts bridge rail misc railing fences miscellaneous materials num num section num miscellaneous materials num cast iron water pipe fittings valves etc a .
materials covered provide cast iron water pipe fittings valves valve boxes fire hydrants and jointing materials for construction extension or repairs of cast iron water lines in accordance with the local municipalities requirements .
when no municipality requirements are applicable provide cast iron water pipe fittings valves valve boxes fire hydrants and jointing materials in accordance with subsection num.b c d e f g and h. b .
pipes num cast iron water pipe provide num ft num m or num ft num m long cast iron pipes .
provide cast iron pipes with a class num thickness for diameters from num in num mm to num in num mm and a class num thickness for diameters greater than num in num mm in accordance with awwa c num or awwa c num .
ensure the pipes have an num iron strength .
provide num in num mm and num¼ in num mm cast iron pipe in accordance with awwa c num .
provide in num ft num m num ft num m or num ft num m long lengths of pipe .
num ductile iron water pipe provide ductile iron in accordance with awwa c num .
c. fittings provide and test cast iron fittings in accordance with awwa c num standards for num in num mm through num in num mm pipe with a pressure rating of num psi num mpa .
d. valves num gate valves provide gate valves in accordance with awwa c num .
provide gate valves with the following characteristics double disc parallel seats nonrising stem vertical mounting oring stem seal counterclockwise opening and pushon mechanical bell and spigot or flanged ends to fit the pipe or fittings .
provide crane darling ludlowrensselaer m h mueller a.p .
smith or an equivalent gate valve approved by the engineer .
num miscellaneous materials num miscellaneous materials num ball valves provide ball valves with the following characteristics doubleseated natural or synthetic rubber bronze or monel metal seats designated for num psi num mpa working pressure flanged ends and oring rotor bearing seals of hightensile strength cast iron with the following enclosed manual operators an openclose indicator and hand wheel with standard size square wrench nut for oneman operation at num psi num mpa unbalance across the valve .
test valves with a hydrostatic pressure of num psi num mpa on the valve body with the rotor open and num psi num mpa on each side of the valve open the opposite side of the valve .
submit four copies of the test results and manufacturers drawings for approval by the engineer before valve delivery .
provide allischalmers henry pratt williamette iron steel or an equivalent ball valve approved by the engineer .
num air relief valves provide num in num mm air relief valves with heavyduty combination air release and vacuum tested to num psi num mpa water working pressure .
provide a cast iron body cover and baffle with highquality stainless steel or bronze internal parts .
ensure the inside of the valve is coated with rust inhibitor .
provide apco no .
numc darling rensselaer or an equivalent air relief valve approved by the engineer .
num check valves provide swing type check valves with the following characteristics single disc horizontal mounting diameter passage that minimizes pressure loss nonslamming for the installation of outside lever and weight bronze disc faces and seat rings and pushon mechanical bell and spigot or flanged ends to fit the pipe or fittings .
provide crane darling ludlowrensselaer m h mueller a.p .
smith or an equivalent check valve approved by the engineer .
e. valve boxes provide screw adjustable valve boxes with drop cover .
f. fire hydrants provide and test fire hydrants in accordance with awwa c num .
provide hydrants with the following characteristics breakable connection features with a lower breaking point than the rest of the unit miscellaneous materials num num breakable coupling on the stem immediately above the bury line with a lower breaking point than the rest of the unit compression main valve num½ in num mm inlet connection num in num mm bell flange or mechanical joint inlet bury length num½ ft num m two hose nozzles num½ in num mm with national standard threads one pumper nozzle num in num mm oring seal drain valve counterclockwise opening yellow finish paint above ground line and national standard pentagon operating nut that can accommodate the installed fire hydrant .
provide darling mueller improved m h or an equivalent fire hydrant approved by the engineer .
g. joints provide joint cast iron pipe and fittings with any of the following end types test pushon joints mechanical joints bellandspigot joints or flange joints .
use flange joint ends only if shown on the plans except always provide flanged joints at valve connection ends of tapping sleeves .
provide pushon joints and mechanical joints in accordance with awwa c num .
provide bellandspigot joints with square braided sterilized hemp and num percent pure lead caulking .
provide flange joints in accordance with asa b num .
h. lining if required by the contract line cast iron pipe and fittings in accordance with awwa c num .
num copper water service pipe and fittings a .
materials covered provide copper water service pipe and fittings for construction of water service lines in accordance with the local municipalities requirements .
when no municipality requirements are applicable provide copper water service pipe and fittings in accordance with subsection num.b copper service pipe and subsection num.c fittings .
b .
copper service pipe provide type k soft annealed seamless copper tubing service pipe cold drawn to size in accordance with astm bnum .
num miscellaneous materials num num c. fittings provide sound clean and defect free cast brass or bronze fittings including corporation and curb stops .
ensure the name or trademark of the manufacturer is permanently cast in each fitting .
num galvanized steel water pipes and fittings a .
materials covered provide galvanized steel pipe for water service lines and fittings in accordance with the local municipalities requirements .
when no municipality requirements are applicable provide galvanized steel pipe for water service lines and fittings in accordance with subsection num.b galvanized steel pipe and subsection numc fittings .
b. galvanized steel pipe provide galvanized steel pipe in accordance with astm anum .
ensure the pipes are first class galvanized welded and seamless steel pipe of standard mass and dimensions new stock smoothly finished and defect free .
c. fittings provide wrought iron or steel galvanized fittings .
provide standard righthand screw threads for connections .
num nonmetallic waterline pipe and fittings provide nonmetallic pressure waterline pipe and fittings in accordance with the local municipalities requirements .
where no municipality requirements are applicable provide nonmetallic pressure waterline pipe and fittings in accordance with the following astm specifications material astm specification polyvinyl chloride pvc dnum acrylonitrile butadienestyrene abs dnum polyethylene pe dnum polybutlene pb dnum num reflective sheeting for guide posts provide type ii reflective sheeting in accordance with subsection num retroflective sheeting .
for the following guide posts barrier reflectors and underdrain outlet posts .
provide metal backing plates for reflective posts in accordance with astm anum with at least a num gauge num µm thickness for galvanized sheet or astm bnum alloy numhnum with at least a num µm thickness .
degrease and clean or caustic etch metal bands to prepare them to receive the reflective sheeting .
miscellaneous materials num num num elastomeric bearing pads a .
description provide plain and laminated elastomeric bearing pads for bearings under structural members with the durometer and dimensions as shown on the plans .
provide shop drawings to the engineer for review and approval before beginning pad manufacture .
b .
materials provide materials fabrication fabrication tolerances markings and certification testing and installation for elastomeric bearing pads in accordance with aashto standard specifications for highway bridges .
ensure the shear modulus for the durometer hardness shown on the plans is in accordance with table num table num shear modulus for durometer hardness durometer hardness shear modulus a psi mpa num num num num num num num num num a at num f num c. provide low temperature grade num elastomer compounds .
provide ⅛ in num mm embedded laminate edge covers or connection members for steel reinforced bearing pads .
if the plans show the anchor plate bonded to the bearing pad use a heatbonded connection made by the pad manufacturer during the vulcanization process .
c. acceptance the resident engineer will accept bearing pads based on the following submit to the engineer a type a certification showing compliance with the contract requirements .
submit to the engineer one fullsize finished bearing pad per size or type per project shipment or lot for dimensional and durometer hardness checks by the departments materials division .
the departments materials division may conduct onsite inspection of bearing pads for slab bridges or other pads deemed by the departments materials engineer to be too cumbersome for submittal to the laboratory upon test completion approved bearing pads may be collected by the contractor or the pad manufacturer from the departments materials laboratory .
the department will not return failed bearing pads .
num nonshrink grout a .
general provide nonshrink grout with a mixture of portland cement fine aggregate water and a nonshrink admixture proportioned as approved by the resident engineer .
num miscellaneous materials num num b .
materials num portland cement water and aggregate provide portland cement mixing water and aggregate except for gradation in accordance with section num portland cement concrete .
provide an aggregate gradation in accordance with the requirements in table num .
table num aggregate gradation requirements sieve size percent passing no .
num num mm num no .
num num µm num num no .
num num µm num num num nonshrink admixture provide nonshrink admixture manufactured under a trade name for use in nonshrink grout .
num premix ensure the engineer preapproves the manufacturers premix formulations .
c. nonshrink mortar num proportioning unless the nonshrink admixture manufacturer recommends otherwise proportion the dry materials portland cement sand and nonshrink admixture on a num weight mass ratio in accordance with the requirements in table num table num nonshrink admixture proportions material weight mass lb kg portland cement num num sand num num nonshrink admixture num num num mixing combine and mix the proportioned materials until thoroughly blended .
if the sand is noticeably wet determine the quantity of free moisture as a percent of the dry mass and the mass of sand .
add the water incrementally to obtain a workable consistency within the proportioning limits approved by the engineer .
discard unused mortar num min after completing the mixing operation .
the department will not allow mortar retempering .
num waterstops a .
general provide plastic waterstops and rubber waterstops for structural concrete construction joints .
provide waterstops with a dense homogeneous cross section .
ensure waterstops are produced in continuous lengths no greater than num ft num m. make field splices in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
miscellaneous materials num num miscellaneous materials b .
materials the engineer will visually inspect and approve material from a source on the basis of the manufacturers identification markings that show the material grade .
to qualify as an approved material source the manufacturer must submit to the resident engineer test certifications showing compliance with the contract requirements for review by the departments materials engineer and approval by the resident engineer .
num plastic waterstops provide waterstops from an elastomeric plastic compound with pvc as the basic resin .
sample in accordance with astm dnum and federal test method no .
num .
provide materials for plastic waterstops in accordance with table num .
table num plastic waterstop requirements property test method requirements tensile strength die iii numa num psi num mpa ultimate elongation die iii numa num low temperature brittleness no failure astm dnum num f num c stiffness in flexure ½ in num mm span astm dnum num psi num mpa a federal test method standard no .
num num rubber waterstops the department will allow natural rubber synthetic rubber or both for rubber waterstops .
sample in accordance with astm dnum and federal test method no .
num .
provide materials for rubber waterstops in accordance with table num .
table num rubber waterstop requirements property test method a requirements tensile strength die iii num num psi num mpa hardness shore diameter type a num num num ultimate elongation die iii num num num modulus num num psi num mpa water absorption num day immersion num f num c to num f num c num num compression set num or astm dnum method b num tensile strength after aging oxygen bomb method num num a federal test method no .
num num miscellaneous materials num miscellaneous materials num slurry grout a .
description provide a slurry type grout for stabilizing and undersealing portland cement concrete pavements using the pressure grouting method .
b .
materials provide grout consisting of a mixture of portland cement fly ash and water .
ensure the portland cement fly ash water and admixtures are in accordance with the following section and subsections material section and subsections portland cement num admixtures num water num fly ash num c. mix designs and tests submit a mix design for review and approval by the engineer .
include job mix test results of the grout from an independent laboratory showing the following seven day strengths in accordance with astm cnum flow cone rate in accordance with the corps of engineers method and astm cnum shrinkage and expansion in accordance with astm cnum or astm cnum and initial set time in accordance with astm cnum or aashto t num .
ensure the num day strength is at least num psi num mpa and the flow cone rate is from num s tonum s. num ada compliant tactile warnings preformed modular concrete ensure compressive strengths tested in accordance with astm dnum are at least num psi .
ensure the slip resistance tested in accordance with astm cnum combined wetdry friction coefficient is num on top of domes and remaining areas .
ensure the color of cured material provides at least num percent contrast with surrounding surfaces .
material for roadside development and erosion control num num section num material for roadside development and erosion control num sodding and sprigging materials a .
general provide a dense source of bermuda grass sod or sprigs with a deeprooted stand on fertile topsoil .
ensure the source for sod and sprigs is free of weeds classified as prohibited noxious and legally restricted noxious plant materials in accordance with oklahoma department of agriculture seed law .
the resident engineer must approve the source of sod or sprigs before beginning sodding or sprigging operations .
before approval do not mow or till the area .
after approval mow vegetative growth higher than num in num mm and remove the residue before harvesting the sod or sprigs .
keep the sod or sprigs moist from excavating at the source until planting .
discard dry sod .
b. sodding sodding consists of bermuda grass vegetative parts rhizomes stolons and roots with an appreciable quantity of adhering soil .
num solid slab sod provide solid slab sod in rectangular slabs of bermuda grass with dimensions as shown on the plans .
ensure bermuda grass vegetative parts exist throughout the slab and come from soils with a plasticity index of at least num .
provide slabs of dense vegetative growth capable of being transported in its original state .
num mulch sod provide mulch sod consisting of fertile topsoil with bermuda grass vegetative parts not harvested within the previous num months .
before excavation disk the sod in different directions to the excavation depth .
make each pass of the disk at right angles to the preceding pass until the bermuda grass vegetative parts are cut into small pieces .
excavate to num in num mm or less immediately after disking .
c. sprigging sprigging consists of bermuda grass vegetative parts separated from the adhering soil .
remove sprigs for row and broadcast sprigging with an automatic sprig harvester that digs cleans and loads the sprigs in one continuous operation .
use a vehicle with closed sides to transport sprigs .
after loading the vehicle wet and cover the sprigs to reduce moisture loss .
keep the sprigs covered until planting .
plant sprigs within num hr of harvesting .
num material for roadside development and erosion control num material for roadside development and erosion control num planting materials a .
plant materials refer to ansi znum nursery stock for grading tolerances quality definitions balling and burlapping specifications container and plant material bareroot requirements except as modified by the following unless otherwise required by the contract provide healthy nurserygrown plant materials representative of the normal species with a developed root system .
provide well branched and symmetrical trees with straight stems in accordance with their natural growth habits .
ensure the branch system is free of disfiguring knots sun scald damage bark abrasions dead or dry wood and broken terminal growth .
the department considers nursery grown stock to be plants that are grown using cultural treatment and are transplanted or root pruned at least two times in accordance with nursery practices .
provide evergreens that are balled and burlapped bb or in a container .
provide deciduous plants that are barerooted br bb or in a container .
ensure bb plants have solid firm balls dug from firm nonsandy soil .
if nursery grown plants are unavailable substitute with collected plants with the written approval of the resident engineer .
ensure a resident engineerapproved nursery digs up the collected plants .
notify the resident engineer in writing at least num weeks before digging collected plants for inspection .
provide materials equipment labor and incidentals for substituting nursery grown plants with collected plants at no additional cost to the department .
ensure the collected plant root spread and ball size is at least num percent greater than the substituted nurserygrown plant in accordance with ansi znum .
pack plants to protect them against damage during transit .
keep br plant roots moist .
the resident engineer may inspect plant materials for provisional approval at any point during the duration of the contract .
at the time of delivery tag plant materials with names and sizes .
provide the resident engineer with a written statement that includes shipment origin and an invoice showing quantities sizes varieties and inspection certificates in accordance with federal and state laws certifying the plant is free of disease and insects .
b .
planting soil mix provide planting soil mix containing one part sand three parts sandy loam and one part peat moss by volume .
provide these materials in accordance with the following sand .
soil material containing at least num percent sand by weight mass .
ensure the combined percent of silt and one and onehalf times the clay is num percent or less of the total weight mass .
sand includes coarse fine and very fine sand .
sandy loam .
sandy loam is soil material that meets one of the following criteria contains num percent or less clay by weight mass the silt percentage plus two times the clay percentage is greater than num percent and contains at least num percent sand by weight mass .
material for roadside development and erosion control num num contains less than num percent clay less than num percent silt and from num to num percent sand all percentages by weight mass .
peat moss .
material containing at least num percent partially decomposed stems and leaves of mosses e.g .
sphagnum hypnum polytrichum in which the fibrous and cellular structure is recognizable .
ensure the peat moss is a brown to black color .
the department will not allow humus peat .
provide peat moss with the following characteristics moisture content of less than num percent by weight mass ash content of less than num percent based on the oven dry weight mass of the material a ph value from num to num at num f num c and a water holding capacity of at least num percent by weight mass on an oven dry basis .
submit to the resident engineer a certificate stating the peat moss type brand name and place of origin .
ensure the certificate contains the volume cubic feet cubic meter of compressed material the compression ratio and the weight per cubic foot mass per cubic meter .
the department will not require a certificate for bales marked with this information .
blend the materials until homogenous in texture and composition in accordance with u.s department of agriculture soil classifications and the ohd manuals of engineering classification of geological material rd division .
provide planting soil mix that is free of materials that interfere with planting procedures and maintenance toxic salts and materials that retard establishment or interfere with growth .
ensure the mix does not contain reproducing weed parts classified as prohibited noxious or legally restricted noxious plant materials in accordance with oklahoma department of agriculture seed law .
stockpile and mix the planting soil materials at a location approved by the resident engineer .
c. organic mulch provide organic mulch free of reproducing weed parts classified as prohibited noxious or legally restricted noxious plant materials in accordance with oklahoma department of agriculture seed law .
allowable mulch includes cottonseed hulls partially decayed and chopped cotton burrs peat moss chopped peanut hulls pine straw wood chips pecan shells compost or a combination of these items .
num seeding materials provide seed in accordance with table num seed specifications .
if mixtures are shown on the plans provide each seed lot in a separate sealed bag .
ensure the labels required by applicable laws are intact and legible .
submit to the resident engineer two legible copies of the invoices and seed tags .
ensure the invoice identifies each species name variety and treatment .
ensure the oklahoma state board of agriculture samples and tests each lot within num months before delivery .
submit to the resident engineer two copies of the report .
num material for roadside development and erosion control num the resident engineer will accept seed lots if the seed report correlates with the seed tags of the same lot number .
remove the seed and tags from the original tagged and sealed bag when approved by the resident engineer .
after approval mix sack and batch the seed as required by the contract .
tag the seed with identification and mass .
mix or sack into batches under the resident engineers supervision .
ensure the seeds do not contain johnson grass seed .
table num seed specifications minimum seed type pls index a minimum purity germination weed seeds bermuda grass common cynodon dactylon unhulled num num hulled num num guymon variety cynodon dactylon unhulled num num hulled num num bluestem big andropogon gerardi b num caucasian andropogon caucasicus num little andropogon scoparius b num plains bothrichloa ischaemum num num sand andropogon halli c num yellow andropogon ischaemum num brome smooth bromus inermis num num buffalo grass buchloe dactyloides bc num burclover medicago hispida arabica or rigidula num num num clover crimson trifolium incarnatum num num num large hop trifolium procumbens c num num num small hop trifolium dubium c num num num drop seed sand sporobolus cryptandrus num num fescue tall festuca arundinacea num num grama blue bouteloua gracilis b num sideoats bouteloua curtipendula b num indian grass sorghastrum nutans b num num lespedeza common lespedeza striata num num num korean lespedeza stipulacea d num num num roundhead lespedeza capitata num num num sericea lespedeza cuneata d num num num love grass sand eragrostis trichodes b num num material for roadside development and erosion control num num table num seed specifications minimum seed type pls index a minimum purity germination weed seeds weeping eragrostis curvula num num millet german foxtail setaria italica num num num native grasses mostly little bluestem b num oats avena sativa num num num rye secale cereale num num num ryegrass annual lolium multiflorum num num perennial lolium perenne num num sudan grass sorghum vulgare sudanense num num num switch grass panicum virgatum num num wheat triticum aestivum num num num wheat grass western agropyron smithii b num num a calculate the pure live seed pls index in accordance with the equations following table num. b the seed must come from oklahoma texas kansas or new mexico .
c provide seed that is prechilled and treated with potassium nitrate in accordance with the hays treatment technique .
d treat the seed with a nitrogen fixing inoculant manufactured by commercial laboratories for the legume .
store and handle the inoculant in accordance with the manufacturers directions .
calculate the pls index from information on the seed tag in accordance with the following equation num fs g p pls p where p pls pls index of seed provided p percent purity g percent germination and fs percent firm seed .
the department defines the weight mass of seed in pounds kilograms of bulk seed .
if the pls index of a seed lot exceeds the minimum pls index specified in table num seed specifications by at least num percent adjust the amount of bulk seed for planting using the following equation p p r r pls bs pls bs num material for roadside development and erosion control num num where r bs weight mass of bulk seed required for planting in pounds kilograms r pls pls index of seeds required in table num seed specifications p bs weight mass of bulk seed required by the contract in pounds kilograms and p pls pls index of seed provided .
num mulching materials a. vegetative mulch vegetative mulch consists of straw or hay in accordance with the following straw is the mature barley oat rye or wheat stem .
hay is mature weeping love grass caucasian bluestem k.r .
bluestem or pure stands of the other bluestem hays .
ensure the hay is free of annual grass short grass or immature tall grass .
provide well preserved vegetative mulch free of mold or rot well preserved and primarily long heavystemmed material .
deliver the material in dry bales .
keep the material dry until application .
ensure the mulch does not contain seeds classified as prohibited noxious and legally restricted noxious in accordance with the oklahoma department of agriculture seed law .
b. asphalt mulch provide msnum emulsified asphalt mulch in accordance with subsection num asphalt materials .
before application dilute the mulching asphalt with num gal water to num gal emulsified asphalt .
c. excelsior mat excelsior mat consists of a machineproduced wood excelsior mat with interlocking fibers that form a continuous web .
ensure at least num percent of the fibers are at least num in num mm long and the web is uniformly distributed throughout the mat creating uniform thickness and density .
cover the mat on one side with extruded plastic netting with a mesh size no greater than num in num in num mm num mm .
provide mats with the following dimensions length at least num ft num m width num in num mm or from num in to num in num mm to num mm and dry mass per area num lbyd² num kgm² .
provide mat with smolder resistant nonleaching treatment that will not harm vegetation animals and humans .
test for leaching resistance in accordance with federal test method num method num .
after the leaching test conduct the smolder resistance test on the airdried sample .
submit to the resident engineer a type d certification for excelsior mat material .
anchor the mat using fasteners in accordance with subsection num.b mat fasteners .
material for roadside development and erosion control num num d. jute mesh provide uniform open plain weave jute mesh made of new single jute yarn .
ensure the yarn is loosely twisted and does not vary in thickness by more than half its normal diameter .
provide jute mesh with the following dimensions length at least num ft num m num warp ends per width num weft ends per yard meter and mass per area at least num lbyd² num kgm² .
anchor the mat using fasteners in accordance with subsection num.b mat fasteners .
e. excelsior mulch excelsior mulch consists of wood fibers cut from sound green timber .
make the cut at a slight angle to the natural wood grain so the fiber splinters when weathered .
provide excelsior mulch with the following properties burred wood fibers num in num mm long .
ensure the fiber is within num percent of num in num mm num in num mm .
ensure the total volatile content at the time of manufacture does not exceed num percent in accordance with the following equation a b a v num where v percent volatile content a weight mass of original sample and b weight mass of dry sample .
deliver the material in bales from num lb num kg to num lb num kg .
tag each bale with the weight mass at the time of manufacture .
ensure the bale density is from num lbft³ num kgm³ to num lbft³ num kgm³ .
f. wood cellulose fiber wood cellulose fiber consists of natural wood fiber produced from wood byproducts .
ensure the wood cellulose fiber does not contain growth or germination inhibitors and contains a water soluble nontoxic coloring agent .
g. nylon erosion control mat provide a nylon erosion control mat consisting of a bulky structure of entangled nylon monofilaments meltbonded at intersections forming a stable mat .
submit to the resident engineer a type d certification with each shipment .
anchor the mat using fasteners in accordance with subsection num.b mat fasteners .
provide common bermuda grass seed unhulled in accordance with subsection num seeding material .
provide a resilient permeable mat that resists environmental deterioration and ultraviolet degradation .
provide a black mat of nylon num with at least num percent by weight mass carbon black with the following properties num material for roadside development and erosion control num num num physical properties filament diameter num in num mm mass per unit area num lbyd² num kgm² thickness of mat num in num mm width num in num mm and roll length from num yd num m to num yd num m. num tensile properties tensile strength length at least num lbyd num nm width elongation at least num lbyd num nm length direction at least num percent and width direction at least num percent .
modify the astm d num strip test procedure to obtain filament bond strength for indicating tensile properties .
num resiliency compression load cycling num psi num kpa on a num in num mm num in num mm sample crosshead speed num inmin num mmmin and recovery num min num cycles at least num percent .
h. inspection of materials before delivery of the mulching material provide the resident engineer with the following notification of the intended material sources and quantities and representative samples of the materials .
the resident engineer may use the samples for provisional approval before delivery and will reject material with evidence of deterioration .
the resident engineer will reject mulching material not applied or fastened as required by the contract during application or after placement .
num mulch fastening materials a. adhesive fastener provide adhesive fasteners in accordance with section num plant mix bituminous bases and surfaces .
b. mat fasteners provide mat fasteners as shown on the plans .
num fertilizer and agriculture liming materials a .
fertilizer provide a commercial fertilizer consisting of the standard materials of the grade required by the contract .
fertilizer grade refers to the percentage of total nitrogen available phosphate and soluble potash in accordance with the oklahoma department of agriculture food and forestry .
provide fertilizer in standard factorysealed material for roadside development and erosion control num num containers labeled in accordance with the oklahoma department of agriculture food and forestry .
ensure the labels remain intact and legible until use of the contents .
ensure two legible copies of the purchase receipt accompany each vehicle bulk load of fertilizer .
give the receipt to the resident engineer upon delivery .
ensure each receipt shows the mass brand name and the labeling requirements in accordance with table num oklahoma department of agriculture food and forestry label requirements .
include the name and address of the person firm or corporation registering or guaranteeing the fertilizer .
table num oklahoma department of agriculture food and forestry label requirements requirement example grade num derived from statement plant nutrients derived from urea diammonium phosphate and muriate of potash magnesium sulfate ammonium sulfate iron oxide .
directions for use specify an application rate or include a statement to use in accordance with recommendations by a qualified institution or according to an approved plan .
manufacturer company name and address broadcast dry fertilizer in a pellet or other granular form .
ensure powder sprayapplied material is soluble in water and uniform in suspension .
the department will allow a higher grade fertilizer with an identical npk ratio .
if using a higher grade fertilizer adjust the application rate to provide an equivalent weight mass of each element per unit of area as that of the grade required by the contract .
adjust the application rate of higher grade fertilizers using the following equation d c b a where a adjusted application rate b grade of fertilizer required by the contract npk converted to decimal c application rate of fertilizer grade required by the contract and d grade of higher grade fertilizer npk converted to decimal .
b .
agricultural liming material agricultural liming material consists of agricultural limestone or hydrated lime in accordance with section num lime .
if the contract requires agricultural limestone the department will allow the substitution of num lb num kg of agriculture limestone with num lb num kg of hydrated lime .
if the contract requires hydrated lime the department will not allow the substitution of hydrated lime with agricultural limestone .
provide liming material in standard factorysealed containers labeled in accordance with the oklahoma agricultural liming materials act .
ensure two legible copies of the purchase receipt accompany each vehicle bulk load of liming material .
give the receipt to the resident engineer upon delivery .
ensure each receipt includes the following information liming material name num material for roadside development and erosion control num num material for roadside development and erosion control the brand or trade name the net weight mass the percent effective calcium carbonate equivalent and the name and address of the manufacturer producer or distributor .
the resident engineer will take a num qt num l sample from each vehicle load for testing by the departments materials laboratory .
num temporary silt dike materials provide a triangularshaped temporary silt dike with a height in the center from num in num mm to num in num mm equal length sides and a base from num in num mm to num in num mm .
ensure the outer cover is a woven geotextile fabric that extends from num in num mm to num in num mm beyond both triangle sides .
provide mildew resistant rotproof ultraviolet radiation resistant geotextile fabric in accordance with aashto m num .
treat the edges to prevent unraveling and reinforce seams and stress points .
ensure the fabric cover and apron consist of a continuous fabric wrapping and the apron is a continuous extension of the upstream face .
use urethane foam as the inner layer of the silt dike in accordance with astm d num .
num water provide water free of harmful quantities of toxic salts and other substances that may damage new and existing plants on the project .
section num pavement markers num class a reflective pavement markers a .
design and shape provide group num class num prismatic reflectorized markers of the size and shape shown on the plans smooth and molded of methyl methacrylate in accordance with astm d num and federal specification lpnuma type num class num .
ensure moisture and road grime will not damage markers and the shape and color do not change when subjected to test method ohd lnum at numf numc .
provide markers with a strong resilient potting compound filler that is capable of withstanding a load of num lb num kn without breaking or deforming when tested in accordance with test method ohd lnum .
b. reflector ensure the specific intensity of the reflector is in accordance with astm d num .
num class b nonreflective pavement markers a .
design and shape provide uniformly curved domeshaped traffic buttons for class b nonreflective pavement markers .
ensure the top and sides are smooth and uniform in color .
ensure the bottom is rough and free of substances that may reduce the adhesive bond .
pavement markers num num pavement markers provide nonreflective markers from ⅝ in to ¾ in num mm to num mm high and with a base diameter from num⅞ in to num⅛ in num mm to num mm .
ensure the base deviates from a plane by no more than num in num mm .
b .
physical requirements provide a button with no greater than num percent water absorption when tested in accordance with astm c num .
ensure the glazed button surface does not craze spall or peel when subjected to one cycle of the autoclave test at num psi num mpa in accordance with astm c num .
provide a random sample of five buttons for compressive load testing and ensure the following characteristics an internal diameter of num in num mm and a wall thickness of ¼ in num mm .
the sample averages a compressive strength of at least num lb num kn .
each button has a compressive strength of at least num lb num kn .
the button is centered base down over the open end of a num in num mm high vertical hollow metal cylinder .
the button breaks under a num in num mm diameter solid metal cylinder centered above the button and moving at num inmin num mmmin .
if a sample fails the compressive load test test five additional buttons .
the resident engineer will reject the lot if resamples fail .
provide a random sample of five buttons for impact resistance testing and ensure the following characteristics buttons are heataged at least num days at numf numc before testing for impact resistance .
the impact tests occurs from numf to numf numc to numc .
the button rests on but is not bonded to a flat steel plate .
the button does not break chip or crack under the impact of a num lb num g steel ball falling freely from a height of num in num mm .
if a sample fails the impact resistance test test five additional buttons .
the resident engineer will reject the lot if re samples fail .
c. color provide buttons of a uniform color as shown on the plans determined by visually comparing them with calibrated standards in accordance with cie chromaticity and federal test method tttnum method num falling in an area with corner points in accordance with table num table num corner points num num num num color x y x y x y x y brightness mgo white num num num num num num num num num yellow num num num num num num num num num d. glaze thickness ensure the glazed surface has an average thickness of at least num in num µm when measured at least ¼ in num mm away from the button edge .
measure the glaze num pavement markers num num thickness with a calibrated scale microscope on a fractured edge of the button to the nearest num in num µm .
num class c reflective allweather pavement markers a .
design and shape provide pavement markers that are an iron casting to which replaceable prismatic reflectors are attached .
ensure markers have the following characteristics the forward portions are shaped to deflect snowplow blades and highway maintenance equipment without snag damages .
the bottom of the casting incorporates anchoring devices that fit into slots or grooves cut in the roadway .
the marker bonds to the roadway pavement with an approved adhesive anchored so traffic snowplows and highway maintenance equipment will not dislodge it .
the casting is designed so the reflectormounting surface is num to the horizontal and contain provisions for attaching replaceable reflectors .
reflectors can be quickly and easily replaced using common hand tools without disturbing the anchorage .
the marker can withstand a load of num lb num kn without breaking or being deformed when tested in accordance with ohd lnum .
b .
casting provide markers cast to conform to the shape and dimensions shown on the plans clean and free of defects .
ensure smooth marker surfaces free from burnton sand .
ensure runners risers fins and other caston pieces are ground smooth .
ensure corners and edges exposed to traffic are rounded .
provide castings of ductile iron grade num in accordance with astm a num unless otherwise required by the contract .
ensure the forward rail tops have a hardness from num hrc to num hrc when tested in accordance with astm e num .
c. reflector provide group num class num marker reflectors made of methyl methacrylate in accordance with astm d num of the shape and dimensions shown on the plans and ensure marker reflectors prevent moisture and road grime from penetrating or causing damage .
ensure the reflector does not change shape or color when tested in accordance with ohd lnum at numf numc with the marker in a vertical position .
ensure the specific intensity of the reflector is in accordance with astm d num .
num adhesives for use with pavement markers a. epoxy resin adhesives provide epoxy resin adhesives for securing class a class b and class c pavement markers to the roadway in accordance with subsection num epoxy resin and other adhesives for general use with concrete type c. pavement markers num num b. bituminous type hotmelt adhesives provide bituminous hotmelt adhesive to secure the class a and class b construction zone pavement markers and tube channelizers to the roadway surface .
num description provide an adhesive for bonding ceramic and plastic markers to portland cement concrete pcc asphaltic concrete and chipsealed road surfaces and when road surface and marker temperatures are from numf to numf numc to numc .
ensure the composition of the adhesive prevents deterioration when heated and applied at temperatures up to numf numc using air or oiljacketed melters .
num materials for the adhesive provide an asphalt material with a homogeneous mineral filler in accordance with table num table num adhesive properties property value test softening point numf numc astm d num penetration num num astm d num flow num in num mm astm d num a heat stability flow num in num mm subsection num.bnumb heat stability flow viscosity num pas astm d num b flash point coc numf numc astm d num a as modified in accordance with subsection num.bnuma flow .
b as modified in accordance with subsection num.bnumc viscosity .
the asphalt properties in table num are determined on the fillerfree material derived from the extraction and abson recovery process table num asphalt properties property value test penetration num g num sec numf numc num astm d num viscosity numf numc num pas astm d num viscosity ratio numf numc num subsection num.bnume viscosity ratio the filler properties specified in table num are determined using the filler separation technique table num filler properties property value test filler content num num subsection num.bnumf filler content filler fineness num µm num num µm num num µm num astm c num a a as modified in accordance with subsection num.bnumg filler fineness .
num pavement markers num num test methods a flow determine flow in accordance with astm d num section num except use an oven temperature from numf numf numc numc .
prepare samples in accordance with astm d num section num. bheat stability flow determine heat stability flow in accordance with flow test methods except place num lb num g of adhesive in a covered liter can heat the adhesive to numf numc and maintained the temperature for num hr before preparing the sample panel .
c viscosity determine viscosity in accordance with astm d num except heat the adhesive to numf numc and allow it to cool .
provide a spindle speed of num rads to determine viscosity at temperatures from numf numf numc numc in accordance with astm d num. dbase asphalt properties provide the material obtained from the following extraction and abson recovery methods to determine the properties of the base asphalt .
extract the asphalt by heating the adhesive until it flows easily .
remove extracted asphalt from the adhesive and mix from num g to num g with num ml of trichloroethylene .
ensure the temperature of the trichloroethylene is from numf to numf numc to numc .
stir the mixture to dissolve the asphalt .
decant the mixture and recover the asphalt using the abson recovery methods in accordance with astm d num except as modified by the following the extraction methods of astm d nums do not apply .
do not filter the solventasphalt solution .
centrifuge the solution for at least num min at num times gravity in a batch centrifuge .
decant the solution into the distillation flask excluding filler sediment .
apply heat and bubble carbon dioxide slowly to bring the solution temperature to numf numc .
increase the carbon dioxide flow to num mlmin to num mlmin .
maintain the solution temperature from numf to numf numc to numc with this carbon dioxide flow rate for at least num min and until the trichloroethylene vapors are absent from the distillation flask .
repeat the extractionrecovery method as necessary to obtain the desired quantity of asphalt .
use the recovered asphalt to determine penetration numf numc viscosity and numf numc viscosity ratio .
e viscosity ratio determine the numf numc viscosity ratio by comparing the numf numc viscosity on the base asphalt before and after the thinfilm oven test .
perform the thinfilm oven test in accordance with astm d num .
determine the specific gravity by pycnometer in accordance with astm d num for the pavement markers num num pavement markers thinfilm oven test .
calculate the numf numc viscosity ratio by dividing the viscosity after the thinfilm oven test by the original numf numc viscosity .
f filler content separate the filler material from the asphalt to determine filler content and fineness .
the portion by mass of the adhesive insoluble in trichloroethylene is considered the filler content .
determine filler content by placing from num g to num g of solid adhesive into a centrifuge flask with num ml capacity in accordance with astm d num .
break the adhesive into small pieces and add num ml of trichloroethylene .
stir with a fine rod without losing solids place the sample flask in a balanced centrifuge and spin using a relative centrifugal force of at least num in accordance with section num of astm d num for num min .
remove the sample flask .
decant the solvent without losing solids .
repeat the solvent application and centrifuging until the solvent becomes clear and the filler is visually free of asphalt .
dry the filler at numf numf numc numc to remove solvent and determine the mass of the resulting filler .
filter the decanted solvent to verify there is no loss of filler .
calculate the percent filler using the following equation num f oa fc where fc filler content percent f weight of filler and oa weight of original adhesive .
g filler fineness determine filler fineness in accordance with astm c num using no .
num num µm no .
num num µm and no .
num num µm sieves .
modify this method with a watersoluble nontoxic wetting agent .
ensure the concentration of the surfactant solution is num percent by mass .
wet the num g dry sample in the surfactant solution .
allow the sample to soak for num min .
transfer the filler into the sieve cup .
apply the filler for num min by waterspraying .
add the surfactant solution as needed to disperse clumped particles .
dry and handle the sample in accordance with astm c num .
num packaging and labeling provide adhesive packaged in selfreleasing stackable cardboard containers .
ensure containers have a maximum net weight of num lb num kg .
ensure the label shows the manufacturer quantity and lot or batch number with bituminous adhesive for traffic markers printed in bold lettering .
num concrete surface finish for structures num section num concrete surface finish for structures num option i heavy cement base mortar a .
materials provide a heavy cement base packaged in dry powder form for mixing with water .
provide a plaster mix for plaster gun application and a brush and float mix for brush and float application .
provide a formulation of acrylic polymers and modifiers in liquid form as an additive with portland cement mixes to ensure adhesion .
b. proportioning and consistency proportion the bonding agent and water in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
give the resident engineer a copy of the recommendations .
num option ii paint type spray finish a .
materials provide material for paint spray finish that is a textured commercial product designed as a spray finish .
b .
testing and certification brand products not included on the materials division approved product list may be qualified by submitting a type a certification and samples for durability and appearance evaluations .
the department will discontinue product approval if products are used in accordance with the manufacturers instructions and prove unsatisfactory .
ensure the manufacturer includes a type c certification with each shipment of tested products .
ensure materials for spray finish are in accordance with the following tests freezethaw cycle accelerated weathering flexibility fungus growth resistance abrasion test and salt spray resistance .
num freezethaw cycle using the mix designed for the structure cast and cure three concrete slabs at least num in num in num in num mm num mm num mm .
apply the surface finish after moist curing the specimens for num days and dry curing them for num hr from num f to num f num c to num c. do not use excessive oil on specimen forms .
coat and cure the specimen sides at room temperature for num hr .
immerse the specimens in water from num f to num f num c to num c for num hr and repeat num cycles of the following procedures place the specimens in cold storage at num f num c for num hr .
concrete surface finish for structures num num concrete surface finish for structures thaw the specimens at temperatures from num f to num f num c to num c for at least num hr .
ensure specimens show no defects at the end of num cycles of the freezethaw test .
num accelerated weathering expose the material to a num hr test in a twinarcweatherometer at an operating temperature of num f num c. test in num min cycles consisting of num min of light and num min of water spray plus light .
at the end of the exposure test ensure the exposed sample shows no chipping flaking or peeling .
num flexibility when applied to a thin metal plate at a spreading rate from num ft²gal to num ft²gal num m²l to num m²l ensure the material bends num over a num mm mandrel without breaking the film .
num fungus growth resistance provide material that passes a fungus resistance test in accordance with federal specification ttpnumb .
test for an incubation period of at least num days and ensure the material shows no signs of fungal growth .
num abrasion test test for abrasion resistance in accordance with astm c num .
ensure the material lost is no greater than num cm³cm² .
num salt spray resistance apply the material to the concrete at a rate of num ft²gal num m²l .
test the material in accordance with astm b num with the coating exposed to a num percent sodium chloride solution for num hr and maintained at a temperature from num f num f num c num c. during the exposure period ensure the material shows no loss of adhesion or deterioration at the end of the num hr .
num elastomeric coating system a .
general provide an elastomeric polyurethane waterproof coating system that forms a waterproof barrier over posttensioning anchorages or areas shown on the plans .
provide waterproof coating system components from a single manufacturer .
apply the surface preparation and coating system in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
b .
physical properties provide an elastomeric coating system composed of several coats .
provide an epoxy prime coat if required on the manufacturers recommendations for waterproofing systems .
provide a polyurethane chemistry that is waterborne aromatic or aromatic .
provide an elastomeric coating system at least num mil thick and in accordance with table num num concrete surface finish for structures num num table num physical properties property test value test method hardness shore a num num astm d num tensile strength num psi num mpa astm d num elongation num a stm d num tear strength num pli num nmm astm c num abrasion resistance h num wheels num gmwheel num mg lossnum revs .
astm c num crack bridging num cycles system passes astm c num elongation recovery num a stm c num c. system modifications for bridge substructures supply the elastomeric coating system with an aliphatic polyurethane top coat .
when applied to bridge substructures match the color to the color scheme shown on the plans .
if the plans do not show a color scheme use a color similar to federal color standard no .
numb table viii shade no .
num .
num antigraffiti coating system a .
general provide a non sacrificial antigraffiti coating system that forms a barrier over new or existing concrete surfaces that allows for the removal of graffiti without leaving graffiti shadows or ghosts .
provide antigraffiti coating system components from a single manufacturer .
apply the surface preparation and coating system in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
b .
physical properties num level num coating provide a non sacrificial antigraffiti coating system that forms a barrier over new concrete surfaces that allows for the removal of graffiti in accordance with astm d num with a cleanability level num .
num level num coating provide a non sacrificial antigraffiti coating system that forms a barrier over an existing concrete surface that allows for the removal of graffiti in accordance with astm d num with a cleanability level num .
num opaque sealers and stains provide opaque sealer and stain coating systems that are solventborne staintype coatings capable of waterproofing as well as coloring finished concrete .
these coatings consist of a blend of acrylic and silicone resins and toning pigments suspended in solution at all times by a chemical suspension agent and solvents .
use laminar silicates titanium dioxide inorganic oxides and other mineral pigments and toning .
use of organic pigments vegetable or marine oils paraffinic materials or stearates in the formulation are not permitted .
provide a coating system capable of being coated with itself or other solventborne coatings without special surface preparation being necessary .
pull boxes num num section num pull boxes electrical conductors num traffic signal wire and cable provide traffic and signal electrical cable in accordance with imsa num or num size num awg .
provide shielded loop detector leadin cable in accordance with imsa num size num awg .
provide loop detector wire in accordance with imsa num size num awg .
num building and highway lighting wire and cable provide awg sized nec wire type xhhwnum or type thhn building wire and cable with copper conductors rated for num v. provide awg sized nec wire type xxhwnum or type tthn underground wire and cable with copper conductors .
provide awg sized nec wire type xhhwnum or type thhn aerial wire and cable with a conductor material that is best suited for the service intended .
num communication wire and cable provide underground communication wire and cables in accordance with imsa num or reanum .
provide overhead communication wire and cable in accordance with imsa num .
section num pull boxes num precast concrete pull boxes a .
concrete provide concrete mixture designed to have a compressive strength of num psi num mpa in accordance with aashto t num .
b. reinforcement provide wire reinforcement in accordance with aashto m num or aashto m num .
c. cover provide a gray iron casting cover in accordance with subsection num iron castings .
ensure the cover has a nonslip surface and two ⅜ in num mm pent head brass bolts and nuts .
num pull boxes num pull boxes num precast reinforced plastic pull boxes a .
general provide reinforced plastic mortar composed of a borosilicate glass fiber in the form of woven fabric chopped strand or mat catalyzed polyester resin and aggregate .
b .
plastic material provide selfextinguishing plastic materials tested in accordance with astm d num .
ensure the plastic material does not physically change when exposed to weather .
c. design characteristics provide a cover with an embossed nonskid surface equipped with two ⅜ in num mm pent head brass bolts and nuts .
provide a concrete gray colored box and cover .
ensure deflections from test loads do not cause the cover to bind or become displaced from the extension .
num cover ensure the cover can withstand the following a weight of num lb num kg distributed over a num in num in num mm num mm area without puncture or splitting and an impact load of num ftlb num ncm from a num lb num kg mass with a tupc nose detail in accordance with astm d num .
num box walls with the cover in place ensure box walls can withstand a num lb num kg vertical load distributed over a num in num in num mm num mm area centered over an exposed edge .
num lateral loads without the cover ensure lateral loads can withstand num lb num kg distributed over a num in num in num mm num mm area of backfill adjacent to the installed box .
traffic signal backplates num num section num traffic signal backplates num materials provide vacuumformed backplates constructed of polycarbonate or acrylonitrilebutadienestyrene abs sheet material .
provide polycarbonate sheet material in accordance with astm d num astm d num astm d num and astm d num .
provide abs sheet material in accordance with astm d num .
num finish ensure the backplate is black with a hair cell finish on the front and a smooth finish on the back .
num chapter num traffic control facilities section page no .
num performance and operational tests for highway lighting and traffic signalsnum num electrical conduitnum num pull boxes and ground boxesnum num concrete footings num num removal of traffic itemsnum num poles and mast armsnum num breakaway bases highway lightingnum num piermounted pole brackets num num luminairesnum num power supplies num num electrical conductors highway lighting num num high mast polesnum num high mast lowering devicenum num traffic signal controller assemblynum num solidstate flashing contoller num num vehicle loop detector and loop wire detector wire num num pedestrian push button num num traffic signal heads num num opticallyprogrammed adjustable traffic signal heads num num traffic signal backplates num num electrical conductors for traffic signalsnum num regulatory or warning sign assemblynum num railroadhighway crossbuck signsnum num signs num num galvanized steel sign postsnum num num overhead sign structures num num delineatorsnum num traffic stripe paint num num traffic stripe paint num num traffic stripe multipolymer num num construction zone pavement markings num num pavement markersnum num sandfilled impact attenuation modulesnum num truck mounted impact attenuatorsnum num portable longitudinal barriernum num modular glare screen num num construction signing and traffic controlnum num changeable message sign num num bridge guardrail retrofitsnum performance operational tests for highway lighting traffic signals num num section num performance and operational tests for highway lighting and traffic signals performance operational tests for highway lighting traffic signals num description this work consists of providing labor equipment appliances and materials to install and test highway lighting and traffic signal systems .
ensure the electrical work conforms to nec except where superseded by the contract requirements .
num materials within num days of receiving notice to proceed submit to the resident engineer a list of materials to be used on the project that are listed on the departments traffic engineering division qualified products list qpl .
for materials not listed on the qpl submit five copies of a complete materials schedule and proposed equipment including catalog cuts diagrams drawings and other data along with a new product evaluation request form to the resident engineer for approval .
provide materials and equipment to meet the contract requirements .
the resident engineer may waive the submittal requirements for materials and equipment listed on the departments traffic engineering division qualified products list .
after completing the traffic signal systems work deliver the manufacturers instruction manual for the maintenance timing and operation of traffic control equipment to the resident engineer .
provide a signal system wiring diagram and a parts list with each controller .
provide galvanized hardware in accordance with aashto m num class c coating .
provide new standard and manufactured electrical and mechanical equipment .
provide the same class of equipment from a single manufacturer .
provide guarantees and warranties in accordance with subsection num guarantees and warranties .
num equipment provide specialized test equipment tools electrical diagrams and labor required to perform tests for highway lighting and traffic signals .
num construction methods a .
general determine exact locations of electrical energy supplies in the field .
make arrangements with the utility provider to complete the service connections .
num performance operational tests for highway lighting traffic signals num performance operational tests for highway lighting traffic signals notify the resident engineer at least num hr before testing .
the resident engineer will notify the city county or other agency responsible for supplying the electrical power for the planned testing procedures .
unless otherwise required by the contract provide numcycle singlephase num v electrical supply and circuits for highway lighting .
ensure the lighting electrical supply and circuits are multigrounded neutral for multiple connections of luminaires with automatic photoelectric control to turn the highway lights on at dusk and off at dawn .
supply the num v lighting circuits from a primary system through a distribution transformer and control equipment .
provide numcycle singlephase num v electrical supply and circuits for permanent and temporary traffic signals and flashing beacons unless otherwise required by the contract .
provide numcycle singlephase num v electrical supply and ballasts for highway sign lighting .
b .
bonding and grounding provide mechanically and electrically secure conduit poles and cabinets to form a continuous system .
provide at least no .
num awg copper wire for bond and ground jumpers .
provide at least no .
num awg copper wire for ground poles securely attached to the pole and the ground rod as shown on the plans .
provide at least no .
num awg copper wire for grounding conduit and neutral grounding conductors at service locations .
c. electrical field testing before starting functional testing test each circuit for continuity and grounds .
ensure the ground rods have a resistance to ground no greater than num ω after installation .
with the resident engineer present conduct an insulation resistance test at num v dc on each circuit between the circuit and the ground .
ensure insulation resistance of at least num mω on all circuits .
the department will not allow insulation resistance testing using magnetometer detector devices .
the department will not allow splices made in the condulet or junction box adjacent to the magnetometer before testing on the leadin conductors between the splice and the controller cabinet field terminals .
submit the written test results to the resident engineer .
d. electrical functional tests notify the government agency with jurisdiction over the system at least num hr before starting functional tests on traffic signal systems .
do not allow the new and existing traffic signal systems to operate simultaneously .
continuously operate conventional and highmast lighting systems and traffic signal systems for num hr to determine if system parts function properly .
place the electrical system into service and inspect immediately for defects .
inspect the system during the test period at intervals directed by the resident engineer .
during the functional test throw safety switches to verify proper operation as required by the contract .
switch photoelectric controllers from auto to manual and back to auto performance operational tests for highway lighting traffic signals num num performance operational tests for highway lighting traffic signals during the night portion of the test to observe the response of the photoelectric controller .
after the num hr test period the resident engineer will inspect the complete electrical system to ensure normal operation and to check for proper fixture and equipment installation .
if connected to the permanent power source perform tests on sign lighting systems flashing beacons and electromechanical changeable message signs .
if not connected to the permanent power source at the time of installation provide temporary power to each device to demonstrate proper installation and operation for approval by the resident engineer .
e. mechanical test after the num hr functional test operate highmast lighting systems and observe the system at night for six days .
look for defects in the luminaire or lamps .
demonstrate the proper function of lowering devices to the resident engineer by completing one lower and raise cycle on each assembly .
f. defects correct defects as directed by the resident engineer at no additional cost to the department .
g. existing traffic signal equipment do not remove disconnect or otherwise disable existing signal equipment until the functional test on the new equipment is complete and approved by the resident engineer for continued use .
h. covering of signal indications before making the new signal equipment operational cover signal heads installed but not lit with an allweather bag do not cover the walkdont walk indications .
do not allow the new and existing systems to be visible to traffic at the same time .
num method of measurement vacant num basis of payment the department will consider the costs of functional tests required by the contract to be included in the contract unit prices for the relevant lighting and traffic pay items .
num electrical conduit num section num electrical conduit num description this work consists of providing and installing electrical conduit junction boxes fittings expansion devices and miscellaneous hardware for electrical conduit .
num materials a .
conduits and fittings provide conduits and fittings in accordance with section num electrical conduit .
b. junction boxes provide junction boxes with gaskets and covers of the size and type shown on the plans .
c. condulets provide oversized condulets with exposed conduit systems and a splicing chamber instead of junction boxes as approved by the resident engineer .
the department will not allow condulets for fused branch circuits .
num equipment vacant num construction methods a .
general install conduit in accordance with the nec .
install direct conduit runs with no less than the minimum size shown on the plans .
the department will allow the use of larger conduit for the entire length of the run outlet to outlet at no additional cost to the department .
the department will not allow slip joints or running threads for coupling conduit .
if standard couplings are not practical use threadedunion couplings to couple metal conduit as approved by the resident engineer .
ream conduit ends to remove burrs and rough edges .
make cuts square so ends will butt together for the full circumference .
for metal conduit tighten couplings until the ends come together do not leave threads exposed .
for nonmetallic conduit use solvent weld connections .
if damage to galvanized conduit exposes bare metal regalvanize metalize or paint with zinc dustoxide paint at no additional cost to the department .
thread and cap metal and nonmetallic conduit ends with standard pipe caps until wiring starts .
after removing caps install conduit bushings on the threaded ends .
cap conduit ends not terminating in a junction box or electrical enclosure .
provide factory conduit bends in accordance with the nec or bend conduit without crimping or flattening using the longest centerline radius for each installation not less than six times the conduit inside diameter .
electrical conduit num num electrical conduit extend conduit in concrete pole bases structures or pedestals no more than num in num mm above the footing .
extend conduit entering pull box sides no more than num in num mm inside the box wall and slope the conduit toward the top of the box .
extend conduit entering the pull box bottom to at least num in num mm above the bottom .
locate near the edges of walls .
use nipples to eliminate cutting and threading short conduit runs .
complete all potentially damaging work before installing conductor in the conduit system .
if incorporating existing underground conduit into a new system clean with compressed air .
b .
pushed or bored conduit use pushing or boring methods to place the conduit under pavement .
do not disturb the pavement without approval from the resident engineer .
keep pushing or boring pits at least num ft num m from the edge of surfaced areas .
the department will not allow the use of water for pushing or boring if the pavement structure may suffer damage .
if leaving pits overnight cover with planking and mark as directed by the resident engineer .
push only rigid metal conduits .
provide rigid metal or nonmetallic conduits for boring .
for rigid nonmetallic conduit predrill a hole larger than the conduit and install conduit by hand .
unless otherwise shown on the plans install bored or pushed conduits at least num in num m deep .
where conduit passes under a surfaced area cut an x in the curb surface or both for locating in the future .
c. trenched conduit and backfilling install conduit in trenches of the types and sizes shown on the plans .
excavate trenches deep enough to provide at least num in num m cover unless otherwise approved by the resident engineer .
clear the trench of hard and abrasive materials before placing conduit .
do not place conduit before the resident engineer inspects the trench .
excavate immediately before installing the conduit .
store the conduit to not damage or obstruct vehicular or pedestrian traffic and surface drainage .
excavate trenches to the dimensions shown on the plans .
dispose of surplus excavated material as approved by the resident engineer .
if rock is encountered during trenching and the minimum cover depth is unattainable alter the depth or location as approved by the resident engineer .
excavate the trench to at least num ft num m deep .
backfill trenches with material approved by the resident engineer immediately after conduit installation .
deposit the backfill material in uncompacted layers no deeper than num in num mm .
install underground utility marking tape as shown on the plans .
provide rockfree backfill for the first layer .
compact each layer before placing the next .
num electrical conduit num num compact backfill to at least num percent standard density in accordance with section num earthwork .
reconstruct disturbed surfaced areas base materials and sodded areas as approved by the resident engineer at no additional cost to the department .
if damage occurs to concrete sidewalks or driveways remove and reconstruct entire slabs unless otherwise approved by the resident engineer .
remove pavement in accordance with section num removal of buildings structures and obstructions neshap inspection .
d. exposed conduit use rigid metal conduit on exposed surfaces unless otherwise shown on the plans .
run surfacemounted conduit straight and flush with the surface of the structure or pole .
support the conduit at least every num ft num m unless otherwise approved by the resident engineer .
use galvanized malleable iron conduit clamps and bolts with expansion shield anchor devices approved by the resident engineer .
the department will not allow lag or machine bolt shields and percussion driven anchors in concrete or masonry .
use qplapproved supporting devices for conduit attached to structural steel members .
e. conduit in concrete structures unless otherwise shown on the plans use rigid metal conduit for concrete structures .
where the conduit crosses an expansion joint install an expansion device of the type and size shown on the plans .
f. junction boxes install the sizes and types of junction boxes shown on the plans .
num method of measurement the resident engineer will measure the length of each size and type of conduit separately along the centerline of the conduit from end to end .
num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit a galvanized steel electrical conduit linear foot meter b polyvinyl chloride pvc conduit linear foot meter c high density polyethylene hdpe conduit linear foot meter d aluminum conduit linear foot meter e junction box each pull boxes and ground boxes num num the department will consider the cost of flexible steel conduit fittings outlets entrance caps pull wires condulets expansion devices excavation backfilling and miscellaneous hardware to be included in the contract unit price for the relevant conduit pay item .
section num pull boxes and ground boxes num description this work consists of providing and installing underground enclosures .
num materials provide materials in accordance with the following subsections material subsection precast concrete pull boxes num compositepolymer concrete pull boxes num provide ground boxes as shown on the plans .
num equipment vacant num construction methods provide underground enclosures as shown on the plans .
obtain the resident engineers approval to revise enclosure locations to fit field conditions or facilitate conduit system installation .
use pull boxes to distribute electrical service .
provide ground boxes for communication applications such as intelligent transportation systems .
a .
installation install underground enclosures on a bed of crushed rock as shown on the plans .
for underground enclosures installed in surfaced areas make the top of the enclosure flush with the finished surface .
for underground enclosures located near curbs as required by the contract place adjacent to the back of the curb and flush with the top of the curb .
for underground enclosures in ground ensure the top of the enclosure is flush with the top of or no greater than num in num mm above the ground surface .
unless otherwise approved by the resident engineer provide underground enclosures with concrete aprons at no additional cost to the department .
install conduits entering underground enclosures as shown in the plans and in accordance with section num electrical conduit .
if shown on the plans provide underground enclosure extensions of the same material as the enclosure .
attach extensions to the underground enclosure to maintain the depth shown on the plans without causing assembly separation .
num pull boxes and ground boxes num num pull boxes and ground boxes b .
cover and markings mark the covers of pull boxes for lighting conductors with the legend lighting .
mark the covers of pull boxes used for traffic signal conductors with the legend traffic signal .
mark ground box covers with the legend electrical danger danger ____v .
for conductor voltages of at least num v add the words high voltage to the cover and equip the conductor cover with a recessed molded lifting eye and recessed holddown bolts .
make the letters from num in to num in num mm to num mm tall .
cast the legend with the cover .
ensure the legend is a uniform depth or height and parallel to one side of the cover .
provide installations for electrical service with nonmetallic covers .
provide installations for use with communication or fiber optic cables with metallic covers .
provide covers with nonskid surfaces .
c. ground rod install copper weld ground rods as shown on the plans .
num method of measurement vacant num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit a pull box each b ground box each the department will consider the cost of the cover extension ground rod concrete apron crushed rock excavation and backfilling to be included in the contract unit price for pull box and ground box .
concrete footings num num section num concrete footings num description this work consists of installing concrete footings for traffic control devices .
num materials provide materials in accordance with the following sections subsection and external reference material section subsection or external reference portland cement concrete class a num reinforcing steel num electrical conduit num anchor bolts and nuts num galvanizing bolts nuts and washers aashto m num num equipment vacant num construction methods a. footings to minimize shimming construct level concrete footings on firm ground in accordance with section num structural concrete .
construct footings at the locations shown on the plans and to the grade directed by the resident engineer .
if an obstruction prevents the construction at the planned location construct footings at the location directed by the resident engineer .
erect the pole post or breakaway base after the foundation reaches num percent of the required num day compressive strength and ages at least num hr .
the resident engineer may waive this restriction if the pole post or breakaway base is set directly in the footing .
modify footings shown on the plans based on field conditions and with the approval of the resident engineer .
after completing the footing restore the surrounding area as approved by the resident engineer .
b. anchor bolts use anchor bolts of the size and quantity shown on the plans .
use a template to locate and secure anchor bolts in the footing .
provide anchor bolts with the top exposed portion plus num in num mm galvanized and threaded as shown on the plans .
supply the anchor bolts with galvanized hex head nuts flat washers and lock washers as shown on the plans .
do not weld any part of the anchor bolt .
num concrete footings num num concrete footings c. conduits install conduits in footings of the quantity size and type shown on the plans .
locate conduit couplings at least num in num mm from the face of the footing .
d. ground rod install copper weld ground rods of the size shown on the plans .
num method of measurement vacant num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit a structural concrete cubic yard cubic meter b reinforcing steel pound kilogram the department will consider the cost of anchor bolts nuts washers ground rod conduit excavation backfilling and other incidental work to be included in the contract unit price for structural concrete and reinforcing steel .
section num removal of traffic items num description this work consists of removing traffic signal and highway lighting items including but not limited to the following pole assemblies luminaires pull boxes power supplies signal heads and controllers .
num materials vacant num equipment vacant num construction methods if the contract requires the removal of traffic signals or highway lighting items disconnect the items from the footing conduit and wiring system and store at a location directed by the resident engineer .
do not damage traffic signal equipment during removal and storage .
remove poles and cut anchor bolts and protruding conduit flush with the final ground level .
leave footings pull boxes and underground conduit in place .
remove wiring from underground conduit .
removal of traffic items num num removal of traffic items construct concrete footings or other concrete appurtenances to adjust or relocate traffic signals or highway lighting systems as shown on the plans .
before reinstalling removed traffic items inspect repair damage clean and install a new lamp of the original size and type .
dispose of materials that can not be reused with the approval of the resident engineer .
provide new materials to complete the installation as shown on the plans and to make the system operational at no additional cost to the department .
after adjusting or resetting the removed items and completing the electrical connections energize and test the traffic signal or highway lighting system in accordance with section num performance and operational tests for highway lighting and traffic .
provide acceptable test results to the resident engineer for approval .
num method of measurement the resident engineer will measure the length of relaid cable or conduit in place before removal .
num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit a removal of traffic items lump sum each or linear foot meter b reset of traffic items lump sum or each c relocation of traffic items linear foot meter d remove and reset traffic items lump sum or each if separate payment for this work is not required by the contract the department will consider the cost to be included in the contract unit price for other relevant items of work .
num poles and mast arms num section num poles and mast arms num description this work consists of providing and installing poles mast arms and pedestal poles for traffic signals and highway lighting .
num materials provide materials in accordance with section num materials and the latest edition of the aashto standard specifications for structural supports of highway signs luminaires and traffic signals .
num equipment vacant num construction methods a .
general install high mast poles as shown on the plans in accordance with section num high mast poles .
ensure the manufacturer designs the poles and mast arms for a minimum num mph num kmh wind velocity .
ensure the calculated stresses from design loading on poles and arms do not exceed the lesser of num psi num mpa or num percent of astm yield strength .
provide certification of the pole material in accordance with astm for the operational stress range of the poles .
provide traffic signal steel poles and mast arm materials with at least a num gauge thickness .
design traffic signal poles in accordance with the traffic engineering divisions loading chart .
unless the poles are on the departments traffic engineering division qualified product list qpl submit manufacturer shop and design drawings and calculations in accordance with subsection num plans and working drawings .
the department will allow mounting of mast arms to the pole before erection .
protect the pole mast arm and finish from damage during erection .
repair damaged finish as approved by the resident engineer at no additional cost to the department .
level anchor base poles with nuts or shims .
for double nut leveling fill the space between the concrete foundation and the pole base with a nonshrink grout unless otherwise shown on the plans .
install and torque fasteners in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
cast structural castings in permanent molds .
the department will not allow double nut leveling for poles with breakaway bases .
b .
poles ensure the pole accommodates the mounting height of the luminaire or traffic signal as shown on the plans .
uniformly taper round or multisided poles from bottom to top pedestal poles do not require taper .
straighten and center poles on the longitudinal axis .
poles and mast arms num num poles and mast arms unless otherwise required by the contract provide each pole with a reinforced hand hole and weatherproof cover .
install a removable pole cap on each shaft except pedestal poles .
provide metallic poles with a grounding connection inside the base of the shaft and ground as shown on the plans .
provide cast or structural plate anchor bases .
c. mast arms provide mast arms of the lengths shown on the plans .
design luminaire mast arms to support a num lb num kg luminaire with an effective projected area of num ft² num m² .
provide a smooth raceway for the wiring each with a slipfitter tenon .
design traffic signal mast arms to support the required signal heads as shown on the plans .
num method of measurement vacant num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit a traffic signal pole and mastarm each b traffic signal pedestal pole each c highway lighting pole and mastarm each d highway lighting posttop pole each num breakaway bases highway lighting num section num breakaway bases highway lighting num description this work consists of providing and installing breakaway bases .
num materials provide materials in accordance with the following subsection and external references material subsection or external reference cast aluminum astm b num alloy num tnum bolts nuts and washers adapter plates num galvanized hardware aashto m num galvanized plates aashto m num provide aluminum breakaway transformer bases cast in a permanent mold .
provide each base with a plastic door approved by the traffic engineer division .
provide breakaway bases in accordance with the latest edition of the aashto standard specifications for structural supports for highway signs luminaires and traffic signals and as approved by the fhwa .
num equipment vacant num construction methods ensure the pole base is no larger than the top flange of the transformer base .
the department will allow slotted anchor bolt holes on the top and bottom flanges of the base .
provide each base with bolts nuts washers and adapting washers as shown on the plans to connect the base to the pole and anchor bolts .
install and provide galvanized connecting bolts nuts washers and adaptor plates in accordance with the base manufacturers recommendations including bolt torque .
affix an installation and mounting instruction label indicating aashtofhwa approval and the year approved inside each breakaway base opposite the door .
use shims to level breakaway base poles in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
the department will not allow double nut leveling .
num method of measurement vacant num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit breakaway base each the department will consider the cost of hardware adapter plates and plastic doors to be included in the contract unit price for breakaway base .
piermounted pole brackets num num section num piermounted pole brackets piermounted pole brackets num description this work consists of providing and installing piermounted pole brackets .
num materials provide materials in accordance with the following sections subsection and external reference material section subsection or external reference structural steel num galvanizing aashto m num electrical conduit num bolts nuts and washers num num equipment vacant num construction methods fabricate galvanize and construct the brackets and install on bridge piers as shown on the plans .
num method of measurement vacant num basis of payment the department will pay for this pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit piermounted pole bracket each num luminaires num section num luminaires num description this work consists of providing and installing roadway and sign lighting luminaires .
num materials provide luminaires with a housing ballast reflector refractor and lamp of the type and lumen rating shown on the plans .
submit to the resident engineer a list of luminaires to be used on the project that are listed on the departments traffic engineering division qualified products list qpl .
for luminaires not listed on the qpl submit five copies of a complete materials schedule and proposed equipment including catalog cuts diagrams drawings and other data along with a new product evaluation request form to the resident engineer for approval .
fabricate assemble and install luminaires as shown on the plans .
provide luminaires meeting the illumination engineering society of north america iesna standards for the size and type of luminaire shown on the plans .
for each size and type of luminaire submit the following to the resident engineer manufacturers photometric test data manufacturer certification that iesnaapproved test procedures were used num equipment vacant num construction methods install luminaires in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations and as shown on the plans .
num method of measurement vacant num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit a roadway luminaire each b underpass luminaire each c post top luminaire each d overhead sign luminaire each e high mast luminaire each f navigational light each the department will consider the cost of cutoff visors and other hardware to be included in the contract unit price for the relevant luminaire pay items .
power supplies num num section num power supplies num description this work consists of providing and installing permanent and temporary power supply systems .
num materials provide materials in accordance with the following sections subsection and external reference material section subsection or external reference wood poles ansi num electrical conduit num portland cement concrete class a num reinforcing steel num conductors num for miscellaneous pole line hardware provide standard material manufactured for pole line construction .
provide hotdipped galvanized or otherwise noncorrosive metal parts .
provide control equipment in accordance with nema numr or num and ul specifications .
provide a metered temporary lighting service to power existing and temporary lighting .
num equipment vacant num construction methods construct power supplies in accordance with the nist handbook num safety rules for the installation and maintenance of electric supply and communication lines .
cooperate with the local utility companies to locate install and connect power supplies .
contact local excavator alert organizations before starting trenching or boring operations .
a. voltage and construction specifications ensure the voltages for the permanent or temporary service poles are as shown on the plans .
construct concrete in accordance with section num structural concrete .
construct reinforcing steel in accordance with section num reinforcing steel for structures .
b .
temporary power supplies arrange for electrical power connections for the temporary service poles as soon as construction allows .
arrange power connections for locations not shown on the plans through the local utility company with the approval of the resident engineer .
num power supplies num power supplies erect energize deactivate and remove the temporary lighting system at various stages of the traffic control as shown on the plans or as directed by the resident engineer .
space the temporary lighting on wood poles num ft num m apart .
protect the light poles from traffic as approved by the resident engineer .
the department will not allow the use of aerial conductors to connect power to light poles with breakaway bases .
install the temporary light and service poles .
repair damage from installation relocation or removal at no additional cost to the department .
maintain all existing lighting systems during construction in accordance with subsection num maintenance during construction at no additional cost to the department .
if a lighting pole assembly is damaged or knocked down by a third party repair or replace the damaged lighting pole assembly to its original condition .
the department will pay the additional cost at the contract unit price for pay items necessary to complete the repair or replacement excluding removal of the light pole and concrete footing .
after completing the lighting system or project connect the temporary service poles to the permanent service poles for final acceptance .
carefully handle items shown on the plans for removal resetting or both .
neatly store the removed items in a location directed by the resident engineer .
removed service poles light poles mast arms luminaires and temporary lighting equipment become the property of the department .
stockpile these items at locations shown on the plans unless otherwise approved or directed by the resident engineer .
leave the temporary service poles and the temporary lighting systems in place or remove at the end of the project as directed by the resident engineer .
if temporary service poles or temporary lighting systems provide a safe driving environment leave in place as approved by the resident engineer .
num temporary lighting on wood poles supply electrical service to temporarily light traffic control crossovers points of conflict and other locations as approved by the resident engineer .
num existing lighting circuits maintain existing lighting systems in operation .
if construction disrupts an existing lighting system use additional temporary lighting on wood poles .
num new permanent lighting circuits use the temporary lighting service and the temporary service poles to supply electricity to the temporary lighting poles and the new permanent lighting circuits .
after project completion connect the permanent service pole to the new permanent lighting circuits .
install the permanent electrical service for the new highway lighting systems as shown on the plans .
electrical conductors highway lighting num num num method of measurement before payment provide the resident engineer with copies of the utility companys invoice and proof of payment for temporary lighting service .
num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit a service pole each b polemounted transformer station each c padmounted transformer station each d temporary service pole each e temporary lighting service kilowatthour f wood pole each the department or local authority will become will become responsible for continuing temporary lighting system maintenance and operation after project completion and final acceptance .
section num electrical conductors highway lighting num description this work consists of providing and installing electrical conductors to transmit and distribute electrical energy .
num materials provide materials in accordance with the following subsections material subsection building wire and cable num underground secondary distribution wire and cable num outdoor aerial neutralsupported secondary distribution wire and cable num num equipment vacant num construction methods a. conductors in conduit complete the conduit system before installing the conductors .
provide enough slack in each conductor to allow at least num ft num m at pole bases and at least num ft num m at pull boxes .
num electrical conductors highway lighting num numelectrical conductors highway lighting b. aerial conductors install aerial conductors in accordance with the national electric safety code and the manufacturers recommendations for sag and tension .
submit a copy of the cable manufacturers charts for each size and type of cable to the resident engineer for approval of aerial conductor .
c. splices and taps splice or tap the underground and indoor conductors at pull boxes pole bases control cabinets junction boxes or other weatherproof enclosures .
splice and tap outdoor aerial conductors as shown on the plans .
do not pull splices into the conduit system .
provide the types of splices and taps required by the contract .
seal waterproof and insulate insulated conductors in accordance with ansi cnum sealed insulated underground connector system rated num volts .
alternatively complete procedure num or procedure num .
num procedure num make splices and taps using compression connectors .
apply at least three layers of rubber tape in uniform halflap wrapping or cover the joint with at least a ⅛ in num mm layer of electrical insulating putty .
place at least three layers of high dielectric high tensile strength cold weather plastic tape in uniform halflap wrapping over the rubber tape or putty .
coat the layers with insulating paint .
num procedure num use waterproof selfinsulating connections made of compression connectors and epoxy or gel cast splice kits or heat shrinking splice kits .
d. fuse holders and fuses make inline or ytype fuse holders as shown on the plans .
if required by the contract provide waterproof and selfinsulating fuse holders with a quick disconnect breakaway feature on the load side .
install a ytype fuse holder at the base of each pole or overhead sign structure with the properly sized fuse .
if shown on the plans provide branch circuits with an inline fuse holder and fuse .
e. testing test the installed electrical conductors in accordance with section num performance and operational tests for highway lighting and traffic signals .
num method of measurement vacant num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit electrical conductor linear foot meter the department will consider the cost of connectors fuses splices and taps to be included in the contract unit price for electrical conductor .
high mast poles num num section num high mast poles num description this work consists of providing and installing high mast poles .
num materials before starting highmast lighting work submit to the resident engineer eight copies of brochures for and a schedule of the proposed materials and equipment items for high mast poles .
include brand names catalogue numbers descriptions cuts diagrams shop and design drawings and calculations as required by the contract .
the resident engineer may waive submittal requirements if the materials and equipment are on the departments traffic engineering division qualified products list .
verify the accuracy of the dimensions and details on the design drawings in accordance with subsection num plans and working drawings .
a .
structural design design high mast pole structures in accordance with the aashto standard specifications for structural supports for highway signs luminaires and traffic signals .
apply the following design parameters design wind velocity num s gust of num mph num kmh minimum design life num years with a num wind importance factor maximum pole deflection no greater than num percent of the pole height fatigue category num provide high mast poles in accordance with table num .
table num base plate thickness for high mast poles pole length ft m base plate thickness in mm num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num the department may randomly check pole designs .
ensure the pole manufacturer certifies the following in writing the pole design was coordinated with the manufacturer of the lowering device design the pole design is compatible with the installation of the high mast lowering device and luminaire and the total system will function properly .
b .
fabrication of steel shafts provide highstrength steel shafts in accordance with section num.d mechanical properties .
the department will allow circular manysided shafts either the total length shown on the plans or in telescoping sections .
provide galvanized poles in telescoping sections only .
provide coldformed shafts uniformly num high mast poles num high mast poles tapered from the largest diameter at the base to the smallest diameter at the top without reducing the wall thickness .
for shafts num ft num m or shorter provide no more than five telescoping sections .
for shafts longer than num ft to num ft num m to num m provide no more than six telescoping sections .
provide telescoping sections in one or two pieces .
provide onepiece sections at least num ft num m long .
buttweld the twopiece sections in accordance with subsection num.c welds .
ensure the capability of each shaft section to telescope over the next lower section at least num½ times the diameter of the female end of the joint .
ensure the manufacturer prefits and matchmarks telescoping sections .
preassemble each telescoping joint for proper fit .
assemble telescoping sections in the field in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations as approved by the resident engineer .
the department will not allow racking .
submit to the resident engineer the manufacturers written guarantee that the joints will not settle .
provide each shaft with a hand hole and a weatherproof cover bolted to a reinforced frame .
ensure the reinforced frame restores the strength lost to create the hand hole .
provide a circuit breaker and winch bracket mounting plate opposite the hand hole .
provide each shaft with a grounding connection inside the pole near the base .
ensure the pole manufacturer meets the standard manufacturing tolerance for straightness of the pole shaft .
the department will not allow fabrication of shaft sections using laminated or layered steel plates .
provide shaft sections with a thickness of at least num in num mm plate or num gauge sheet .
c. welds weld in accordance with the aashto standard specifications for structural supports for highway signs luminaires and traffic signals unless otherwise required by the contract .
buttweld the telescoping shaft sections of single unit poles with backed up num percent penetration circumferential transverse welds .
ensure the manufacturer ultrasonically inspects the welds .
grind circumferential transverse welds except for the base plate connection from ⅛ in to num in num mm to num mm beyond the outside pole surface .
contour backup material for full continuous contact with the same material as the shaft .
provide each shaft with no more than two longitudinal electric welds with at least num percent penetration except for the following areas for longitudinal seam welds within num in num mm of circumferential welds use fullpenetration groove welds at butt joints of base plates for longitudinal seam welds on the female section of telescopic field splices use fullpenetration groove welds equal to the minimum splice length plus num in num mm .
weld the shaft to the steel base with two continuous welds one at the top of the base and one at the bottom of the shaft or one fullpenetration buttweld with a backup strip if necessary .
high mast poles num num the department will not allow field welds except for those performed in accordance with subsection num.b fabrication of steel shafts .
visually inspect and test welds using one of the following methods aws dnum ultrasonic method astm e num magnetic particle method or astm e num astm e num or astm e num radiographics method .
test and inspect welds in accordance with the aashto specification for the type of weld used .
submit certified results to the resident engineer for review .
test num percent of field welds .
remove weld splatter before finishing .
finish welding before galvanizing .
ensure weld metal meets the notchtoughness requirements specified for bridge application in aws dnum .
perform impact tests in accordance with aws dnum appendix c for electroslag and electrogas weld metal .
d. mechanical properties provide highstrength steel for pole shafts with yield strengths of at least num psi num mpa and meeting the notchtoughness requirements of the charpy vnotch test for num ftlbs num kgm at num f num c. submit to the resident engineer num copies of the manufacturers certified chemical and physical properties mill test report covering each heat number used on the project .
test at least num coupons for each heat number after rolled by the steel manufacturer .
for samples that do not meet the minimum yield strength retest new samples with the same heat number .
the resident engineer may reject steel that fails the second test .
provide base flanges brackets and miscellaneous hardware fabricated from steel plate with yield strengths of at least num psi num mpa .
ensure the base plate meets the notchtoughness requirements of the charpy vnotch test for num ftlbs num kg m at num f num c. num anchor bolts provide each high mast pole with at least num anchor bolts .
ensure the anchor bolts arrive on site before the pole and cage the bolts before installing in the excavated foundation hole .
provide a template for placing and holding the anchor bolts in the foundation to ensure the pole base will fit properly .
install galvanized anchor bolts and nuts with galvanized poles in accordance with astm a num aashto m num at least the threaded length plus num in num mm .
prevent embrittlement in accordance with astm a num .
provide certification of compliance with these requirements if requested by the resident engineer .
the department will not allow welding or tacking the anchor bolts to make the required lengths or to make the anchor cage .
torque anchor bolts as specified by the pole manufacturer .
provide two hex nuts and one lock hex nut for each anchor bolt .
num high mast poles num num high mast poles num finish if shown on the plans provide galvanized shafts bases and miscellaneous brackets in accordance with astm a numa aashto m num .
take precautions against embrittlement warpage and distortion in accordance with astm a num and astm a num .
provide certification of compliance with these requirements if requested by the resident engineer .
avoid scratching the pole finish .
repair damaged finish in accordance with recommended materials and procedures established by the manufacturer for the pole and the finish as approved by the resident engineer .
num equipment vacant num construction methods join shafts made of telescoping sections before erection as directed by the pole manufacturer and approved by the resident engineer .
plumb and verify shafts in at least two directions num apart with a transit .
plumb shafts at the time directed by the resident engineer and within a tolerance of one half the pole top diameter .
fill the void between the base plate and the top of the foundation with an approved nonshrinking grout after approval by the resident engineer .
provide a drain hole through the grout for moisture inside the pole .
as an alternative to grout install a heavy gauge galvanized sheet steel formed to fit the hole inside the base plate .
ensure the sheet encloses the void between the base plate and the foundation .
fasten the sheet steel in place to prevent rodents and vandals from entering .
install the high mast lowering device before erecting the pole .
num method of measurement vacant num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit high mast pole each the department will consider the cost of accessories attachments and testing field welds to be included in the contract unit price for high mast pole .
high mast lowering device num num section num high mast lowering device num description this work consists of providing and installing a lowering device for high mast pole assemblies .
num materials before starting highmast lighting work submit to the resident engineer five copies of brochures for and a schedule of the proposed materials and equipment replacement parts for high mast lowering devices .
submit to the resident engineer five copies of the service and operating manuals .
include brand names catalogue numbers descriptions cuts diagrams shop and design drawings with part numbers and material finishes labeled and calculations as required by the contract .
do not include materials otherwise covered by these standard specifications on the schedule .
the resident engineer may waive submittal requirements if the materials and equipment are listed on the departments traffic engineering division qualified products list .
ensure the lowering device manufacturer has at least num years experience manufacturing and installing the device and is approved by the design engineer .
the design engineer will make final acceptance of the lowering device design .
a .
structural design provide a lowering device that consists of three main subassemblies head frame lowering ring and winch assembly .
ensure the material is corrosionresistant stainless or galvanized steel or aluminum .
ensure fixtures on the lowering devices pass an accelerated vibration test of at least num g. determine the actual loading for the high mast pole design by performing a fullscale wind tunnel test on the complete system consisting of the lowering device and the luminaires .
provide a lowering device capable of lowering a ring of luminaires to within num ft num m of the pole base to ensure safe and efficient routine luminaire maintenance .
provide each pole with a power cable and connectors to energize the entire ring of luminaires while the lowering device is in the lowered position .
provide a weatherproof twistlock service receptacle for this cable rated at num v. provide equally spaced hoisting cables attached to the luminaire ring .
provide a method to equalize the tension on the hoisting cables .
provide hoist cables of num num construction aircraft cable num in num mm diameter zinccoated galvanized steel in accordance with mil specification wnumc and federal specification rrwnumd .
provide a winch cable of ¼ in num mm diameter zinccoated galvanized steel using high strength num num construction aircraft cable .
num high mast lowering device num high mast lowering device in the raised position ensure minimal free movement in the luminaire ring .
rigidly suspend the luminaire ring from equally spaced points with mechanical latches or with cables in tension as shown on the plans and approved by the resident engineer .
provide the following luminaire ring suspensions as required by the contract num type i provide a positive automatic mechanical latching system not requiring manual or electrical tripping devices to latch or unlatch the system .
ensure the portion of the latching system permanently attached to the top of the pole with no moving parts or parts requiring adjustment after erection of the pole .
provide lowering devices with visual indicators of positive latching .
prevent ice or snow accumulations from impairing the latching system .
ensure the removal of tension from the hoisting and winch cables when the luminaire ring is latched .
num type ii ensure a positive guide and positioning method for the cables to prevent the luminaire ring from moving .
keep the hoisting cables in constant tension .
provide a method to equalize the stress on each cable and remove tension from the winch and cable assembly when the luminaire ring is in the raised position .
install guide arms rollers or both on the luminaire ring .
this assembly will consist of the following a roller contact spring loaded cast aluminum arms designed to protect the pole luminaries and lamps .
ensure the centering system keeps the ring luminaire concentric to the pole prevents the ring from hanging up prevents damage to the tower shaft finish and constantly keeps the luminaire ring equidistant from the pole during raising and lowering .
ensure that the centering arms interconnect to prevent the system from jamming on the pole during high winds .
provide stainless steel springs and nonmarking rollers .
house selflubricating pulleys located at the top of the pole under a weathertight cover with coloring similar to the support assembly .
provide at least six hoist cable sheaves at least num in num mm in diameter .
machine the cable groove in each sheave with a circular crosssection to match the hoist cable diameter .
provide sheaves in accordance with the requirements of astm a num .
ensure lowering device systems are stable and capable of operating in num mph num kmh winds .
provide a lightweight remotelycontrolled portable motor to power the lowering device winch .
provide a heavyduty reversible motor with at least num hp num w and a stalled torque at least twice the torque required for the lowering device .
provide for manual operation of the lowering device in case of power failure .
obtain written certification from the lowering device manufacturer that the lowering device design works with the high mast pole and luminaries and that the high mast lowering device num num total system functions mechanically and electrically .
ensure the lowering device and fixtures include manufacturer warrantees .
do not install an electromechanical disconnect in the circuit that supplies power to the luminaires at the top of the pole .
wire the power cable directly to the terminal blocks in the junction box on the luminaire ring .
attach the power cable to the luminaire ring and ensure support the full weight of the cable in the raised luminaire position .
provide a nema numr aluminum junction box including a weatherproof inlet on the ring exterior for testing the luminaries and lamps at ground level .
provide a factory prewired enclosure with the number of num type st cords for the luminaires and main power cord size as recommended by the manufacturer and approved by the resident engineer .
attach the power cord to the ring using cable clamps .
b .
materials num wire rope attachments obtain approval from the resident engineer for wire rope attachments .
install and torque wire rope attachments in accordance with the manufacturer recommendations .
num luminaire rings and mast arms provide luminaire ring and mast arms constructed of no .
num gauge weldable structural steel with a hot dip galvanized finish .
provide mast arms with num in num mm diameter pipes with slipfitter connections to the high mast luminaries .
equally space the arms around the ring unless otherwise shown on the plans .
provide the number of mast arms as shown on the plans .
provide a weatherproof luminaire ring prewired to distribute power from the main power cable .
ensure easy mast arm attachment and removal .
provide one mast arm for each high mast luminaire .
num high mast support assembly provide a weldable structuralsteel highmast support assembly that attaches to the pole shaft .
devise a pole attachment method in cooperation with the pole manufacturer to prevent the support assembly from rotating on the pole top .
ensure the support assembly houses the pulleys and mechanical latching devices .
num winch assembly provide a selflocking worm gear drive winch assembly with a reduction ratio of num .
place the winch assembly at the base of the pole shaft adjacent to the hand hole .
equip the winch assembly with a takeup guide to prevent cable overlap .
provide a winch assembly capable of raising and lowering the luminaire ring and luminaires at least num ftmin num mmin .
provide a winch containing an inboard and outboard support designed to operate by hand or mechanically using a portable motor .
ensure the winch cable is securely attached to the winch drum with at least three wraps around the drum when the luminaire ring is in the lowered position .
num high mast lowering device num num aircraft obstruction markers unless otherwise required by the contract provide luminaire rings with a double faaapproved red aircraft obstruction marker and a dry transformer mounted on the ring assembly with a bracket .
the resident engineer will not accept pipe with conduit lock rings for brackets .
ensure marker is visible num around the pole and wired to power on and off with the luminaires .
provide lights equipped with a multiple transfer relay for instant transfer to a reserve lamp if the operating lamp fails .
install the plugin transfer relay in a weathertight enclosure .
num lightning rod and arrestor attach a lightning rod to the lead frame assembly and wire to ground .
ensure that the assembly includes a lightning arrestor at the junction box on the luminaire ring .
num hardware provide hardware made of noncorrosive materials or plated to a compatible thickness to the structural parts of the lowering device .
num fasteners secure fasteners and pins to prevent loosening by vibration .
provide selflocking nuts jam nuts and cotter pins .
num poles ground the pole as shown on the plans .
provide an assembly that includes a circuit breaker in the base of the pole sized for the voltage and phasing supplied for the luminaire load .
provide an aluminum or zincplated steel cover for the circuit breaker .
provide a pigtail cord and plug from the circuit breaker assembly .
ensure the cord and plug are compatible with the main power cord of the lowering device system .
c. welding weld in accordance with aws dnum .
the department will not allow field welds .
visually inspect welds and test using the ultrasonic method in accordance with aws dnum the magnetic particle method in accordance with astm e num or the radiographic method in accordance with astm e num e num or e num .
submit certified test results if requested by the resident engineer .
complete welding and remove weld splatter before finishing .
d. finish galvanize the high mast lowering device after fabrication in accordance with astm a numa aashto mnum .
traffic signal controller assembly num num num equipment vacant num construction methods work with the manufacturers representative to ensure correct installation of the lowering device .
obtain a written installation and operation manual from the manufacturer of the lowering device .
obtain at least num copies per project or one copy per device whichever is greater .
after installing the lowering device on the tower but before erecting the tower request that the departments traffic engineer inspect the fully rigged device .
erect the tower after the traffic engineers inspection and the resident engineers approval .
num method of measurement vacant num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit high mast lowering device each the department will consider the cost of attachments wiring circuit breakers and other accessories to be included in the contract unit price for high mast lowering device .
section num traffic signal controller assembly num description this work consists of providing and installing a fullactuated traffic controller assembly including cabinet solidstate fullactuated controller unit load switches flasher conflict monitor and related documentation .
num materials provide a controller assembly in accordance with nema standards publication tsnum traffic control system nema tsnum .
if shown on the plans provide a controller assembly in accordance with nema standards publication ts num traffic controller assemblies with ntcip requirements nema tsnum .
a. fullactuated traffic signal controller num hardware design requirements ensure each controller unit has a permanent label on the unit face displaying a unique serial number .
provide solidstate digitallytimed controller units .
synchronize the controller timing with the num hz power source .
provide controllers with at least the dimensions and characteristics specified in table num num traffic signal controller assembly num table num controller dimensions and characteristics phases num phase num phase num phase load switch positions num num num cabinet size height width depth num in num in num in num m num m num m num in num in num in num m num m num m num in num in num in num m num m num m number of detector channels num num num number of preemption channels num num num number of nema plus monitor channels num num num traffic signal controller assembly ensure the unit face displays the following phases in service one per ring phases to be serviced next one per ring presence of vehicle call one per phase presence of pedestrian call one per phase reason for green termination one per ring gapout maximum timeout forceoff pedestrian service one per phase and max ii in effect one per ring .
the department will allow steady and flashing indications for phase in service phase next and pedestrian service or other mutually exclusive indications .
provide a controller that stores and maintains userprogrammed entries and timing settings using nonvolatile memory .
the department will not allow battery power for memory storage .
provide circuit components capable of withstanding the environments and voltage conditions described in part num of nema tsnum .
design the controller unit to operate with the logic ground isolated from the alternating current ac neutral common .
provide a controller unit with the following on the front panel a highquality keyboard for entering timings and settings with a lifetime rating of one million operations per key and a direct reading alphanumeric or graphic liquid crystal display lcd with back lighting .
provide an lcd display with the following properties readable from a distance of num ft num m at a num angle in any light conditions an automatic timeout feature unless the displays continuous life expectancy is num years or more an operating temperature range from num f to num f num c to num c blank out num min after the last keystroke and a display capacity of at least num character num lines .
traffic signal controller assembly num num if the contract requires an lcd contrast adjustment control for visibility at temperature extremes ensure the contrast control is accessible from the controller unit face and does not require tools to adjust .
provide one spare set of proprietary components for every ten controller units provided or portions thereof at least one set per project .
num external downloadupload interface provide a controller unit with an rs num serial port accessible through a dbnums or dbnum connector .
provide the following reserve connector pin assignments table num connector pin designations pin designation num frame ground num transmit data num receive data num request to send num clear to send num data set ready num signal ground num data carrier detect num data terminal ready num ring indicator ensure the port has a baud rate of at least num baud and is selectable by keyboard or jumper .
configure the port for an num bit word num stop bit no parity .
num program requirements a programmingdata entry ensure the controller is programmable including time base coordinator tbccbt features using simple keystrokes aided by full menu displays .
the department will not allow programs and displays that are difficult to program or interpret .
provide controller units using a programming interface with the following characteristics a menu structure containing a main menu with options for each controller sections on one screen each option selectable using a numeric entry each subsequent menu displays a detailed breakdown of the previous menu option each menu option programmed with a descriptive name e.g .
controller section entries display and enter in english toggle entries are set using yesno or onoff responses nonalphanumeric symbols with clear meanings numeric entries programmed in base num each nema timing interval is programmable for eight phases and appears in a spreadsheet on the same display screen a copy feature allowing the user to copy all intervals of one programmed phase to selected unprogrammed phases the department will allow other num traffic signal controller assembly num versions of the copying functions that meet the functional intent as reviewed by the departments traffic engineering division and approved by the resident engineer a display scroll feature to show additional information secure access to unit timing and configuration programmable with at least a fourdigit userselected code preset to all zeros and display features available without requiring access to the unit .
the department will allow internal dip switches to establish codes .
provide a keyboardentered coded command series of commands or entries not a single command or entry that will set controller and tbc timings and entries to a default or inactive value .
do not place instructions for the access code on the face of the unit .
ensure the coded command allows entry of new values without deleting previous entries .
boperational features provide volume density timing in accordance with nema tsnum .
ensure the controller unit allows dualentry operations .
ensure the following modes are available on a per phase basis maximum recall minimum recall pedestrian recall soft recall detector locking and nonlocking memory and phase omit .
provide a controller unit with the following selectable programmed configurations num phase nema and num phase sequential .
design the controller unit to provide pedestrian phasing with any phase .
ensure the controller programs for left turn conditional servicing in the num phase nema configuration under the following conditions the opposing through movement gappedout the compatible through movement green continues to extend or the compatible through movement has enough time to service the minimum turn time and the through movement terminating amber and red if a left turn is reserviced ensure the controller terminates the phases when the through phase gap or maximum termination point is reached .
provide a userprogrammed controller with detector assignments .
ensure each detector can call or extend the phases .
provide default detector assignments in accordance with nema tsnum .
c tbcbct ensure the tbcbct selects and coordinates the reversible leftturn sequence operations dual leading leading and lagging or lagging and leading left turns .
ensure operations are transferable from one sequence to another at a preprogrammed time .
ensure transfer occurs at the barrier following phases num traffic signal controller assembly num num num num and num or at tnum as defined in accordance with subsection num.anumd coordinator operation .
in addition to operation modes required by the contract provide a pedestrian override mode that operates in accordance with the following no pedestrian calls present ensure normal phase timings programmed for a particular coordination plan are effective for service of the intersection .
pedestrian calls present ensure the programmed pedestrian times service the call and override the normal split times .
if the intersection drops out of coordination ensure the controller returns to coordination after servicing the call without altering the programmed phase sequence .
computer controlling the intersection ensure the computer ignores the pedestrian override mode .
userprogrammable timing entries on a per phase basis .
the department does not require special pedestrian override timings and will allow normal pedestrian timing entries for the pedestrian override timings .
individual plan selection of the pedestrian override mode .
provide at least num patterns specifying cycle length splits and offsets including the following at least four cycle length selections each from num s to num s adjustable in one second increments at least three splits per cycle length selection and a unique offset for every cycle per split combination up to num s adjustable in one second increments .
ensure additional patterns available using additional cycle lengths splits per cycle length selection or offsets per cycle split combination .
dcoordinator operation ensure the coordinator references a systemwide cycle timer system cycle timer .
tnum refers to the point in the local cycle timer when the coordinated phase or the leading coordinated phase if the user selects a pair of coordinated phases is scheduled for the first time .
for early return tnum may not be the start of green .
if early return to main street green occurs ensure the pedestrian outputs do not turn on until after any other phases are allowed to be serviced before tnum .
the offset is the amount of time the local cycle timer is behind the system cycle timer .
ensure the following minimum information is available to the user for establishing patterns basic nema controller timing cycle length in seconds phase sequence desired for the particular pattern seconds or percentage of the cycle that a phase is active including green amber and red times when there is a constant demand on all input detectors the offset in seconds of the first coordinated phase serviced in the sequence from the referenced clock tnum and num traffic signal controller assembly num pedestrian override mode selection .
ensure the coordinator performs the following functions for each pattern using the above list of information guarantees the coordinated phases programmed time will be serviced in its entirety to coordinate between intersections the programmed time of the first coordinated phase in the sequence starts at tnum .
calculates the forceoff point of each phase the point when green must stop to not violate subsequent phases programmed time if calls exist .
calculates the start of the permissive window of each phase the point in the cycle when the previous phase yields to the current phase .
calculates the end of the vehicle permissive window of each phase the point preceding the force off point by the minimum time and the clearance time of the previous phase .
the department requires that vehicle calls received before the end of vehicle permissive window be serviced during the current cycle .
calculates the end of the pedestrian permissive window of each phase the point preceding the force off point by the pedestrian walk and clearance times and the clearance time of the previous phase .
the department requires that pedestrian calls received before the end of pedestrian permissive window be serviced during the current cycle .
guarantees the programmed time of each phase is serviced if the call occurs before the beginning of the permissive window and the phase does not terminate due to gap out .
the department will allow percentage inputs for coordination phase times only .
ensure the controller unit tests the plan after entering the information for phase service to verify no plan errors exist minimum times are violated .
if a plan error exists ensure the controller displays a code indicating the error .
if the error remains uncorrected and the erroneous plan is selected ensure the controller runs in the free operation mode .
if pedestrian override is selected ensure the coordinator ignores errors detected due to pedestrian times violating split times .
ensure the tbcbct is programmable to seek offsets by shortway lengthening or shortening the cycle by up to num percent and dwell in the coordination phase .
ensure the user can program the longest permissible dwell times .
ensure the tbcbct allows the following features and operations under timeofday tod control max ii timing gapext ii timing phase omit free operation and flash operation .
ensure the user can make the transfer into and out of flash in a safe manner from any point in the phasing sequence and can program each phase and overlap to flash yellow or red on the controller front panel .
ensure the flashing operation is programmed to simultaneously flash the loadswitch driver outputs .
traffic signal controller assembly num num where vehicle detection does not exist ensure the controller unit coordination program is programmable from the front panel to emulate a pretimed controller by recall or bct .
when servicing the walk violates other phases permissive windows unless the call to nonactuated function is active ensure pedestrian movements for the main street rest in green and dont walk .
ensure the internal reference synchronous pulse from which the local offset is calculated resynchronizes at midnight or ensure the resynchronization is user programmable with the default set to midnight .
ensure a pulse generates when the tod clock shows a time that is a multiple of the current cycle length after resynchronization .
in case of a power failure ensure the resynchronization is calculated from the programmed resynchronization time .
ensure the power failure recovery routine accommodates a power failure at midnight .
when the tbc operates in the free mode ensure the current cycle length will generate a synchronous pulse output .
ensure this output does not stop due to commands other than external start in which case all coordination outputs are false .
for each configuration ensure the coordinated phase or phase pair is selectable from the individual phases or phase pairs in table num table num configuration of coordination phasing coordinated phases num phase nema quad sequential num phase sequential individual num num num pairs num and num num and num num and num note do not force compatible pairs to begin simultaneously .
when establishing its offset from the reference point ensure the coordinator references the synchronous pulse leading edge regardless of width .
ensure the pulse width is at least num s. ensure internal coordination and uploaddownload programs are simultaneously operable and mutually noninterfering .
program the implementation of revised timing parameters loaded into the timer to occur at controller coordination cycle points that do not alter the selected phase sequence .
ensure the controller continues to operate even if it temporarily drops out of synchronization during the uploaddownload .
submit to the resident engineer a complete description of the uploaddownload format and protocol with the controller unit to be provided to the maintaining organization .
e communication ensure the internal settings are accessible through the rs num interface using an external modem .
ensure all functions including the following show in real time on an intersection graphical display on the modemconnected downloadupload unit or other compatible unit detector actuation signal indications gapout maxout minimum green num traffic signal controller assembly num extensions preempt and coordination synchronization status .
ensure alarms are accessible through the rs num port by remote interrogation and by automatic dialing initiated by the controller unit .
provide software necessary to perform all functions as part of the controller software on cdrom .
provide a set of software for every ten controller units .
the department reserves the right to make additional copies of this software .
num clockcalendar programming requirements provide a clockcalendar program with the following characteristics capable of easily setting to the time hourminutesecond and the date yearmonthday including the day of the week stores a yearly program including dates and times for starting and ending daylight savings time dst userprogrammable dates for dst fixed and floating holidays and special events using the keyboard automatic adjustments for the leap year calendar and stores operation sequences in the form of the following programs num yearly num weekly num daily and num exceptions .
ensure the structure and interrelationships of each type of program are in accordance with table num table num clockcalendar programming program entries num events per daily program including the following time of day cycle num num offset num num split num num mutcd flash onoff mode of operation special function num onoff special function num onoff left turn sequence leadleadleadlaglaglead max ii gap daily ext ii traffic signal controller assembly num num table num clockcalendar programming program entries num weekly programs including the following sunday daily program num num monday daily program num num tuesday daily program num num wednesday daily program num num thursday daily program num num friday daily program num num saturday daily program num num monday through friday daily program num num weekly all week days daily program num num num entries including the following starting month num num starting day of month num num yearly weekly program number num num including the first num as follows new years day labor day martin luther king day columbus day presidents day veterans day memorial day thanksgiving day independence day exception christmas day ensure num exception programs are user programmable for fixed and floating exceptions .
the department considers the fixed and floating exception format a day program as defined in table num with an assigned date fixed monthday of month floating monthweek of monthday of week to override the normally operating program .
provide a copy feature allowing the transfer of entries between programs within the same program level daily to daily program weekly to weekly program etc ..
the department will allow other programming schemes as reviewed by the departments traffic engineering division and approved by the resident engineer .
num coordination control hierarchy when num v ac conventional interconnect line inputs or interconnect free input are absent and the central computer does not have online control ensure the internal tbc controls the coordinated free and flash operation of the intersection .
when the interconnect free input signal is present and the computer is not controlling the intersection ensure the master controller tbc controls the controller unit .
when the central computer brings the intersection online using the online input ensure the central computer supersedes the internal time base or external conventional interconnect inputs .
for noncomputerized applications with conventional num v ac interconnect lines ensure the tbc and cabinet interface are operable as a master for the num traffic signal controller assembly num conventional wire system and as a local accepting conventional cycle offset split freeflash and online commands from the interconnect line .
num preemption programming requirements provide an internal preemptor that is user programmable from the front panel for railroad or fire run preemption sequences .
ensure phases are selectable so a limited signal sequence is operational during preempt pe .
ensure the user can add phases not in the intersection sequence to the special limited sequence without requiring additional external logic .
provide at least the following intervals table num controller intervals durations and increments interval a duration s increment s num .
preempt delay emergency vehicle preempt num num num num .
p.e .
minimum green num num num num .
p.e .
yellow num num num num .
p.e .
red clearance num num num num .
track green num num num num .
track yellow num num num num .
track red num num num num .
minimum p.e .
duration flash or limited cycle num num num num .
return yellow solid display yellow limited after limited cycle green num num num num .
return red clearance red after flash p.e .
num num num aterminology may vary but the meaning must be clear .
ensure the user can program additional unspecified intervals to zero .
if using three letter abbreviations or interval numbers on the display define them on the front panel .
while in preemption ensure the display identifies the timed intervals as preempt intervals .
the department will allow the use of yellow and red clearance from the phase timings in place of the specified clearance intervals as long as all other preemption requirements are met .
ensure the phases serviced after the preempt sequence are programmable using the front panel keyboard .
ensure the preempt sequences are selectable using external inputs .
assign preempt priority with no .
num as the highest .
if the controller receives a higher priority pe input during a sequence ensure the controller unit immediately clears to the next allred interval before entering the new sequence .
reserve preempt num for a priority railroad preempt .
if more than two preempts exist ensure the user can delete the priority overrides except the railroad preempt .
if a nonpriority preempt activates during another preempt cycle ensure the inprogress preempt completes its cycle .
if the second preempt input is active when the first finishes ensure the controller unit goes to allred flash or the programmed point in the nonpriority preempt .
when preempt inputs are removed ensure the controller unit proceeds through the normal sequence to return red clearance interval num .
once the controller unit enters the pe minimum green following preempt delay interval num ensure the sequence continues to completion even if the call is traffic signal controller assembly num num dropped .
if the call returns or remains through the minimum preempt interval num ensure the controller unit remains in the minimum preempt until the call is dropped .
ensure the controller unit is programmable to be in flash or limited sequence during interval num .
if flash is programmed ensure the phases flash yellow or red as programmed form the front panel .
implement flash by simultaneously flashing the appropriate loadswitch driver outputs not by setting the voltage monitor output to false .
when selecting limited sequence ensure all phases are programmable even if not normally used in the intersection sequence .
in the event of a power interruption as defined in nema tsnum and the preempt command is present when power returns ensure the controller unit powers up in allred flash operation and remains there until the preempt command is removed .
ensure overlap phases start and end with the parent phases in accordance with nema tsnum .
if the preempt occurs during yellow or red displays between parent phases ensure the overlap phase displays yellow for at least num s and red clearance for at least num s. ensure dont walk displays throughout the preempt sequence unless a limited cycle runs during the preempt duration intervals num through num .
during a limited cycle interval num the department will allow pedestrian heads programmed to dark .
ensure preempt routines have priority over all functions except emergency and conflict flash .
ensure the signal from the conflict monitor stop times the preempt cycle until removed or reset .
all intervals are sequential .
the department defines the logic of each interval as follows a preempt delay ensure preempt delay starts immediately upon receipt of the preempt command .
ensure the preempt delay does not affect the normal operation of the controller until the delay time out occurs .
use this interval for emergency vehicle preemption delay .
ensure the interval is omitted if zero time is set .
bpe minimum green when the pe minimum green interval becomes active ensure any vehicle signals displaying green does not terminate until the programmed time lapses .
ensure walkwalk indications change to dont walk immediately at the interval end .
ensure the interval is omitted if zero time is set .
c pe yellow clearance ensure green signals not programmed as track or fire lane signals change from green to yellow and red signals do not change .
ensure signals displaying yellow at the start of pe yellow clearance remain yellow and display for at least num s. ensure walkwalk indications change to dont walk immediately at the interval start .
ensure yellow signals programmed as track or fire lane signals remain yellow and green and red signals do not change .
num traffic signal controller assembly num dpe red clearance ensure yellow signals change from yellow to red and red and green signals do not change .
e track green ensure signals programmed as track or fire lane signals change to or remain green and all other signals change to or remain red .
ensure intervals num num and num are user programmable to zero during emergency vehicle preempts .
f track yellow ensure the track yellow interval is the yellow interval for the track or fire lane signals .
ensure all other signals remain red .
g track red ensure the track red interval provides allred time for track or fire lane clearance .
hminimum pe duration ensure the preempt sequence does not end until the preempt input signal is removed and the minimum duration time expires .
ensure each signal is user programmable for red red flash yellow flash or green using the keyboard .
as an alternative ensure a limited cycle is programmable for railroad preempts .
i return yellow clearance ensure return yellow clearance provides a solid yellow clearance for green or flashing yellow indications red and flashing red indications display solid red and the interval skips if programmed to zero .
j return red clearance ensure the return red clearance is an allred clearance in preparation for return to the normal cycle .
ensure return phases are user programmable using the keyboard .
b .
cabinet requirements num design requirements provide cabinets with the following characteristics completely weatherproof to prevent entry of water constructed of unpainted sheet aluminum at least ⅛ in num mm thick contains no wood wood fiber products or flammable materials neat and uniform welds unwelded seams sealed with clear or aluminum weatherseal compound vertical shelf support channels with single continuous slots not fixed notches or holes to allow for shelf adjustments sufficient shelf space to accommodate the following a controller unit num in num m high a numchannel nema conflict monitor and the number of nema loopdetector amplifiers specified in table num controller dimensions and characteristics .
equip the cabinet with the following traffic signal controller assembly num num a commerciallyavailable thermostaticallycontrolled fan with a capacity meeting nema requirements with at least num cfs num cms an adjustable thermostat with a range from num f to num f num c to num c and an air intake and exhaust vent .
securely mount a filter to the air intake vent so air entering the cabinet passes through the filter .
ensure the air intake vent is large enough to use the entire filter .
provide the minimum filter dimensions recommended by the manufacturer for each cabinet size defined in table num controller dimensions and characteristics .
place a screen over the air intake and exhaust vent .
provide a screen with openings no greater than num in² num mm² .
ensure the exhaust vent is large enough to prevent back pressure on the fan .
provide each cabinet with a unique serial number of at least ¼ in num mm high numbers .
stamp the serial number on the upper rightside wall of the cabinet near the front or engrave on a metal mylar plate and attach to the cabinet with epoxy or aluminum rivets .
mount a ground fault circuit interruption type duplex receptacle to the lower front right side wall or on the door and wire it to the load side of the num a circuit breaker .
num back panel provide back panels with the following characteristics designed to accept the minimum load switches as shown on the plans hinged at the bottom folding down and out from the top and allowing access for maintenance of all components load switches relays etc .
and allows access to the back of the back panel in less than num min using standard tools .
the department will not allow printedcircuit back panels or components mounted behind the panel except transient suppression devices for relay coils .
number or identify wire termination points on the back of the back panel to correspond with the labeling on the panel face .
bring outputs from the controller to the load switches and outputs from the detectors to the controller through posted binder head screw terminals with removable shorting bars .
support load switches and flashers with brackets designed to accept all nema load switches and flashers and prevent vibration from dislodging them from the back panel sockets .
bring load switch outputs through posted binder head screw terminals .
connect field wiring for signal heads at this terminal strip on the back panel .
if the contract requires provide additional load switches for phasing .
num detector panel mount a loop detector panel on the left side of the cabinet .
ensure the panel provides the following connections between loops at the street and detector amplifiers pedestrian call isolation and connections between detector amplifiers and the controller unit .
provide a three position detector test switch per detector in the cabinet .
num traffic signal controller assembly num bring inputs from the loops through posted binder head screw terminals and outputs from the detectors to the controller through posted binder head screw terminals with removable shorting bars .
equip detector harnesses for shelf mounted units with an msnumanums connector and wire the harness in accordance with table num table num detector harness wiring pin number function a ac common b controller unit logic ground c num v ac d loop e loop f controller detector call input g spare h ground bus i controller detector call input j num v ac output from green load switch for this phase provide an onoffmomentary toggle switch for each vehicle and pedestrian phase that allows the user to disconnect the detector input for that phase from the controller unit or place a call to the controller .
ensure the momentary position places a call to the controller the on position connects the detector to the controller unit and the off position disconnects the detector from the controller unit .
if using a detector rack provide a detector panel loop amplifiers and associated wiring in accordance with section num vehicle loop detector and loop detector wire .
num cabinet door provide a cabinet with one door in front .
attach the door to the cabinet using three hinges with unremovable stainless steel pins or a full length piano hinge with stainless steel pins spot welded at the top of the hinge .
provide stainless steel pins in accordance with astm anum bnumf .
mount the hinges to allow removal from the door or cabinet only when the door is open .
ensure the bottom of the door opening extends at least to the bottom level of the back panel .
fit the cabinet door with a number num corbin lock with a three point latch at least a ¾ in num mm diameter shaft and a cast aluminum or stainless steel handle that is lockable in the closed position with a padlock .
provide a lock and latch designed so the handle will not release until the lock releases .
provide one key for each cabinet .
install the lock clear of the handle arc .
provide a gasket at least ⅜ in num mm thick as a permanent dust and weather resistant seal in the channel cabinet door facing .
provide a nonabsorbent gasket material that maintains resiliency after long term exposure to the outdoor environment .
the department will allow an lbracket instead of the channel if the gasket fits snugly against the bracket and provides a permanent dust and weather resistant seal around the entire door .
provide a locking auxiliary police door in the cabinet door allowing access to a panel containing a signal shutdown switch flash switch and a manualautomatic switch .
provide a standard ¼ in num mm twoconductor phone jack to accept a traffic signal controller assembly num num manual push button telephone .
equip the police door with a gasket of the same specifications as the main cabinet door and provide one brass key per auxiliary door .
rivet a num in num in num m num m heavygauge vinylplastic pouch to the inside of the cabinet door .
ensure the pouch can accommodate a copy of the cabinet wiring diagram controller manual and accessory documentation .
num wiring provide neat wiring in the cabinets routed so that opening and closing the door or raising and lowering the back panel does not cause twists or crimps .
provide wiring harnesses that are braided sheathed in nylon mesh sleeving or of pvc or polyethylene insulated jacketed cable .
provide pvc jacketed cable for wiring leading to the cabinet door and jacketed cable for loop detector harnesses .
provide the following sizes of stranded copper conductor wire at least no .
num awg in the cabinet at least no .
num awg between the main power circuit breakers and the signal power bus and at least no .
num awg for wires carrying individual signal lamp current .
provide all wires and insulation rated to at least num v and ensure ac service lines can carry the maximum circuit current .
provide white conductors for ac common and green conductors for equipment grounding .
the department will not allow these colors to be used for any other conductor .
provide a num a barrier terminal block with at least three binder head screw terminals and one compression fitting designed to accept up to no .
num awg stranded wire for connecting the ac power lines .
isolate ac wiring in the path from the terminal block to the transient surge suppression device and bundle separately from all other wiring in the cabinet .
provide permanent terminal identification as shown on the plans in accordance with the cabinet wiring diagram and the following as close to the terminal strip as possible not on any part easily removable from the terminal block panel not obstructed by cabinet equipment on both sides of the panel for throughpanel solder lugs or other connectors a number and function designation for each controller input and output function at each terminal point in the cabinet a number for each load switch socket for each flash transfer and power relay base a function designation for each harness in the cabinet on the connector end for the flasher socket and for other sockets in the cabinet .
make all nema controller unit and conflict monitor connector pinouts except for load switch inputs to the conflict monitor available on binder head screw terminals on the back panel .
num traffic signal controller assembly num provide a controller unit harness a b c or any combination of the three plugs long enough to reach any point num in num m above the timer shelf .
provide a conflict monitor harness and any auxiliary harnesses required by the contract long enough to reach num in num m from the conflict monitor shelf .
provide copper ground buses for the power supply neutral common and chassis ground .
jumper the ac neutral and chassis ground buses together with at least no .
num awg wire .
isolate the logic ground from the ac neutral and terminate it on a logic ground bus that accepts num no .
num awg stranded wires .
equip the circuit breakers with solderless connectors installed on the right side wall or the lower right hand side back panel inside the cabinet .
ensure the breakers are easily accessible and positioned so the rating markings are visible .
these circuit breakers are in addition to auxiliary fuses required by the contract to protect component parts .
protect the load side of the main circuit breaker with a lightning surge suppressor edco acpnum or an equivalent reviewed by the departments traffic engineering division and approved by the resident engineer .
connect the suppressor ground connection to the cabinet and the suppressor to the line filter in accordance with manufacturer recommendations .
provide at least no .
num awg wire to connect the suppressor line filter and load switch bus .
install a relampable fluorescent light with a switch in the cabinet .
ensure the light turns on when the cabinet door opens and off when the cabinet door closes .
place transient suppression devices on the coil side of all relays in the cabinet .
provide directcurrent relay coils with at least a reversed biased diode across the coil .
equip each ac relay with a metal oxide varistor or equivalent suppression device across coils .
the department will allow resistor capacitor rc networks .
except where soldered provide wires with lugs or other fittings approved by the resident engineer to attach binding posts .
ensure the outgoing traffic control signal circuits are the same polarity as the line side of the power source .
provide a switch on the cabinet door inside face and label it autoflash .
when the switch is in the flash position ensure that calls for flashing operation do not remove the power from the controller unit and allow normal operation while the intersection is in flashing operation .
when the switch is in the auto position ensure the operation is in an automatic mode with the signals on .
provide a three position switch near the autoflash switch to stop the controller unit and auxiliary equipment and label it stop timing .
label the top position automatic operation the middle position stop time off and the bottom position stop time on .
provide a controller power onoff switch .
wire the cabinet so that activation of the conflict monitor causes the controller unit and any auxiliary equipment to stop timing .
wire conflict and manual flash for all red .
ensure the red enable and remote reset from the conflict monitor can be terminated on the back panel face .
traffic signal controller assembly num num c. conflict monitor provide nema plus conflict monitors in accordance with nema tsnum with the number of channels shown on the plans .
provide additional channels as shown on the plans .
d. solidstate load switch provide solidstate load switches with the following characteristics solidstate construction meets section num of nema tsnum triplesignal load switches type and indicator light for each circuit that illuminates when a true input occurs .
e. twocircuit solidstate flasher provide twocircuit solidstate flashers with the following characteristics solidstate construction contains no electromechanical devices meets section num of nema tsnum voltage range from num v to num v ac nominal voltage of num v ac constructed of easily replaceable components operating frequency from num hz to num hz designed to operate at ambient temperatures from num f to num f num c to num c and type iii unit dual circuit rated at num a per circuit .
f. led traffic signal battery backup system provide a battery backup system in accordance with the latest nema numr or num requirements .
obtain the following from the equipment manufacturer and submit to the resident engineer upon request certification showing that the equipment model has been tested and approved in accordance with nema service warrant instruction books service manuals list of generic part numbers for service personnel and complete installation instructions .
num general equipment ensure the system provides power for normal signal operation flash operation and combination mode .
provide a system designed for outdoor applications meeting the traffic industry environmental standard and compatible with nema tsnum and tsnum controllers and cabinets .
provide a system that includes cables wiring harnesses battery cables and components for operation .
num traffic signal controller assembly num num num system equipment provide equipment for led traffic signal battery backup systems in accordance with table num table num equipment properties for led traffic signal battery backup property requirement output power num va active output power num w outputinput voltage num v ac num hz output waveform pure sine wave num thd input current num a num a input voltage variation num v num v ac typical efficiency num maximum charge current num a operating temperatures num f num f num c num c typical transfer time num ms num ms audible noise at num m num dba lightningsurge protection passing ansiieee cnumcnum cat a and b typical battery recharge time num in num hr warranty num months on components computer interface port rsnum protect the unit with automatic electronic short circuit or overload shutdown automatic over temperature shutdown and voltage adjustment that activates due to input voltage variation .
provide an led indicator for online on battery low battery overload and fault .
num battery system provide sealed absorbed glass mat or gel num v batteries .
ensure the number of batteries and amphour ratings are capable of operating the battery backup system in full time signal operation at num w for at least num hr .
provide batteries with interconnect wiring corrosionresistant mounting trays and brackets .
provide a regulated temperature compensated battery charging system .
provide batteries with numyear fullreplacement warranties .
num battery cabinet ensure the battery cabinet is mountable on the controller cabinet side .
provide a cabinet of ⅛ in num mm thick aluminum type numhnum housing with a natural aluminum finish sturdy aluminum shelves and lockable door .
g. documentation submit the following documentation with each cabinet three accurate and legible cabinet wiring diagrams and one manual for the controller conflict monitor load switch flasher and detector units .
solidstate flashing controller num num num equipment vacant num construction methods install vehicleactuated solidstate traffic signal controllers at locations shown on the plans and in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
num method of measurement vacant num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit traffic signal controller assembly each the department will consider the cost of additional load switches and conflict monitor channels to be included in the contract unit price for the traffic signal controller assembly .
section num solidstate flashing controller num description this work consists of providing installing and programming initial solidstate flashing controllers and solidstate time clocks .
num materials provide the following types of flashing controller as shown on the plans type i provide a flashing controller in accordance with subsection num.a controller .
type ii provide a flashing controller including a solidstate time clock in accordance with subsection num.a controller and subsection num.b time clock .
a .
controller provide a solidstate nema twocircuit type iii num a flashing controller .
b .
time clock provide a solidstate singlecircuit time clock except for the relay output .
ensure availability of components to the department for servicing num years after expiration of the manufacturers warranty .
alternatively ensure availability of the components from industrial electronics suppliers .
provide an integral keyboard capable of setting the time date day of week and the relay output operation .
provide a keypad with marked key functions .
ensure all data for programming the unit and reviewing the stored program is clearly displayed without using auxiliary devices .
num solidstate flashing controller num solidstate flashing controller provide a system capable of automatically changing between daylight savings time and standard time once programmed .
ensure a hardware change a software change or both can override the automatic changes .
ensure the display verifies data before it is entered into the program .
ensure the programmer can correct data before its entry .
ensure the system allows alteration of data before entry .
provide for alteration of individual program steps without disturbing other program steps .
provide operating instructions with each time switch .
the department defines a program step as the time and days of the week when the output turns on or off .
when instructed to turn the output on or off ensure the system sets the instruction time to the minute and ensure the change occurs at the zero second of that minute .
provide a time switch capable of initiating at least six program steps .
ensure the time switch can execute five separate skip plans programmed at least num year in advance .
use the integral keyboard to program skip plans .
to program each plan enter the beginning and ending dates for the time switch output deactivation .
ensure the time switch can skip durations from num day to num months .
ensure a skip plan can begin in num calendar year and end in the next consecutive year .
ensure the system allows entering oneday skips num days before the day to be skipped .
after the oneday skip ensure the time switch automatically resets and resumes normal operation .
the department will not require chronological entry of skip plan programs .
ensure review of the skip plan program without affecting the normal operation of the time switch .
ensure the display includes the skip plan number the beginning date and the ending date .
provide a backup system to maintain timekeeping and the program for at least num hr at num f num c that automatically goes online when the num v alternating current ac power source fails .
when the line power resumes ensure the unit automatically resumes normal operation and recharges the backup system .
provide a capacitive charging system .
the department will not allow batteries for the charging system .
if an ac power outage erases the time switch program ensure the unit displays a program loss indication .
provide a display with a discrete led indicator and ensure the display can be reset from the integral keyboard .
when the time switch operates on the backup system ensure the display blanks and the output disables to conserve power .
ensure the unit displays the time day of week date and the output relay condition .
when using the num hr time format ensure the unit displays ampm .
provide a unit capable of switching to an alternate time display that includes seconds .
ensure a keystroke switches the display between the normal and alternate modes .
provide for program review on the clock memory integral with the input .
ensure the program review does not affect the current time switch operation .
ensure the capability for mounting the time switch back panel to a backplate .
ensure that mounting holes provide a clearance for at least a no .
num screw .
provide a time switch no larger than num in num mm wide num⅜ in num mm high num⅛ in num mm deep .
provide a cover for the unit to protect the time switch from dust .
ensure easy removal of the cover to allow access to the field wiring terminals .
a raintight cover is not necessary .
solidstate flashing controller num num solidstate flashing controller provide a terminal block capable of accommodating wire sizes from no .
num awg to no .
num awg to interface to the power line and the controlled device .
ensure that the time switch operates on num v ac num hz power source from num v to num v ac and from num f to num f num c to num c. ensure that timing synchronizes with the power line .
provide a backup power source to maintain the timing when commercial power fails .
when using the backup power ensure timing remains accurate within num sec per num hr period throughout the entire temperature range .
ensure changeovers between num v ac and the backup system do not alter the time .
provide a keyboard for system programming .
ensure the time set accurately to num s. c. cabinet provide a weatherproof aluminum alloy cabinet of at least num in num mm high num in num mm long num in num mm wide to enclose with ample space the flashing controller and associated equipment of the type regularly supplied by the manufacturer and approved by the resident engineer .
provide a hinged door that allows access to the cabinet interior .
seal and weatherproof the door with neoprene gasket material .
provide a standard police lock and two keys .
provide identifiable terminals connected to terminal boards accessible without removing equipment from the cabinet .
provide a surge protector edco spanum or an equivalent approved by the departments traffic engineering division with each flashing controller .
provide a circuit breaker in accordance with nec .
num equipment vacant num construction methods place and wire the type i or type ii controller unit as required by the contract .
num method of measurement vacant num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit solid state flashing controller each the department will consider the solid state time clock and the cabinet included in the contract unit price for solid state flashing controller .
unless otherwise required by the contract the department will pay for sign posts in accordance with section num galvanized steel sign posts and sign post footings in accordance with section num concrete footings .
num vehicle loop detector and loop detector wire num section num vehicle loop detector and loop detector wire num description this work consists of providing and installing a solid state digital inductive vehicle loop detector and loops .
num materials provide and install the following materials in accordance with the latest edition of nema tsnum or tsnum .
a .
detector loop wire provide detector loop wire embedded in the pavement in accordance with subsection num traffic signal wire and cable .
b .
shelf mounted detector unit provide a selfcontained selftuning solid state digital detector that automatically compensates for temperature variations and environmental conditions .
num mechanical requirements provide a detector unit and power supply enclosed in a sheetmetal housing with a protective paint finish .
ensure that the case allows access to the interior assembly and allows parts testing and servicing .
supply each detector unit with a connecting cable .
insert a multiterminal plug into the plug receptacle on the face panel of the detector to make an electrical connection from the detector to the incoming and outgoing circuits .
ensure detector replacement without disconnecting and reconnecting the individual wires .
num output delay and extend supply the loop detector unit with programmable delay and extend output features .
a delay output provide a delay circuit variable to at least num s in num s increments for delayed output .
ensure vehicle detection delay for the time period selected to prevent detector output until vehicle presence in the loop for the selected length of time .
ensure the vehicle delay timing resets each time the vehicle vacates the loop .
ensure the delay circuit immediately disables in the presence of num v ac on pin j of the ms numanum nump connector for this channel .
bextend output provide a variable extend circuit for carryover output to at least num s in num s increments .
ensure detector actuation extends after the vehicle leaves the loop .
ensure the timing circuit resets the after the extension expires .
do not disable the extend circuit in the presence of num v ac at pin j of the connector .
vehicle loop detector and loop detector wire num num vehicle loop detector and loop detector wire provide digital timing .
ensure use of pins thumbwheels or dip switches for programming settings .
the resident engineer will not require delay and extend features to function simultaneously unless otherwise shown on the plans .
provide external programming capability on the face of the unit .
num operating requirements design the detector so environmental metal objects near the loop do not affect operation .
ensure the leadin cable is located in a common conduit with signal and interconnect cables without interfering with detector operation .
ensure the detector operates in temperatures from num f to num f num c to num c with an online voltage of single phase num v ac num cycle .
accommodate online voltage variation of num percent without affecting the operation or life of detector equipment .
provide the detector unit with a tuning range of loop inductance from num µh to num µh .
ensure the detector detects vehicles traveling up to num mph num kmh .
ensure the detector detects vehicles that pass over any part of the loop .
ensure the detector returns to its original condition after a power failure .
num electrical requirements provide solid state detector circuitry .
provide a printed circuit board in accordance with section num traffic signal controller assembly .
provide facilities on the front panel for adjusting the detector .
provide for a simplified loop tuning procedure without a test apparatus or traffic .
provide a detector unit with switches on the front to independently select the pulse or presence operating mode .
provide each detector channel with a surge protector edco sranumcnum or an equivalent approved by the departments traffic engineering division .
provide the detector with a multiconductor color coded harness and ms connector .
on the front panel install a fuse replaceable without tools for each detector unit .
permanently ground each detector unit internally .
provide an indicator light on the front panel to show vehicle detection .
c. card rack detector unit provide two channel selftuning solid state digital card rack detector units that automatically compensate for temperature variations and environmental conditions in accordance with nema tsnum and subsection num.b shelf mounted detector unit .
d. card rack assembly provide a card rack crosswired for two or four channel operations that will accommodate at least eight detector units .
provide an aluminum detector card rack frame with modular slots allowing the pcb edge connectors to plug into the rear while sliding between top and bottom card guides for each module .
provide mounting flanges turned outward .
to allow the card rack to swing out provide slack in the wiring and hinge on one side and fasten with thumb screw connectors on the other side .
e. power supply provide a num v dc power supply that delivers at least num a .
for a shelfmounted power supply ensure the front panel of the power supply provides power on led a num vehicle loop detector and loop detector wire num power onoff switch a fuse for the num v ac input line and a connector .
provide a connector with a metallic shell internally connected to the chassis ground that is compatible with an msnumanumsw cable connector .
provide connector pin terminations in accordance with table num table num connector pin terminations pin function a ac neutral b reserved c num v ac line d reserved e num v dc output f reserved g logic ground h chassis ground i reserved j reserved f. vehicle loop wire sealant provide and install loop wire sealant for installing vehicle detector loops in asphalt and concrete pavement as shown on the plans .
num general requirements provide a onepart polyurethane sealant for asphalt and concrete pavement .
ensure that the sealant allows traffic to travel over the filled slot immediately after application without tracking .
provide sealant that will not shrink in volume .
num physical properties provide sealant with a shelf life of at least num months .
provide sealant with uncured and cured properties specified in table num table num and table num a uncured wet sealant provide uncured wet sealant with the following properties table num physical properties of uncured sealant property requirement test standard weight num lbcycle num lb num kgmnum num kg astm e num total solids by weight num hr at num f num c num num by weight astm d num viscosity no .
num spindle at num rpm num f num c num relative humidity num psis num psis num pas num pas brookfield rvf curing time num relative humidity touch num hr astm d num num mil num µm film num f num c complete num hr bcured sealant provide cured sealant with the properties specified in table num vehicle loop detector and loop detector wire num num table num physical properties of cured sealant property requirement test hardness indentation num num astm dnum model num numc num relative humidity tensile strength die c pulled at num ipm num psi num kpa astm dnum elongation die c pulled at num ipm num astm dnum adhesion canvas to concrete num lbin num kgmm wide astm dnum application temperature num f num f num c num c service temperature num f num f num c num c c resistance provide cured sealant with the chemical resistances specified in table num table num chemical resistance of cured sealant property result test deicing no effect astm d num gasoline slight swell astm d num hydraulic brake fluid no effect astm d num motor oil no effect astm d num sodium chloride num no effect astm d num conduct the astm tests from num f to num f num c to num c for num hr num application of sealant apply the sealant as shown on the plans .
the department may test to ensure compliance .
if a sample fails remove and replace with new sealant as approved by the resident engineer .
num equipment vacant num construction methods locate the loop detection system as shown on the plans .
mark and maintain the detection system locations on the roadway for approval of the resident engineer .
cut the induction loop slot and corner cuts to the dimensions shown on the plans .
use compressed air to clean and dry the slot .
wind loop wires in the same direction .
provide loop wire in a continuous length to the pull box and connect to the leadin cable .
use a blunt wood instrument to place the wire into the slot without damaging the insulation .
make all connections between loop wire and leadin cable in the pull box .
solder the connection with a num alloy rosin core solder .
avoid damaging the wire and cable insulation while soldering .
num vehicle loop detector and loop detector wire num num vehicle loop detector and loop detector wire place a watertight connector sealing packet over each completed connection .
if no leadin cable is necessary directly connect the loop wire to the terminal block in the base of the traffic signal pole .
after placing the loop wire and backer rod in the slot check the circuitry and seal the slot with a sealer required by the contract .
num method of measurement vacant num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit a vehicle loop detector each b loop detector wire each or linear foot meter section num pedestrian push button num description this work consists of providing and installing pedestrian push buttons and signs on traffic signal installations .
num materials provide phenolicenclosed precision snapacting singlepole singlethrow pedestrian push button switches with screw terminals rated at num a at num v alternating current in accordance with americans with disabilities act ada section num .
provide materials for pedestrian information signs as shown on the plans .
num equipment vacant num construction methods install the pedestrian push button in accordance with ada requirements .
design pedestrian push buttons to prevent tampering and electrical shock .
attach the pedestrian push button and sign to a traffic signal pole or steel pipe as shown on the plans .
shape the housing to fit the curvature of the pole or pipe .
secure the housing to provide a rigid installation .
num method of measurement vacant traffic signal heads num num num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit pedestrian push button each the department will consider the cost of signs and hardware to be included in the contract unit price for pedestrian push button .
section num traffic signal heads num description this work consists of providing and installing vehicular and pedestrian traffic signal heads and lamps on supports .
num materials provide vehicular traffic signal heads and component parts that consist of polycarbonate or diecast aluminum in accordance with the ite standard for adjustable face vehicle traffic control signal heads vtcsh .
provide pedestrian traffic signal heads in accordance with the ite standard adjustable face pedestrian signal head standard .
provide led lamps in accordance with the ite standard for vehicle traffic control signal heads unless otherwise shown on the plans .
provide led colors in accordance with the chromaticity requirements of the vtcsh standard section num and figure num .
provide led lamps approved by the departments traffic engineering division or listed on the departments traffic engineering division qualified products list .
ensure pedestrian symbols are fully illuminated leds .
the department will not allow outline symbols .
provide pedestrian countdown if shown on the plans .
if shown on the plans provide incandescent lamps in accordance with the ite standard for traffic signal lamp .
for num in num mm vehicular traffic signal heads or num in num mm pedestrian traffic signal heads provide num w num lm num v clear traffic signal incandescent lamps with a life rating of at least num hr .
for num in num mm vehicular traffic signal heads or num in num mm pedestrian traffic signal heads provide num w num lm num v clear traffic signal incandescent lamps with a life rating of at least num hr .
provide glass lenses and specular alzak aluminum reflectors in traffic signal heads with incandescent lamps .
if the contract requires polycarbonate traffic signal housings provide ultraviolet stabilized precolored opaque yellow and injectionmolded housings with black doors and visors unless otherwise shown on the plans .
apply three coats of paint inside and outside to die cast aluminum doors visors and signal housings before assembly .
num traffic signal heads num num traffic signal heads a .
first coat primer ensure the first coat consists of oxide baking primer in accordance with the performance specifications of federal specifications ttpnum .
b .
second coat grey enamel ensure the second coat consists of medium grey alkyd urea exterior baking enamel in accordance with federal specifications ttenum .
c. third coat yellow enamel ensure the third coat consists of highway yellow alkyd urea exterior synthetic baking enamel with minimum gloss reflectance in accordance with the performance specifications of federal specifications ttenum enamel heat resisting glyceryl phthalate type num instrument black .
num equipment vacant num construction methods make signal heads weathertight .
ensure signal heads consist of at least one adjustable signal section with led or lamps fastened together .
ensure each signal section is selfcontained and consists of an optical unit with housing housing door visor and glass lenses unless otherwise shown on the plans .
provide signal heads with brackets and fittings for mounting on the type of signal support shown on the plans .
ensure signal heads capable of positioning to control the movement of one direction of vehicular or pedestrian traffic .
num method of measurement vacant num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit traffic signal heads each the department will consider the cost of lamps wiring visors and hardware to be included in the contract unit price for traffic signal heads .
opticallyprogrammed adjustable traffic signal heads num num section num opticallyprogrammed adjustable traffic signal heads num description this work consists of providing and installing opticallyprogrammed adjustable traffic signal heads and lamps on supports .
num materials provide opticallyprogrammed adjustable traffic signals capable of allowing optical determination of the visibility zone of the indication .
ensure the signal does not require hoods or louvers .
provide for projected indications selectively visible or veiled within num of the optical axis .
ensure the indications emanate from a single section .
ensure external illumination does not provide indications .
prevent one light unit from illuminating a second unit .
a. optical system provide a lamp with the following characteristics num w num v ac three prong sealed beam with an integral reflector with stippled cover and with an average life rating of at least num hr .
provide a lamp collar including specular inner surface that couples the lamp to the diffusing element .
the diffusing element may be discrete or integral with the convex surface of the optical limiter .
provide an optical limiter made of heatresistant glass with an accessible imaging surface at focus on the optical axis for objects from num ft to num ft num m to num m away .
provide an optical limiter that allows the application of a veiling mask determined by the desired visibility zone .
for the objective lens provide a high resolution planar incremental lens hermetically sealed within a flat laminant of weather resistant acrylic or an equivalent approved by the resident engineer .
ensure the lens has a symmetrical outline and can rotate num about the axis without displacing the primary image .
provide an optical system that accommodates projection from a single section of diverse selected indicia to separate portions of the roadway so one indication is visible at a time .
provide the projected indication in accordance with ite chromaticity standards .
b .
electrical for the lamp fixture provide a separately accessible housing and integral lamp support with indexed ceramic socket and selfaligning quick release lamp retainer .
electrically connect the case and lamp housing with an interlock assembly which disconnects from the lamp holder when opened .
in each signal section include a covered terminal block for clip or screw attachment of lead wires .
interconnect num opticallyprogrammed adjustable traffic signal heads num num opticallyprogrammed adjustable traffic signal heads sections with concealed copper no .
num awg stranded and coded wires to enable field connection .
c. photo controls in each signal section include an integral way to regulate its intensity between limits as a function of background illumination .
ensure that the lamp intensity is at least num percent of uncontrolled intensity at num lx and reduces from num percent to num percent of maximum at less than num lx .
ensure response is proportional and instantaneous when illumination increases to num lx and damped for decreases from num lx .
provide an intensity controller with an integrated directional light sensing and regulating device interposed between the lamp and line wires .
ensure that the intensity controller is compatible with num hz input and is responsive from num v to num v. the contractor may phasecontrol the output for a controller with terminal impedance of num ω open circuit and a corresponding holding current .
num equipment vacant num construction methods provide die cast aluminum parts in accordance with ite alloy and tensile requirements and with a chromate preparatory treatment .
finish the exterior of the signal case lamp housing and mounting flanges with a high quality prime baked enamel and finish paint .
make the lens holder and case interior optical flat black .
predrill the signal case and lens holder for backplates and visors .
use stainless steel hinges and latch pins .
seal access openings with weather resistant rubber gaskets .
mount the signal to standard num½ in num mm fittings as a single section as a multiple section face or combined with other signals .
provide the signal section with an adjustable connection enabling incremental tilting from num to num below horizontal while maintaining a common vertical axis through couplers and mounting .
ensure that the mounting attachment allows external adjustment in num increments about the mounting axis .
provide a mountable signal capable of being serviced with standard tools .
ensure that attachments fasten to mounting surfaces without affecting water and light integrity of the signal .
install direct and veil the signal in accordance with manufacturers instructions .
mask signal sections with manufacturerrecommended materials .
num method of measurement vacant num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit opticallyprogrammed adjustable traffic signal heads each the department will consider the cost of masking wiring and hardware to be included in the contract unit price for optically programmed adjustable traffic signal heads .
traffic signal backplates num num section num traffic signal backplates num description this work consists of providing and installing backplates to traffic signal heads .
num materials provide backplates in accordance with section num traffic signal backplates .
num equipment vacant num construction methods provide one piece backplates .
the department will allow the use of two or three piece backplates for snum signal heads .
secure the backplate to the traffic signal heads with noncorrosive machine screws washers and lock nuts as shown on the plans .
num method of measurement vacant num basis of payment the department will pay for each item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit backplates each num electrical conductors for traffic signals num section num electrical conductors for traffic signals num description this work consists of providing and installing electrical conductors for traffic signal systems .
num materials provide materials in accordance with the following subsections material subsection traffic signal wire and cables num shielded loop detector leadin cable num num equipment vacant num construction methods avoid damaging the conductor and the insulation during installation .
replace damaged conductors at no additional cost to the department .
a .
traffic signal electrical cable install traffic signal electrical cable from the heads on each traffic signal pole to the traffic signal controller .
place the electrical cable in conduit from the traffic signal pole to the controller .
provide electrical cable with the number of conductors and at least one spare conductor as shown on the plans .
b. shielded loop detector leadin cables place the shielded loop detector leadin cables in conduit from each loop detector pull box to the traffic signal controllers .
at each loop detector pull box splice the loop wire or the sensing element lead to the loop detector leadin cable with a waterproof selfinsulating connection using soldered connections and epoxy or gel cast splice kits as shown on the plans .
c. underground conductors in conduit complete the conduit system before installing the conductors .
provide slack in each conductor at the pole bases pull boxes and cabinets as approved by the resident engineer .
d. underground splices the department will allow splices in the traffic signal conductors at the pole bases terminal block or controller cabinet .
e. testing test the installed traffic signal and detector leadin conductors in accordance with section num performance and operational tests for highway lighting and traffic signals .
regulatory or warning sign assembly num num num method of measurement vacant num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit a traffic signal electrical cable linear foot meter b shielded loop detector leadin cable linear foot meter the department will consider the cost of connectors splices and incidentals to the traffic signal system to be included in the contract unit price for traffic signal electrical cable and shielded loop detector leadin cable ..
section num regulatory or warning sign assembly num description this work consists of providing and installing regulatory or warning sign assemblies with flashing beacons .
num materials provide regulatory or warning sign assemblies that consist of a sheet aluminum sign with the message traffic signal heads solidstate flashing controller time clock sign post foundation wiring and conduit as shown on the plans .
a .
sign provide the sign material in accordance with section num signs .
b .
solid state flashing controller and time clock provide the solidstate flasher controller and time clocks as shown on the plans and in accordance with section num solidstate flashing controller .
c. flashing beacons provide flashing beacons with traffic signal heads and lamps as shown on the plans and in accordance with section num traffic signal heads .
d. sign post footing and mounting hardware provide the sign posts and foundations as shown on the plans and in accordance with section num signs .
provide galvanized aluminum or stainless steel mounting hardware .
e. aluminum base provide fhwaapproved cast aluminum bases .
num regulatory or warning sign assembly num regulatory or warning sign assembly num equipment vacant num construction methods install and connect the regulatory or warning sign assembly to a power supply as shown on the plans .
num methods of measurement vacant num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit regulatory or warning sign assembly each the department considers the cost of wiring and connecting the regulatory or warning sign assembly to power to be included in the contract unit price for regulatory or warning sign assembly .
section num railroadhighway crossbuck signs num description this work consists of providing and erecting railroadhighway crossbuck signs with posts .
num materials provide materials as shown on the plans .
submit to the resident engineer a type d certification in accordance with subsection num material certifications .
num equipment vacant num construction methods a .
making signs provide the signs and posts as shown on the plans .
b .
setting signs set the sign posts in compacted soil holes with the top of the sign set to the elevation as shown on the plans or as directed by the resident engineer .
ensure the sign faces oncoming traffic .
adjust the sign to provide visibility as approved by the resident engineer .
backfill the holes with class a concrete as shown on the plans .
rod and consolidate the concrete to obtain density .
temporarily support the sign in a plumb position for at least num hr before removing the supports .
signs num num c. sign locations place crossbuck signs in accordance with mutcd for streets and highways or as directed by the resident engineer .
num method of measurement vacant num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit railroadhighway crossbuck signs each the department will consider the cost of posts and footings to be included in the contract unit price for railroadhighway crossbuck signs .
section num signs num description this work consists of providing and erecting signs including sheet aluminum and extruded aluminum panel signs with a retroreflective or nonretroreflective sheeting background and steel or aluminum sign bracket arms bolts and fittings .
num materials provide materials in accordance with section num signs .
provide signs with type iii high intensity retroreflective sheeting unless otherwise shown on the plans .
provide extruded panel signs with type iii high intensity retroreflective sheeting for the background with type viii retroreflective sheeting for legends and borders .
provide durable transparent or opaque high intensity colored electronic cuttable film with pressure sensitive adhesive and removable liner for interstate shields for both extruded aluminum signs and route assembly signs .
obtain the resident engineers approval of shop drawings before starting the manufacture of special signs .
num equipment vacant num construction methods a .
cleaning clean sheet aluminum and extruded aluminum panel signs before applying sheeting adhesive and sheeting .
b .
application of sheeting preperforate class num adhesive coated sheeting .
use mechanical equipment to apply sheeting to treated base panels as follows num signs num num signs num continuous roll application continuously apply the sheeting with class num adhesive coating over the entire surface of the sign .
prevent air pockets or bubbles .
ensure the retroreflective sheeting for extruded panel signs extends ¼ in num mm over and adheres to each side of the panel .
for sheeting on extruded panels ensure no more than one splice per panel .
num color match during sign fabrication match the color of sign faces with at least two pieces or panels of retroreflective sheeting to provide uniform appearance and brilliance at night and during the day .
the resident engineer will reject signs with nonuniform shading and contrast between adjacent widths of applied sheeting .
num splices at splices overlap class num adhesive coated sheeting at least num in num mm .
butt splice class num adhesive coated sheeting and ensure a gap not exceeding num in num mm .
only use butt splices on screen processed sign faces with transparent colored ink .
for sheet metal signs with heights no greater than num in num m the department will not allow retroreflective sheeting splices .
for sheet metal signs at least num in num m high the department will allow one horizontal or one vertical retroreflective sheeting splice .
c. finishing signs after applying the retroreflective sheeting background use the silk screen process to apply messages and borders on sheet metal signs .
use a cutout legend if required by the contract .
seal sign face splices and edges with materials supplied and recommended by the sheeting manufacturer .
use stickon copy for legends symbols and borders on extruded panel signs .
ensure finished signs with a smooth and uniform light surface with clear and sharp letters and numbers .
protect sheet signs from moisture during shipment or storage .
d. sign locations and positions erect signs with sign faces in a vertical position and horizontally angled away from the direction of travel as shown on the plans .
prevent specular reflection from erected signs .
adjust sign positioning to eliminate or minimize specular reflection at no additional cost to the department .
align the lower edge of extruded panel signs on overhead trusses along the centerline of the lower horizontal chord member .
after installation the resident engineer will inspect the signs at night .
num method of measurement the resident engineer will measure signs by the area of the vertical front face with no deduction for rounded corners .
galvanized steel sign posts num num num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit a sheet aluminum signs square foot square meter b extruded aluminum panel signs square foot square meter c mastarm mounted signs square foot square meter d special signs each or square foot square meter section num galvanized steel sign posts num description this work consists of providing and constructing galvanized steel sign posts and footings .
num materials provide materials in accordance with section num galvanized steel sign posts .
num equipment vacant num construction methods if necessary field cut steel posts and place the cut end in the concrete foundation .
regalvanize metalize or paint steel post parts if damage reveals bare metal .
use zinc dustoxide paint approved by the resident engineer .
the department will not allow the use of welded splices in round pipe or wide flange beam posts .
num method of measurement vacant num galvanized steel sign posts num galvanized steel sign posts num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit a galvanized steel wide flange beam posts linear foot meter b galvanized steel pipe posts linear foot meter c square tube post linear foot meter d flange channel posts linear foot meter if the contract requires breakaway sign posts the department will consider the cost of breakaway design elements to be included in the contract unit price for the relevant post pay items .
unless otherwise required by the contract the department will pay for sign post footings in accordance with section num concrete footings .
section num overhead sign structures num description this work consists of providing and constructing overhead sign structures on prepared footings .
num materials provide materials for overhead sign structures in accordance with section num overhead sign structures .
provide materials for concrete footings in accordance with section num concrete footings .
num equipment vacant num construction methods a .
design to design overhead sign structures use general data in accordance with the aashto specifications for structural supports for highway signs luminaires and traffic signals as shown on the plans .
submit shop drawings to the resident engineer for approval before construction .
b. welding qualify procedures welders and welding in accordance with subsection num welding requirement and aashtoansiaws d num .
overhead sign structures num num overhead sign structures c. fabrication provide overhead sign structures free of sharp edges irregularities misfits or structural deficiencies as approved by the resident engineer .
complete overhead sign structures as shown on the plans .
d. shipping and erection deliver upright supports and truss structures to the project immediately before the erection of the complete structure including signs .
attach fixtures and other components after erection of the complete structure .
protect the surfaces of the structures to prevent damage during transportation and erection .
the resident engineer will reject damaged structures that can not be regalvanized or metalized in accordance with aws cnumtrecommended practices for metalizing .
e. electrical requirements provide electrical equipment materials and installation methods in accordance with section num performance and operational tests for highway lighting and traffic signals .
if there is no electrical power at the site provide temporary power to demonstrate that fixtures and equipment are installed in accordance with section num performance and operational tests for highway lighting and traffic signals .
num method of measurement vacant num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit a aluminum overhead sign structure each or linear foot meter b galvanized steel overhead sign structure each or linear foot meter c overhead sign structure monotube type a each d overhead sign structure monotube type b each e overhead sign structure monotube type c each f aluminum overhead sign structuresbridge mounted each g galvanized steel overhead sign structuresbridge mounted each h overhead sign structures walkway and handrail linear foot meter i uprights for overhead sign structure each j testing of aluminum welds lump sum num overhead sign structures num pay item pay unit k replace aluminum tubing in overhead sign structure pound kilogram l repair overhead sign structure each num overhead sign structures the department will pay for the following items separately in accordance with section num electrical conduit section num pull boxes and ground boxes section num concrete footings section num luminaires and as shown on the plans internal walkway and hand rail external walkway and hand rail sign lights electrical conduit wiring pull boxes and reinforcing steel in footings and concrete footings .
section num delineators num description this work consists of providing and installing delineators and posts .
num materials provide materials in accordance with section num delineators .
num equipment vacant num construction methods install delineator units on the posts at the heights shown on the plans or directed by the resident engineer .
drive or set posts to the line and grade shown on the plans .
if driving posts ensure the posts are plumb and firm in the ground spaced as shown on the plans .
use a resident engineer approved driving cap for driven posts .
do not damage the tops of posts during driving operations .
remove and replace damaged posts as directed by the resident engineer at no additional cost to the department .
if setting posts dig the post holes to the depth and spacing shown on the plans .
backfill post holes with resident engineer approved material in layers no greater than num in num mm deep .
compact each layer and preserve the alignment of the posts .
provide bolts and fasteners of the type length diameter and material shown on the plans or an equivalent approved by the resident engineer .
at bridges fasten the delineators to the bridge handrail posts or parapet wall using brackets and fasteners for the various types as shown on the plans .
traffic stripe paint num num num method of measurement the resident engineer will divide and code delineators for measurement and payment in accordance with table num table num delineators type num monodirectional type num bidirectional code no .
of reflectors reflector placement code no .
of reflectors reflector placement num num num num one on each side mounted back to back num num vertically num num two on each side vertically mounted back to back num num vertically num num three on each side vertically mounted back to back provide reflectors of the color shown on the plans or directed by the engineer .
num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit delineators each the department will consider the cost of post mounting brackets and hardware to be included in the contract unit price for delineators .
section num traffic stripe paint num description this work consists of providing and placing a white or yellow paint stripe with beads applied by the dropon method .
num materials provide materials in accordance with subsection num glass beads for traffic paint thermoplastic and multipolymer and subsection num traffic stripe paint acrylic waterborne .
num equipment use a paint machine capable of applying an even cleancut line with minimal drifting paint .
ensure the cutoff mechanism on the paint machine is capable of making a cleancut end section without dripping or stringing fine lines of paint .
use a bead dispenser with an automatic cutoff control synchronized with the cutoff of the striping material .
num traffic stripe paint num traffic stripe paint num construction methods clean the pavement area of foreign material to ensure maximum adhesion of paint .
apply the material to the pavement at a wet film thickness of num mils num mm .
evenly distribute num lb of beads per gallon of wet paint num kg per cubic meter unless otherwise directed by the resident engineer .
use an automatic bead dispenser attached to the striping machine to immediately and uniformly dispense the beads on the completed paint line .
do not apply the traffic stripe paint on wet pavement or at air temperatures below num f num c and falling .
apply traffic stripe paint when air temperature is num f num c and rising .
num method of measurement the resident engineer will measure the length of traffic stripe using a num in num mm standard width .
for traffic stripes narrower or wider than num in num mm the resident engineer will make a proportional adjustment based on the num in num mm standard width .
the resident engineer will measure arrows words and symbols by each unit .
the resident engineer will count arrows by each head .
num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit a traffic stripe paint linear foot meter b traffic stripe paint arrow words or symbols each traffic stripe plastic num num section num traffic stripe plastic num description this work consists of providing and placing reflectorized plastic pavement markings on asphalt concrete ac and portland cement concrete pcc pavement surfaces .
num materials provide plastic pavement markings materials in accordance with section num traffic stripe except yellow thermoplastic material .
provide yellow thermoplastic provide matte nonretroreflective black contrast markings for pcc surfaces .
provide glass beads in accordance with subsection num glass beads for traffic paint thermoplasticand multipolymer .
num equipment a extruded application thermoplastic apply the material to the pavement using the extrusion method one side of the shaping die is the pavement surface and the other three sides are formed by equipment for heating and controlling the material flow .
prevent extrusion of the material above the pavement surface .
ensure the equipment parts coming in contact with the material are accessible for cleaning and maintenance .
prevent parts between the main reservoir and the shaping die from clogging .
ensure mixing and conveying parts including the shaping die maintain the material at the plastic temperature .
extrude plastic stripes with continuously uniform dimensions .
use equipment designed to produce a uniform film thickness from num mil to num mil num mm to num mm .
ensure the shaping die includes a remotely controlled cutoff device to provide clean square stripe ends and to apply skip lines .
the department will not allow the use of pans aprons and similar appliances that the die overruns .
b .
mechanical application preformed plastic tape install preformed pavement line markings with a mechanical applicator that accurately and uniformly places pavement lines .
equip the mechanical applicator with a film cutoff device and measuring devices that automatically and accumulatively measure the length of each stripe within a num percent tolerance .
num traffic stripe plastic num traffic stripe plastic num construction methods a .
surface preparation remove foreign material from the road surface before applying the plastic marking material .
ensure the pavement surface is dry .
for new pcc pavement sandblast the pavement surface at stripe locations to remove curing compound .
sandblast at least num days after placing the new pcc pavement unless otherwise directed by the resident engineer .
remove existing stripes at the direction of the resident engineer .
on ac and pcc surfaces older than num months or with existing or removed pavement markings apply a num blend of a twopart epoxy primer sealer to the area to be striped .
use a primer sealer compatible with the plastic striping material and the pavement surface .
on pcc and ac surfaces older than num months apply a liquid seal coat to the area to be striped .
use a seal coat compatible with the plastic striping material and the pavement surface .
correct pavement markings that are nonuniform or not visible as directed by the resident engineer at no additional cost to the department .
obtain written approval from the resident engineer before placing plastic pavement markings over longitudinal joints .
use abrasive blasting or grinding to remove existing temporary or permanent traffic markings until at least num percent of the underlying pavement is visible unless otherwise specified by the manufacturer .
minimize interference between temporary pavement markings and the permanent dualcomponent pavement marking materials .
when applying dual component markings to new pcc pavement use a highpressure water jet sandblasting or other method approved by the resident engineer to remove existing curing compound .
remove the curing compound at least num in num mm beyond the width of the marking .
after removing the curing compound sweep and use a highpressure air spray .
b .
application of markings num hotapplied plastic pavement markings use the extrusion method for hot applied pavement markings .
ensure the lines have sharp edges uniform thickness good adhesion and uniform high reflectance .
in accordance with the manufacturer recommendations melt the compound and install at temperatures from num f to num f num c to num c measured at the pavement surface .
apply hot thermoplastic markings on clean dry pavement with a surface temperature of at least num f num c and rising and wind chill temperature of at least num f num c. the department defines the drying time for pavement markings as the minimum elapsed time after application when the stripe retains its shape and reflectivity and traffic will not damage the stripe .
the department defines minimum drying times in accordance with the following at a maximum relative humidity of num percent and air temperature of num f num c traffic stripe plastic num num for stripes num mil num mm thick num min and for stripes num mil num mm thick num min .
mix and apply thermoplastic pavement marking material to ensure that stripes retain the original characteristics of the bond to the surface resistance to distortions by traffic or climate and resistance to discoloration .
ensure the thickness of the dry thermoplastic material in accordance with table num table num specified line thickness description standard line thickness mil mm thin line thickness a mil mm lane and stop lines num num num num num num num num edge gore and diagonal lines num num num num num num num num words arrows and symbols num num num num num num num num a for roadways with less than num adt use a num in stripe only no words or symbols .
num coldapplied plastic pavement markings for preformed pavement markings of reflectorized plastic material coldapplied to the pavement surface coat with a factoryapplied pressuresensitive adhesive .
apply the material to the ac and pcc surfaces in accordance with the manufacturer recommendations when the surface temperature is at least num f num c and rising .
if applying the markings at surface temperatures from num f to num f num c to num c apply the markings in accordance with the manufacturer recommendations other special instructions or both .
do not use heat solvents or extra adhesives to apply the reflectorized plastic markings except for surface sealers on pcc surfaces as required by the contract .
num inlaid installation of preformed plastic tape for the inlaid method apply the markings on newlyplaced compacted ac pavement when the pavement temperature is from num f to num f num c to num c. use a mechanical roller to inlay the markings into the ac surface .
ensure the mechanical roller inlays the marking to a depth from num percent to num percent of the plastic tape thickness .
if any of the following occurs during inlaying operations repair or replace the inlaid markings as approved by the resident engineer at no additional cost to the department distortion of the markings failure to provide a uniform appearance or improper installation of the markings .
place the markings in the finished surface of installed ac pavement before the end of each work day .
num traffic stripe plastic num c. application of glass beads apply large glass beads at a coverage rate of at least num lb per num ft² num kg per num m² before applying standard beads .
apply standard glass beads at a coverage rate of at least num lb per num ft² num kg per num m² .
for transverse and handmachine applied markings use a single drop of large glass beads at a rate of at least num lb per num ft² num kg per num m² .
d. performance period ensure markings and replacement markings meet the contract requirements for at least num calendar days .
within num days of notification by the resident engineer remove and replace noncompliant pavement markings at no additional cost to the department .
e. retroreflectivity measure stripes with a portable reflectometer that uses num m geometry in accordance with astm e num and the manufacturer recommendations .
ensure the manufacturer calibrates the reflectometer annually .
keep the annual calibration certification with the reflectometer .
num minimum retroreflectivity ensure longitudinal markings meet the minimum retroreflectivity values in accordance with table num table num minimum retroreflectivity white yellow mcdm²lx contract unit price adjustment mcdm²lx contract unit price adjustment num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num remove and replace num remove and replace num measurement measure retroreflectivity of markings within num calendar days of placement after removing loose beads .
measure marking retroreflectivity in the direction of traffic except the department will allow yellow skip lines to be measured in either direction of traffic .
one measurement multiple readings will represent each num ft num m lot of singlecolor longitudinal stripe .
the department will not allow readings for adjacent lots to be taken closer than num ft num m from each other .
for solid longitudinal stripes one measurement represents the average of five readings per lot taken at num ft num m intervals along a randomly selected num ft num m section of solid stripe .
for longitudinal skip stripes one measurement represents the average of six readings per lot two readings taken from each of three adjacent skip stripes .
the department will not allow readings taken within the first or last num ft num m of skip stripes .
for noncompliant measurements the resident engineer will require additional measurements to determine the extent of noncompliance .
traffic stripe multipolymer num num the department will not require measurements for the following stop bars crosswalks gores words and symbols longitudinal striping installed using hand line machines county roads or city streets unless otherwise required by the contract and projects less than num mi num km long .
obtain the resident engineers approval in writing before using a mobile retroreflectometer system as an alternate measurement method .
num acceptance submit final retroreflectivity measurements to the resident engineer for acceptance .
include the date and time of reflectometer calibration location gps coordinates line color and date of each measurement .
the department will consider unmeasured stripes noncompliant .
the resident engineer will provide notification of noncompliance with the minimum retroreflectivity values .
remove and replace noncompliant stripe sections at no additional cost to the department .
for quality assurance the department will measure retroreflectivity with a delta light optics model ltl x portable reflectometer .
if the department and the contractor measurements differ by greater than num percent the department will use its measurements for acceptance .
the resident engineer may accept striping quantities less than num ft num m by visual inspection .
num method of measurement the resident engineer will measure the length of traffic stripe for num in num mm num in num mm num in num mm and num in num mm stripe .
the resident engineer will count arrows by each head .
num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit a traffic stripe plasticnum wide linear foot meter a traffic stripe plasticnum wide linear foot meter a traffic stripe plasticnum wide linear foot meter a traffic stripe plasticnum wide linear foot meter b traffic stripe plasticarrows each b traffic stripe plasticwords each b traffic stripe plasticsymbols each the department considers the cost of preparing the pavement surface and retroreflectivity measurements including the measurement submittals to be included in the contract unit price for the relevant pay item .
the department will pay for the replacement of pavement markings damaged by snow and ice removal .
the department will pay for stripe removal in accordance with section num construction zone pavement markings .
num traffic stripe multipolymer num section num traffic stripe multipolymer num description this work consists of providing and placing reflectorized and nonreflectorized multipolymer pavement markings on asphalt concrete ac and portland cement concrete pcc pavement surfaces .
num materials a .
physical properties of the mixed compound provide a multipolymer resin material free of heavy metals as defined by the epa approved by the resident engineer .
when heating to the application temperature ensure the material does not exude toxic fumes .
formulate and test the materials to ensure performance as a pavement marking material with glass beads applied to the surface .
when properly applied with the required gradations and bead applications ensure the multipolymer resin compound cures to a notrack condition within num min at num f num c or greater or within num min at num f num c tested in accordance with astm d num .
provide materials in accordance with the table num table num and table num table num color requirements chromaticity coordinates num num num num federal num color x y x y x y x y brightness y white num num num num num num num num num num min yellow num num num num num num num num num num min num min table num multipolymer traffic stripe properties property test procedure description abrasion resistance astm c num evaluate using a taber abrader with a num lb num g load and csnum wheels for num cycles .
calculate the wear index and ensure the index for the dual component material is num mg or less .
perform the test on cured samples applied without glass beads at a film thickness from num in to num in num mm to num mm to code snum stainless steel plates .
allow the samples to cure at room temperature from num f to num f from num hr to num hr before performing the tests .
traffic stripe multipolymer num num table num multipolymer traffic stripe properties property test procedure description hardness astm d num ensure the multipolymer paint pavement markings material has a shore d hardness from num to num .
allow the samples to cure at room temperature from num f to num f from num hr to num hr before performing the indicated tests .
adhesion to concrete aci num appendix a.num ensure the multipolymer marking material has a higher degree of adhesion to the specified concrete at least num psi surface so there is num percent concrete failure in the test performance .
allow the samples to cure at room temperature from num f to num f from num hr to num hr before performing the indicated tests .
yellowness index astm d num ensure the white material has a yellowness index no greater than num .
base the index on a sample cured at room temperature from num f to num f for num hr and exposed in the quv chamber for num hr .
traffic stripe multipolymer table num material requirements tests requirements density gallon weight num lbgal num kgm³ viscosity krebsstormer num ku viscosity cone plate num p grind not less than the standard nonvolatile matter num pigment white num volume nonvolatile matter num infrared spectrum analyze component a and component b to verify for control purposes that submitted materials are identical to materials originally approved by the resident engineer .
the resident engineer will reject materials that deviate from the original sample .
b. multipolymer composition provide a twocomponent compound a and compound b multipolymer resin material num percent solids system with a volumetric mixing ratio of num ab in accordance with table num table num multipolymer composition pigment composition percent by weight white titanium dioxide rutile num minimum purity astm d num type iii num num multipolymer resin num num num traffic stripe multipolymer num table num multipolymer composition pigment composition percent by weight yellow organic nonlead yellow num num titanium dioxide astm d num type iii num num multipolymer resin num num ensure that the pigment composition only consists of titanium dioxide .
num multipolymer content component a test the multipolymer content of the multipolymer resin in accordance with astm d num and calculate the weight per multipolymer equivalent wpe for both white and yellow markings .
determine the multipolymer content on a pigment free basis .
ensure the multipolymer content meets the target value provided by the manufacturer reviewed by the departments material division and approved by the resident engineer .
the resident engineer will apply a tolerance of num wpe to the target value to establish the acceptance range .
num amine value component b determine the amine value of the curing agent in accordance with astm d num .
ensure the total amine value meets a target value provided by the manufacturer reviewed by the departments material division and approved by the resident engineer .
the resident engineer will apply a tolerance of num wpe to the target value to establish the acceptance range .
c. sampling and certification if directed by the resident engineer submit the following from manufacturer certified test results a num qt sample representing each batch of multipolymer resin material or both .
obtain resident engineer approval of the multipolymer components before use in accordance with the following documentation of acceptable performance from other state dots field performance of num adt for the past num years in accordance with this specification .
submit a written explanation of changes to the formulation as well as physical or chemical properties of the approved multipolymer resin to the resident engineer at least num days in advance of its use for reevaluation and approval .
include msds with submitted documentation .
d. nonreflectorized contrast or shadow markings ensure the marking material used for the contrast or shadow marking conforms to the same formulation material and preapproved sampling requirements except for the following items color pigments used color requirements listed and if dropon glass beads must be replaced with a black colorfast antiskid material .
traffic stripe multipolymer num num e. glass beads provide doubledrop glass beads in accordance with subsection num glass beads for traffic paint .
num equipment use equipment that sprays the multipolymer materials in the manufacturer recommended proportions .
mount the equipment on a truck capable of applying uniformly dimensioned markings as required by the contract .
provide equipment with an automatic bead dispenser that continuously mixes and agitates the pavement marking material .
provide equipment capable of placing at least num ft num m of the following types of markings per day to the alignment spacing and thickness shown on the plans solid or skipped stripes num in to num in num m to num mm wide markings other than solid or skipped lines and a centerline and nopassing barrier stripe configuration consisting of one skip stripe with two solid stripes simultaneously .
ensure the equipment places markings with clean edges of uniform cross section and thicknesses with square ends and with an approximate stripetogap ratio of num .
ensure the equipment uniformly and instantly places the beads on the markings .
when placing beads on two adjacent stripes ensure each stripe has an equivalent bead coverage rate and embedment .
provide equipment that heats and places each component within the component mix tolerances in accordance with the manufacturer recommendations .
num construction methods a .
surface preparation remove foreign material from the road surface before applying the dual component material .
ensure the pavement surface is dry .
use abrasive blasting or grinding to remove existing temporary or permanent traffic markings until at least num percent of the underlying pavement is visible unless otherwise specified by the manufacturer .
minimize interference between temporary pavement markings and the permanent dualcomponent pavement marking materials .
when applying dual component markings to new pcc pavement use a highpressure water jet sandblasting or other method approved by the resident engineer to remove existing curing compound .
remove the curing compound at least num in num mm beyond the width of the marking .
after removing the curing compound sweep and use a highpressure air spray .
b. pavement temperature and condition apply dual component pavement markings to new ac and pcc pavement surfaces at least num calendar days after paving and under the following conditions on a dry roadway no standing water or significant dampness at a pavement surface temperature of at least num f num c and rising and at wind chill temperature of at least num f num c. num traffic stripe multipolymer num measure the pavement surface temperatures num min before beginning striping installation .
if critical temperatures exist as determined by the resident engineer measure the pavement surface temperature every num hr to num hr or at shorter intervals as directed by the resident engineer until the end of the day .
measure the pavement surface temperature with a standard surface temperature or infrared noncontact thermometer .
c. application apply large glass beads at a coverage rate of at least num lb per num ft² num kg per num m² before applying standard beads .
apply standard glass beads at a coverage rate of at least num lb per num ft² num kg per num m² .
for handmachine applied markings apply a single drop of standard glass beads at a coverage rate of at least num lb per num ft² num kg per num m² .
alternatively apply a nonreflectorized contrast marking of the same dimensions as the white skip lines shown on the plans immediately after each upstream white skip line .
d. performance period ensure markings and replacement markings meet the contract requirements for at least num calendar days .
within num calendar days of notification by the resident engineer remove and replace noncompliant pavement markings at no additional cost to the department .
e. retroreflectivity measure stripes with a portable reflectometer that uses num m geometry in accordance with astm e num and the manufacturer recommendations .
ensure the manufacturer calibrates the reflectometer annually .
keep the annual calibration certification with the reflectometer .
num minimum retroreflectivity ensure longitudinal markings on pcc pavement surfaces meet the minimum retroreflectivity values in accordance with table num num measurement measure retroreflectivity of markings within num calendar days of placement after removing loose beads .
take the reading at least num hr after application to allow the binder to cure .
measure marking retroreflectivity in the direction of traffic except the department will allow yellow skip stripes to be measured in either direction of travel .
one measurement multiple readings will represent each num ft num m lot of singlecolor longitudinal stripe .
the department will not allow readings for adjacent lots to be taken closer than num ft num m from each other .
for solid longitudinal stripes one measurement represents the average of five readings per lot taken at num ft num m intervals along a randomly selected num ft num m section of solid stripe .
for longitudinal skip stripes one measurement represents the average of six readings per lot two readings taken from each of three adjacent skip stripes .
the department will not allow readings taken within the first or last num ft num m of skip stripes .
traffic stripe multipolymer num num for noncompliant measurements the resident engineer will require additional measurements to determine the extent of noncompliance .
the department will not require measurements of the following stopbars crosswalks gores words symbols longitudinal striping installed using hand line machines county roads or city streets unless otherwise required by the contract and projects no greater than num mi num km long .
obtain the resident engineers approval in writing before using a mobile retroreflectometer system as an alternative measurement method .
num acceptance submit final retroreflectivity measurements to the resident engineer for acceptance .
include the date and time of reflectometer calibration location gps coordinates line color and date of each measurement .
the department will consider unmeasured stripes noncompliant .
the resident engineer will provide notification of noncompliance with the minimum retroreflectivity values .
remove and replace noncompliant stripe sections at no additional cost to the department .
for quality assurance the department will measure retroreflectivity with a delta light optics model ltl x portable reflectometer .
if the department and the contractor measurements differ by greater than num percent the department will use its measurements for acceptance .
the resident engineer may accept striping quantities less than num ft num m by visual inspection .
table num minimum retroreflectivity white yellow mcdm²lx pay adjustment mcdm²lx pay adjustment num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num remove and replace num remove and replace num method of measurement the resident engineer will measure the length of traffic stripe using a num in num mm standard width .
for traffic stripes narrower or wider than num in num mm the resident engineer will make a proportional adjustment based on the num in num mm standard width .
the resident engineer will count arrows by each head .
num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit a traffic stripe multipolymer num wide linear foot meter a traffic stripe multipolymer num wide linear foot meter a traffic stripe multipolymer num wide linear foot meter num traffic stripe multipolymer num pay item pay unit a traffic stripe multipolymer num wide linear foot meter b traffic stripe multipolymer symbols words etc .
each traffic stripe multipolymer the department will consider the cost of preparing the pavement surface and retroreflectivity measurements including the measurement submittals to be included in the contract unit price for the relevant pay item .
the department will pay for the replacement of pavement markings damaged by snow and ice removal .
the department will pay for stripe removal in accordance with section num construction zone pavement markings .
section num construction zone pavement markings num description this work consists of providing and placing pavement markings on detours and roadways accessed by traffic during construction .
num materials provide paint removable pavement marking tape or other construction zone pavement marking material as shown on the plans or as directed by the resident engineer .
provide traffic stripe materials in accordance with section num traffic stripe .
num equipment apply pavement markings in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
use a paint machine and a bead dispenser in accordance with subsection num equipment to apply the painted construction traffic stripe .
use equipment for removing pavement markings that will not damage the pavement surface or pavement material texture .
num construction methods a .
general install removable pavement marking tape and pavement markings in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations or as approved by the resident engineer .
at the time of marking application ensure a dry pavement surface an atmospheric temperature above num f num c and a wind chill factor above num f num c. remove dirt debris loose particles curing compound and heavy oil residues from the road surface application areas immediately before installing pavement markings .
construction zone pavement markings num num construction zone pavement markings ensure uniform and visible removable pavement marking tape and pavement markers for traffic control .
correct pavement markings not uniform or clearly visible as approved by the resident engineer at no additional cost to the department .
b. detours complete pavement markings on detours including lane and edge lines before opening the detour to traffic .
if the resident engineer directs maintenance restoration of pavement markers or restriping of detours begin these operations within num hr of notification from the resident engineer weather permitting .
c. stage construction when resurfacing roadways in successive stages place pavement markings before opening the new roadway stage to traffic as shown on the plans or as directed by the resident engineer .
d. removal if detour or permanent pavement markings conflict with the permanent pavement markings of the next traffic control phase remove as approved by the resident engineer before switching traffic .
place temporary pavement markings before removing existing markings from roadways open to traffic .
remove temporary pavement markings before installing final striping .
when additional pavement marking is necessary due to overlays redirection of traffic restoration or resident engineer direction start the striping operation within num hr of notification from the resident engineer .
remove the removable pavement marking and adhesive as directed by the resident engineer .
install additional pavement markings according to traffic conditions as approved by the resident engineer .
immediately dispose of removed pavement marking tape and pavement markers .
remove pavement markings without damaging the pavement surface or pavement material texture .
the department will not allow painting over or blotting out the existing pavement markings .
when the removal operation deposits sand or other material on the pavement remove as the work progresses .
if blast cleaning within num ft num m of a lane carrying traffic remove the residue immediately using a vacuum attachment operated concurrently with the blast cleaning operation or other methods approved by the resident engineer .
repair pavement damage as directed by the resident engineer at no additional cost to the department .
num method of measurement the resident engineer will measure the length of stripes and each unit of arrows and words .
num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows num construction zone pavement markings num pay item pay unit a construction traffic stripe paint linear foot meter b construction traffic stripe paint arrows words symbols each c removable pavement marking tape each or linear foot meter d nonremovable pavement marking tape each or linear foot meter e construction zone pavement markers each f pavement marking removal each or linear foot meter num construction zone pavement markings the department will consider the cost of restoring pavement markers restriping and maintaining pavement markings to be included in the contract unit price for the relevant pay items .
the department will consider the cost of placement and removal of removable pavement marking tape and construction zone pavement markers to be included in the contract unit price for removable pavement marking tape and construction zone pavement markers .
section num pavement markers num description this work consists of providing and installing pavement markers .
num materials provide materials in accordance with section num pavement markers .
provide retroreflective markers with neutral or colored marker bodies that match the reflector face .
for bidirectional markers ensure the marker body color is neutral or split to match the reflective face .
provide pavement markers in accordance with the color codes specified in table num table num pavement markers color code class color code a crystalcrystal b amber c crystalred d amberamber for class c markers provide reflector units affixed to the castings with an adhesive material molded to the reflective unit as an integral part .
provide marker housing colors matching the existing traffic stripe colors .
pavement markers num num pavement markers num equipment use equipment to mix and apply epoxy resin adhesive in accordance with aashto m num .
num construction methods ensure the marker attachment areas on the highway surface are free of material that may affect the adhesion of the marker to the pavement surface .
for markers on pcc pavement sand blast or wire buff the marker attachment area immediately before placing the maker .
immediately before attaching the reflector unit apply a coat of primer from the same manufacturer to the casting at the reflector unit attachment point .
follow the installation procedure recommended by the marker manufacturer .
affix the markers to the highway surface ensuring traffic does not displace markers .
correct pavement markers that are not uniform or clearly visible day or night as directed by the resident engineer at no additional cost to the department .
place retroreflective pavement markers at the locations shown on the plans .
ensure the color of reflected light as shown on the plans or as directed by the resident engineer .
for roadways open to public travel during work operate the equipment and store materials and supplies to minimize hazards or inconveniences to the traveling public .
repair pavement or facilities damaged by equipment operation at no additional cost to the department .
num method of measurement the resident engineer will measure pavement markers separately by counting individual marker classes and types .
the resident engineer will divide pavement markers into classes and types for measurement and payment in accordance with table num table num pavement marker classes class a retroflective class b nonretroreflective ceramic class c retroreflective all weather type direction type type direction type num monodirectional yellow type num mono directional type num bidirectional white type num bidirectional num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit a pavement markers each b remove and reset pavement markers each num sandfilled impact attenuation modules num section num sandfilled impact attenuation modules num description this work consists of providing and placing sandfilled impact attenuation modules .
module .
one freestanding frangible unit within the impact attenuation system .
num materials a .
general provide sandfilled impact attenuation modules that meet the test requirements procedures and results in accordance with nchrp num report test level iii approved by the fhwa .
ensure each module consists of a barrel a lid and sand material .
provide high density thermoplastic polyethylene or polypropylene barrels and lids that shatter on impact .
provide modules designed to distribute the sand mass without spontaneous rupture of the outer container or collapse of the inner core .
provide a yellow outer container unless otherwise shown on the plans in accordance with the standard highway color code requirement in the mutcd .
as a replacement supply provide the number of additional modules of each capacity as shown on the plans .
these unassembled modules will become the property of the department .
deliver to the nearest department warehouse approved by the resident engineer .
b .
barrels provide yellow barrels molded in one or multiple parts that resist ultraviolet uv weathering degradation .
provide barrels capable of supporting and containing num lb num kg num lb num kg num lb num kg num lb num kg and num lb num kg of sand at the heights required by the contract without leaking .
c. lids provide a polyethylene lid from ⅛ in to ⅜ in num mm to num mm thick that resists deterioration from uv rays .
ensure the lid clamps or pressfits over the outer container to seal the module .
d. sand ensure the sand mass and sieve analysis for each module meets the manufacturers recommendations and contains no greater than num percent moisture by dry weight of the aggregate at the time of placement .
e. certification for each lot or module shipment submit to the resident engineer a type d certification in accordance with subsection num material certifications .
sandfilled impact attenuation modules num num sandfilled impact attenuation modules num equipment vacant num construction methods place the modules in the configuration for each location as shown on the plans .
paint the outline of the base of each module on the surface of the pavement or apron .
within the outline paint the weight of the sand mixture for each module using num in num mm high numbers .
to prevent modules on sloped surfaces greater than num percent from moving or overturning attach a halfring block or other leveling device to the pavement or apron surface under the module .
while placing each module in the final position fill within num lb num kg of the sand mass required by the contract .
fill the module with sand to the heights required by the contract .
after filling the module place and fit the lid .
for nonselfsecuring lids drill four holes with ¼ in num mm diameters through the perimeter of the lid and outer container at equidistant points around the module perimeter .
secure the lid with four pop rivets .
num method of measurement a .
permanent installations provide new materials .
the resident engineer will measure modules including component parts by the unit as shown on the plans .
the resident engineer will measure delivered replacement modules by the unit as shown on the plans .
b .
temporary installations for modules temporarily used in construction work zones the resident engineer will not measure the installed replacement modules .
maintain enough sandfilled replacement modules to provide replacement of num percent of the total modules in use on the project .
upon project completion retain ownership of sandfilled impact attenuation modules used for temporary installations unless otherwise shown on the plans .
c. removal of existing installations remove and dispose of existing modules not used during construction or not remaining in place after project completion .
num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit a sandfilled impact attenuation module each or sign day b replacement impact attenuation module each c removal of existing impact attenuation module each num sandfilled impact attenuation modules num num sandfilled impact attenuation modules the department will consider the cost of sand and paint to be included in the contract unit price for sandfilled impact attenuation module .
the department will consider the cost of maintaining replacement modules in stock to be included in the contract unit price for sandfilled impact attenuation module .
section num truck mounted impact attenuators num description the work consists of providing installing operating maintaining and relocating truckmounted impact attenuators .
this work also consists of providing stockpiling and moving repair packages .
num materials provide truckmounted impact attenuators with the following components crushable cartridge encased in a shell backup and support assembly to attach the backup to the truck and truck with a gross vehicle weight from num lb to num lb num kg to num kg .
provide a truck chassis to mount the impact attenuator with a clearance from num in to num in num mm to num mm between the bottom of the shell and the roadway .
provide truckmounted attenuators in accordance with the test requirements procedures and results in nchrp num report test level iii approved by the fhwa .
submit certified test results meeting the test and performance criteria in accordance with nchrp num .
provide the truckmounted impact attenuator cartridge with a standard trailer lighting system .
provide a num tilt system with a mechanical locking device to secure the truckmounted attenuator cartridge in the num position .
num equipment vacant num construction methods do not park truckmounted impact attenuators against rigid objects except as a temporary safety measure until installation of a permanent crash attenuator .
use this method for no longer than num hr or as shown on the plans .
install the attenuator on the truck in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
during truckmounted attenuator operations stockpile the truckmounted impact attenuator replacement packages on the project or at another local site approved by the resident engineer .
if repairing the truckmounted impact attenuator ensure traffic safety through the construction area or suspend construction activities .
immediately repair or replace damaged truckmounted attenuators .
portable longitudinal barrier num num num method of measurement vacant the resident engineer will measure truckmounted attenuator by the maximum number in use at any one time during the project .
num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit a truck mounted attenuator each or sign day b truck mounted impact atten .
replacement package each the department assumes ownership of truckmounted attenuators paid for on an each basis .
the contractor retains ownership of truckmounted attenuators paid for on a sign day basis unless otherwise shown on the plans .
section num portable longitudinal barrier num description this work consists of providing placing and relocating portable longitudinal barriers .
num materials provide materials in accordance with the following sections material section portland cement concrete class a num white concrete num reinforcing steel num provide portable longitudinal barriers in accordance with the current test requirements procedures and results in nchrp num report test level iii approved by fhwa .
submit certified test results meeting the test and performance criteria in accordance with nchrp num guidelines .
submit alternative designs for approval by the resident engineer before starting the manufacture of barriers .
the resident engineer will consider alternative and special design features influencing the casting of a section and attachments or holes that facilitate the handling and lifting of a section .
ensure alternative designs meet the exterior dimensions as shown on the plans .
num equipment use a transfer and transport vehicle for placing resetting and removing the portable longitudinal barriers on the project as required by the contract .
num portable longitudinal barrier num portable longitudinal barrier num construction methods before casting the portable longitudinal barrier notify the resident engineer of the casting site and start date .
mix place finish and cure the longitudinal barriers in accordance with subsection num construction methods .
submit written certification indicating barrier fabrication in accordance with the specifications before delivering portable longitudinal barriers to the project .
prevent damage to longitudinal barrier sections and hinges during fabrication storage handling and placement .
repair minor chipping spalling and scars as directed by the resident engineer .
make repairs or replace damaged sections and hinges at no additional cost to the department .
finish surfaces supporting the portable longitudinal barrier units to provide a full and uniform bearing over the entire bearing area .
correct bearing defects as approved by the resident engineer .
connect or join units as shown on the plans .
align joint units horizontally and vertically to present a uniform appearance .
when the project no longer requires portable longitudinal barriers to protect the work site or traveling public remove the barriers and hardware from the project and deliver to the department storage facility shown on the plans or otherwise to the contractors yard .
at the storage facility stockpile the barrier sections and store hardware in sturdy containers marked for future use .
num method of measurement vacant num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit a portable longitudinal barrier linear foot meter b deliver portable longitudinal barrier linear foot meter c relocation of port .
longitudinal barrier linear foot meter the department will consider the cost of purchasing and delivering new barrier to the project in the contract unit price for portable longitudinal barrier .
the department will pay for portable longitudinal barrier on its first functional use on its storage as shown on the plans or on its storage directed by the resident engineer .
after installation of the portable longitudinal barrier in its first functional location the department will own the barrier .
the department will pay for other moves of the new barrier in accordance with deliver portable longitudinal barrier or relocation of portable longitudinal barrier .
the department will pay num percent of the contract unit price for deliver portable longitudinal barrier upon delivery and placement of the contractorowned portable longitudinal barrier to the project in its first functional location as shown on the plans .
the department will pay the final installment num percent of the contract unit price for deliver portable longitudinal barrier after removal of the barrier from its last functional location on the project .
modular glare screen num num for relocation of portable longitudinal barrier the department will pay the contract unit price after the barrier is moved from one functional location to another functional location on the project as shown on the plans .
the department will pay the last payment for relocation of portable longitudinal barrier when the barrier is moved to its last functional location .
section num modular glare screen num description this work consists of providing and installing modular glare screen units on concrete median barriers .
num materials provide num ft num m long modular glare screen units with glare screen blades a flexible base rail mounting brackets with hardware and an anchor bolt system .
provide modular glare screen blades and base rail manufactured from frangible or flexible lightweight material .
provide modular glare screen in accordance with table num table num modular glare screen blade properties property measurement weight num lbft num kgm width num½ in num in num mm num mm specific gravity num num tensile strength num psi num kpa provide green modular glare screen blades similar to federal standard number num .
a .
base rail provide base rail in accordance with table num table num base rail properties property measurement weight num lbft num kgm width num½ in num mm num in num mm rail tensile strength num psi num kpa b. weatherability provide glare screen blades and base rails that retain mechanical properties from num f to num f num c to num c and show minimum degradation after num hr in a weatherometer .
c. certification submit to the resident engineer a type d materials certification in accordance with section num material certifications .
num modular glare screen num modular glare screen num equipment vacant num construction methods install unit component parts as shown on the plans and in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
fasten each base rail section to the barrier wall in at least three locations .
ensure the connections have a pullout strength of at least num psi num kpa and a shear strength of at least num psi num kpa .
num method of measurement vacant num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit a modular glare screen permanent each or linear foot meter b modular glare screen temporary sign day section num construction signing and traffic control num description this work consists of providing and erecting signs lights barricades and other devices .
num materials a .
general provide materials for construction signing and traffic control in accordance with nchrp num report test level iii approved by fhwa .
b .
construction signing and traffic control materials num arrow display provide each arrow display with a circuitry control unit a mounting frame and a sign panel with yellow sealed beam lamps attached in accordance with mutcd section numfnum .
provide nonreflective black finish for panel faces exposed to oncoming traffic .
provide a control unit to display higher intensity during the day and lower intensity at night .
ensure lamps display the same light intensity for a given setting .
the department will only allow the substitution of larger panels for smaller panels .
provide a mounting frame to support the sign panel so the bottom edge of the panel is at least num ft num m above the roadway surface when displayed to construction signing and traffic control num num construction signing and traffic control oncoming traffic .
mount arrow displays so the panel rotates on a horizontal axis to hide it from the view of oncoming traffic when not in use .
mount mobile arrow displays on pneumatictired vehicles .
provide a power source with a separate auxiliary power source that can be immediately available to operate flashing lights .
provide a selfcontained battery or electric generator power source on mobile arrow displays .
provide arrow displays with a solidstate electronic circuitry control unit with four modes that contain switching controls for operator selection in accordance with table num table num arrow display controls mode display pass right flashing arrow pass left flashing arrow pass either side the apex of the outermost chevrons point to the nearest panel edge caution at least four lamps in a pattern not indicating a direction num construction signs and barricades provide metal wood or plastic supports and sign blanks .
provide two supporting legs for each sign num ft² num m² or larger .
provide wideangle flat top retroreflective sheeting for signs and barricades in accordance with type iva sheeting unless otherwise shown on the plans .
construct sign messages and symbols in accordance with mutcd and as shown on the plans .
mark and immediately replace construction signs not in accordance with subsection num retroreflective sheeting .
num construction signs num ft² num m² and larger provide aluminum or galvanized steel to construct signs .
if ground mounting provide and install breakaway signs in accordance with gmsnum fgsnum fgsnum and spanum .
the resident engineer will approve installation locations before construction begins .
the department will not require reinforcing steel in the sign footings .
place signs on existing overhead signs if shown on the plans .
retroreflectorize signs as required by the contract .
provide signs of the designs and colors shown on the plans .
num vertical panels provide vertical panels in accordance with mutcd section numfnum .
place type iva reflectorized sheeting on both sides of each vertical panel .
num warning lights provide warning lights in accordance with mutcd section numfnumof .
num cones provide cones in accordance with mutcd section numfnum .
num construction signing and traffic control num num surveillance of traffic control provide an atssa or departmentcertified observer to maintain traffic control devices in position for work zones at the construction site num hr a day seven days a week when traffic is directed away from the normal traffic lanes or when directed by the resident engineer .
provide the observer with a cell phone .
num traffic surveillance police make arrangements through the oklahoma highway patrol chiefs office to provide one officially marked oklahoma highway patrol car and one law enforcement officer capable of issuing traffic citations .
ensure the oklahoma highway patrol insures licenses bonds and approves the officer for this work .
ensure the duty hours of the officer and vehicle match the contractors working hours .
num flagger if required by the contract provide two flaggers per sign day .
provide lighting to illuminate the flagger stations at night .
numplastic drums provide twopiece breakaway drums in accordance with the mutcd .
obtain a certificate of crashworthiness from the manufacturer stating that the drums with conventional barricade warning lights are in accordance with the nchrp num category i device requirements .
use the drums as channelizing devices for construction and maintenance operations .
provide plastic drums at least num in num mm high and at least num in num mm wide .
ensure the upper body of the unreflectorized drum weighs at least num lb num kg and the base weighs at least num lb num kg .
provide drums constructed of impact resistant low density polyethylene with a density of num and a melt index of num .
provide bright orange polyethylene that resists color fading .
ensure the material will maintain structural integrity in temperatures from num f to num f num c to num c. ensure sheeting surfaces are num percent flame treated to maximize adhesion of reflective sheeting to the drum body .
provide weather tight drums designed to accept horizontal circumferential bands of reflectorized sheeting num in to num in num mm to num mm wide .
provide drums with a dshaped configuration at the base attachment point to minimize rolling after impact .
provide drums with enclosed tops and drains to prevent water accumulation .
ensure that stacking the drums will not damage the reflective surface .
ensure each drum allows the attachment of two type a or type c conventional barricade warning lights .
provide warning lights capable of remaining attached during repeated impacts at speeds of at least num mph num kmh and in accordance with nchrp num .
provide drum base sections with the following characteristics no taller than num in num mm an integral component of the plastic drum at least num percent post consumer or post industrial rubber num lb num kg construction signing and traffic control num num a vertical profile no greater than num in num mm attachable and detachable by one person without tools and capable of withstanding num mph num kmh winds turbulence created by vehicles and repeated movements during construction and maintenance operations .
ensure the top portion of the unit deforms and breaks away from the base and ballast upon vehicular impact .
ensure the ballast remains in place allowing the vehicle to pass over it .
drums shall have alternating fluorescent orange and white horizontal circumferential stripes of retroreflectorized sheeting .
there shall be a minimum of two fluorescent orange and two white stripes beginning with a fluorescent orange stripe at the top of the drum .
if there are nonreflectorized spaces between the horizontal orange and white stripes they shall be no more than num in num mm wide .
all nonreflectorized portions of the drum shall be orange .
reflective sheeting shall meet the requirements of the latest astm dnum for type x reboundable sheeting .
numtube channelizers provide orange tube channelizers at least num in num mm high and at least num in num mm wide when facing traffic .
ensure the channelizers do not damage vehicles upon impact .
for nighttime use equip each tube channelizer with two num in num mm wide white bands with retroreflectivity at least that of type iv sheeting .
place the white bands no greater than num in num mm from the top of the tube and no greater than num in num mm apart .
numsampling and testing submit to the resident engineer a type d certification in accordance with subsection num materials certifications .
num equipment vacant num construction methods perform construction traffic control as directed by the resident engineer in accordance with mutcd chapter vi and as shown on the plans .
place signs lights and barricades on portable or fixed supports as required by the contract .
monitor and maintain the condition of devices .
immediately replace damaged signs or devices as directed by the resident engineer .
if directed by the resident engineer clean the sign or device .
coordinate with department personnel to conduct nighttime traffic control device reviews at the beginning of the project in conjunction with major changes to traffic signing and at monthly intervals .
record the date and result of the nighttime inspection in the contractor signing log .
immediately remove or cover unnecessary traffic control devices as approved by the resident engineer .
num construction signing and traffic control num num light the flagger stations at night and ensure the lighting does not impede the vision of passing drivers .
the resident engineer will give written notice of unacceptable conditions to facilitate prompt maintenance and changes in construction traffic control devices .
correct the specified devices within num hr of notice .
continue providing construction traffic control and maintain the log of devices until completion and acceptance at no additional cost to the department .
num method of measurement a .
per pay item if plans show itemized pay items for construction traffic control devices the resident engineer will measure each device used for construction traffic control per calendar day .
for nonworking periods the resident engineer will use the sign log from the previous and successive working days to measure payment for devices .
the resident engineer will measure one calendar day for devices used at multiple locations in one day .
maintain a log of devices used for construction traffic control per calendar day .
update the log daily throughout the project to confirm the addition or deletion of individual devices .
submit the log to the resident engineer before each pay period .
the department will not allow unnecessary devices to remain in place for more than num days unless covered as directed by the resident engineer .
the resident engineer will not measure unnecessary devices left in place .
after num calendar days the resident engineer will deduct the contract unit price of the relevant pay item every day the unnecessary device remains in place and uncovered .
if an unnecessary device remains in place and uncovered for more than num calendar days the device will become the property of the department .
b .
lump sum item if additional days are necessary the resident engineer will calculate a daily rate by dividing the lump sum contract unit price for construction traffic control by the number of calendar days in the contract time .
the resident engineer will calculate the additional compensation by multiplying the daily rate by the number of additional days .
if the contractor fails to make corrections to devices as directed by the resident engineer within num hr the resident engineer will assess a daily charge equal to half of the daily rate calculated in the previous paragraph .
the resident engineer may assess the daily charge for each additional num hr until the devices are corrected .
the department will deduct this amount as a nonrecoverable charge from the next progress payment .
num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit a arrow display type sign day b construction signs size sign day construction signing and traffic control num num pay item pay unit c construction barricades sign day d vertical panels sign day e warning lights type sign day f drums sign day g tube channelizers sign day h cones size sign day i flagger sign day j construction traffic control lump sum k surveillance of traffic control sign day l traffic surveillance police hour construction signing and traffic control if the contract includes a lump sum pay item for construction traffic control the department will consider the cost of installing and removing all construction traffic control to be included in the contract unit price for construction traffic control .
the department will pay for construction traffic control as a percentage equal to the project percent complete .
the department will pay for amounts of construction traffic control remaining on the date of completion in the next estimate .
the department will pay for surveillance of traffic control traffic surveillance police and arrow display separate from the other construction traffic control pay items .
if the resident engineer requires additional signing for safety differing site conditions which require additional work and calendar days or uncontrollable third party delays that require the extension of contract time the department will pay for such by prorating the price bid for lump sum traffic control .
the amount determined by multiplying the rate per day for construction traffic control by the number of additional days allowed by the resident engineer will be the amount added by change order and shall be full compensation for the additional work or third party delay .
unless otherwise shown on the plans or special provisions construction traffic control devices remain the property of the contractor upon project completion .
the department will consider the cost of incidental items for detours and other traffic control systems to be included in the contract unit price for other relevant pay items .
the department will consider the cost of providing two flaggers and lighting the flagger stations at night to be included in the contract unit price for flagger .
the department will not pay for construction traffic control for time extensions due to unusually severe weather .
the department will not pay for devices on liquidated damage days .
if the resident engineer suspends contract time for public safety in accordance with subsection num administration and extension of contract time the department will pay for construction traffic control during the period of suspension .
num changeable message sign num section num changeable message sign num description this work consists of providing maintaining and using a trailermounted changeable message sign or remotecontrolled changeable message sign .
num materials provide an internallyilluminated variablemessage sign including the following characteristics a magnetically operated matrix led fiber optic or lamp matrix message board a solar and battery power supply hardware for connection to a num v power source an onboard computer and a computeroperated interface .
mount on a towable heavy duty trailer .
provide a sign capable of three lines of text or symbols each with seven rows and num columns of led pixel display elements .
provide solid state leds and led energizedeenergize circuitry directly embedded in the display element panel .
ensure each line consists of eight separate interchangeable display element panels with seven rows and five columns of display elements .
provide display element panels with an evenly installed horizontal matrix with num in between individual characters .
ensure each display element panel measures num in num mm high by num in num mm wide with no separate driver boards required to drive the leds .
provide a separate wiring harness to power each led pixel on the display element panels .
provide sign display elements consisting of wideangle leds that allow num legibility of the sign message .
ensure leds rated for at least a num hr life .
ensure the display elements operate at temperatures from num f to num f num c to num c. ensure clear sign legibility from num ft num m. provide an onboard computer to control the sign .
ensure the sign automatically changes to a preselected default message upon failure and it remains on display until the problem is corrected .
equip the remotecontrolled changeable message sign unit with a cellular telephone and a security system that prevents unauthorized sign access but allows access through a password or code unique to that sign .
if the password or code is not entered within num s of initial telephone contact terminate the call .
control the remotecontrolled changeable message sign with a touch tone modem decoder .
provide a sign capable of storing up to num preprogrammed messages and displaying any of the messages with a call through the trailermounted terminal for the changeable message signs and the remotecontrolled changeable message signs .
ensure the sign retains the messages during power failure .
ensure sign operation if the sign keyboard controller is disconnected .
provide a solar recharged battery pack as the primary power supply .
changeable message sign num num changeable message sign provide a solar power supply consisting of solar cell modules installed in a rigid mount at the top of the sign case and wired to the battery pack through a num a solar regulator .
ensure the solar regulator capable of num consecutive num hr days of operation starting with a fully charged num v battery pack without sun under normal weather conditions .
include a temperature compensated voltageregulated num v ac battery trickle charger accessible from a standard plugin convenience receptacle mounted in the side of the pedestal .
ensure a num v ac battery trickle charger capable of recharging the battery pack within num hr to num hr .
ensure the temperaturecompensated voltageregulated trickle charger automatically charges the batteries when num v ac is applied to the convenience receptacle .
do not require the operator to configure the charging system after plugging in the num v ac power source .
provide four num v dsize batteries deep cycle rated for solar power systems .
ensure the lamp matrix led or fiber optic sign equipped with a topmounted photocell for automatic signdimming during night use .
provide a trailer rated for num lb num kg including an axle and springs rated for num lb num kg .
ensure each trailer includes hydraulic surge brakes rated for num lb num kg with a num in num mm ball hitch .
provide a trailer consisting of a frame and tongue constructed of square tube .
ensure the frame is at least num in by num in num mm by num mm and num in num mm thick and the tongue at least a num in by num in num mm by num mm and ¼ in num mm thick .
weld the tongue and trailer in accordance with aws standards .
use astm num grade b alloy .
ensure the trailer is num in num mm long by num in num mm wide .
provide num in num mm five lug wheels with holes for inserting a heavy chain to prevent vandalism .
provide size pnum rating b tires .
provide the trailer with four leveling jacks one at each corner making the trailer and sign assembly capable of withstanding num mph num kmh wind gusts .
num equipment vacant num construction methods .
provide place operate maintain and relocate the sign as shown on the plans .
num method of measurement vacant num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit a changeable message sign each or sign day b remote controlled changeable message sign each or sign day the department will consider the cost of the cellular telephone and telephone charges required for the remotecontrolled sign to be included in the contract unit price for remotecontrolled changeable message sign .
the cellular phone will become the property of the department .
num changeable message sign num num changeable message sign if the contract includes an each pay item for changeable message sign or remote controlled changeable message sign the portable changeable message signs will become the property of the department upon completion of the project .
if the contract includes a sign day pay item for changeable message sign or remote controlled changeable message sign the portable changeable message signs will become the property of the contractor upon completion of the project .
the department will consider the cost of providing placing at a location approved by the resident engineer maintaining and operating one changeable message sign for num day to be included in the contract unit price for the relevant pay item .
section num bridge guardrail retrofits num description this work consists of providing and installing bridge guardrail retrofits .
num materials provide materials in accordance with the following sections and subsections material section or subsection portland cement concrete num reinforcing steel num metal guard rail num aluminum alloy tubes for railings num cast aluminum alloy bridge railing post num pipe railing num num equipment vacant num construction methods install bridge guardrail retrofits as shown on the plans .
num method of measurement vacant num basis of payment the department will pay for each pay item at the contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows pay item pay unit a bridge guardrail retrofit linear foot meter b bridge parapet retrofit linear foot meter c remove bridge rail and posts linear foot meter num index description a section no .
abbreviation and acronyms num ada compliant tactile warnings preformed modular concrete num adjustment of existing structures num aggregates num num aggregate base num num num num num num agricultural liming num num num aluminum pipe num anodes num antigraffiti coating system num approach slabs num num num num num num arrow display num asphalt concrete pavement hot mix num num asphalt membrane overlay num award and execution of contract num description b section no .
backfill num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num backplates traffic signal num num num bale barriers num basesnum num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num bearing assemblies num num num bidding requirements and conditions num bituminous bases and surfaces plant mixnum num num num num num num num bituminous binder num num num bituminous prime num bituminous surface treatment num num blockouts num num bonded portland cement concrete overlay num borrownum num num num num num num num num num num breakaway bases highway lighting num num num bridge decks approaches rails and parapets num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num bridge deck overlay num num num num bridge deck repair num num num bridge guard rail retrofits num buy america num num description c section no .
cable barrier high tension num caliche base num num cast iron pipe num num num cement kiln dust num num cement treated base num num cementitious modified subgrade num cementitious stabilized subgrade num chain link fence clf num num num changeable message sign num num chip seal num claims for adjustment num num clay plating num num num clearing and grubbing num num num num num num cold milling pavement num collection and handling of waste num concrete bridge decks num num num num num concrete culverts num num num concrete footingsnum num num num num num num num num num concrete joint sealing num num concrete or bituminous sidewalks driveways and dividing strip num num concrete patching num concrete surface finish for structures num num num cones num num num num num num num num construction barricades num construction fabric num construction signing and traffic controlnum num num num num num num num num num num num num num construction signs num num construction zone pavement markings num num num continuously reinforced portland cement concrete pavement num contract time num num num num num num num num contractor construction staking num num control of materials num num num control of work num controlled lowstrength material clsm num num num num coordination of plans specifications and special provisions num copper water pipe num num cored holes num num corporation stops num cover aggregates num num num critical path method schedule cpm num crosshole sonic logging csl num culvert end sections num curb and gutter num num num num num curb and drop inlets num num num curing agentsnum num num num num num num num description d section no .
deadman num definition of terms num num num num num num num num num delineators num num num detour bridge num diamond grinding concrete pavement num num disincentive for late completion num num num ditch liner protection num dividing strips num num dowel bar retrofit num num dowel jointed portland cement concrete pavement num drainage conduit num num num num drilled shaft foundations num num num num drivewaysnum num num num num num num num driven foundation piles num num num num drums num num num num num num num num num num num num num ductile pipe num ductile iron pipe dip num num num description e section no .
earthwork num num num num num num num num num num num num num econocrete base num num edge drain num elastomeric bearing pads num num num num elastomeric mortar num num elastomeric coating system num num electrical conductors num num num electrical conductors highway lighting num num num electrical conductors traffic signals num num num electrical conduit num num num num num num num electrical mechanical performance and operational tests num num num num num embankmentnum num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num emulsified asphalt num num num num num num num num epoxy coated reinforcing steel num num epoxy resinnum num num num num num num num num erosion and sedimentation num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num erosion and sedimentation temporary num num excavation num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num excavation and backfill for structures num num num num num num excelsior mat num num num expansion joints num num num num num num num num num num num description f section no .
fabric reinforcement for asphalt concrete pavement num falseworknum num num num num num num num num num num num num fences num num num num num num num num num fertilizingnum num num num num num num num fiber reinforcement for concrete num field office num num num num filter blanket num num filter fabric num num num num num num fire hydrants num num num num num flagger num num num flexible conduits num num flexible delineator posts num flood coats num num fly ashnum num num num num num num num num num num num fly ash modified subgrade num fog seal num num num num num num num num footings num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num description g section no .
gabionsnum num num num num num num galvanized steel pipe num num num num num num galvanized steel sign posts num num num gates num num geogrid reinforcement num geotextile reinforcement num glare deflector fence gdf num num glass beads num num num num granular backfill num num num num ground boxes num num ground granulated blast furnace slag num num num guarantees and warranties num num num num num num num guard rail and guide postsnum num num num num num num num description h section no .
handrailing num high density concrete num num num high early strength concrete num high mast lowering device num num high mast poles num num num highway lighting signals and signing electrical num num num num num num num num num hydrated lime num num num num num num hydraulic cement num num num num num hydrodemolition num num description i section no .
impact attenuation module sand filled num incentive for early completion num num num inlets num num num num num num num num num num num num num num description j section no .
jacked conduit num joint filler and sealantsnum num num num num num num num num num num num junction boxesnum num num num num num num description l section no .
laboratorynum num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num lane rental num num latex modified concrete num num num legal relations and responsibility to public num num num lighting highway num num num num num num num num num lighting poles and mastarms highway num num limenum num num num num num num num num num num num num num num lime pretreatment num lime modified subgrade num lime stabilized subgrade num longitudinal barrier concrete num num longitudinal barrier portable num loop detectors num num num num luminaires num num num num num num num num num num description m section no .
machine grading num magnesium ammonium phosphate concrete num num mailboxes num manholesnum num num num num num num num num num num num masonry brick num material certifications num num num num num num num num num materials for guard rail guide posts bridge rail miscellaneous railing and fences num num materials miscellaneous num num num measurement and payment num num num num num metals miscellaneous num meter boxes num meter installation num microsurfacing num mineral aggregate miscellaneous uses num mobilization num num num modified subgrade num modular glare screen num monuments num num mowing num num num num muck excavation num num mulching num num num multiple layer polymer concrete overlay num description n section no .
neshap predemolition inspection and notification num num num nonshrink grout num num num notice to proceednum num num num num num num num nylon erosion control mat num num description o section no .
obliterating abandoned road num num num opaque sealers and stains num opengrade bituminous base num num num num opengraded friction surface course num num opengraded portland cement concrete base num optically programmed adjustable traffic signal heads num overhead sign structures num num num num num description p section no .
paintingnum num num num num num num num num num num parapetsnum num num num num num num num num num num num pavement edge drain conduit num pavement markers num num num pavement markers construction zone num num payment num pedestrian push button num penetrating water repellent treatment num num num permeable friction course pfc num num num pier mounted pole brackets num pilesnum num num num num num num num num num num num num pile load test num pipe railing and miscellaneous pipe work num num num num pipe underdrain num num num num plans and working drawings num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num plant inspection num num num planting num num num num num num pneumatically applied mortar num poles and mast arms num num num num num num num polyethylene pipe num num polymermodified emulsified asphalt num polyvinyl chloride pipe pvcnum num num num num num num num num num portland cement num num num num num num num num num portland cement admixtures num num num portland cement concrete num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num portland cement concrete pavement num num num num num num num num post tensioning num num power supplies num num num num num num num preconstruction conference num num presplitting of rock num num pressure grouting portland cement concrete pavement num prestressed concrete beams num prestressed concrete deck panels num prime coat num num num num num num project completion and acceptancenum num num num num num num num num num num num num num processing existing base and surface num num num prosecution and progress num num num num num num pull boxesnum num num num num num num num description q section no .
quick lime num num description r section no .
railsnum num num num num num num num num num num num num railroad approach slabs .
num railroad flagging num railroad highway crossbuck signs num rapid cure joint sealant num num rapid setting cement num reclaimed asphalt pavement num num regulatory or warning signs with flashers num num reinforced concrete pipe rcp num num num num reinforcing steel num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num reinforcing steel for structuresnum num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num relaying culvert pipe num removal and storage or reconstruction of fencing guard rail and guide posts num removal of contaminated soil num removal of culvert ends num removal of existing bridge structure num removal of oil field equipment num removal of pavement markings num num num num removal of structures and obstructions num removal of traffic items num removal of underground storage tanks num retaining wallsnum num num num num num num num num num num num num retroreflective sheeting num num num num num revetment mattresses num num rich bottom layer rbl .
num num rightofway markers num riprap num num num num num roadside development and erosion control materials for num rock excavation num num rock filter dams num num num rolling and sprinklingnum num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num rubblizing portland cement concrete pavement num rumble strip num description s section no .
salvaging topsoil num num num sanitary sewer pipe conduits num num sawcut grooving num sawing pavement num scope of work num num sediment control basins num num sediment control filters num num sediment removal num sealer crack preparation num sealer resin num seeding num num num num num num select borrow num num num num selective clearing num selective subgrade topping num num num num num separator fabric for bases num num shielded loop detector leadin cable num shrubs num num sidewalk num num num num num num sign posts galvanized num num num num signs .
num num num num silica fume num num num silt fence num num silt dike num num slope drains num slopewall num slurry grout num num soddingnum num num num num num num solid state flashing controller num num solid state time clock num sound barrier walls num sprigging num num num num stabilized subgrade num staking num num num num standard bedding material num num num steel jetty bank protection num stone for riprap filter blanket and gabions num stone matrix asphalt sma num num storm water pollution prevention and control num num num num num stranded wire fence swf num num strip drains num num structural concrete num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num structural concrete repair by sealing and injection num num structural excavation num num num structural steelnum num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num subbase num num num num num num subgrade num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num subletting of contract num superpave num num supplemental drawings num num surfacesnum num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num description t section no .
tack coatnum num num num num num num num num num num tactile warning device num temporary concrete num num temporary lighting num temporary structures num num terminal joints num test rolling num timber and lumber num num num num num num num num num timber piles num timber preservatives and treatment num num timber structures num num traffic bound surface course num num traffic controlnum num num num num num num num num num num num num num num traffic signal controller assembly num num traffic signal heads num num num num traffic signal poles and mastarms num num num num traffic signalsnum num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num traffic stripe num num num num num num num traffic surveillance police num trees num num num num num num num trench excavation num truck mounted impact attenuators num tube channelizers num num description u section no .
ultrathin bonded wearing course num description v section no .
valves num num num num num num num valve boxes num num num value engineering num num vertical panels num vines num num description w section no .
warning lights num water for portland cement concrete num water for roadside development and erosion controlnum num num num num num num water pipe and fittings num num num num water repellent num num num watering num num num num num num white concrete num num num wick drains num wire baskets for gabions and revetment mattresses num num wood cellulose fiber num num woven wire fence wwf num num
