STANDARD SPECIFICATION – ROADWORKS DoI REFERENCE TEXT – October 2016 Page 0 2017 standard specification for roadworks miscellaneous provisions ■ provision for traffic ■ clearing grubbing and rehabilitation ■ earthworks ■ conformance testing ■ pavements and shoulders ■ stabilisation ■ spray sealing ■ dense graded asphalt ■ slurry surfacing ■ miscellaneous concrete works ■ drainage works ■ protection works ■ road furniture and traffic control devices ■ pavement marking ■ landscape ■ ducting and conduits ■ traffic control signals ■ traffic counting stations ■ street lighting ■ directional boring ■ measurement and payment ■ referenced australian standards ■ other referenced authorities and documents ■ acts regulations and codes ■ civil standard drawings for roadworks ■ nt climate zones table ■ this document specifies the general standards of materials and workmanship required by the department for construction of civil road network assets This page deliberately left blank STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 1 PO Box 61 Palmerston NT 0831 ABOUT THIS SPECIFICATION This document was prepared by the Department of Infrastructure , Planning and Logistics ( DIPL ) and specifies the general standards of materials and workmanship required by the Department for roadworks .
It brings together standard terminology and methods for roadworks work across all regions of the Northern Territory .
This document is designed to be used as a reference document for roadworks projects .
It is to be read in conjunction with the Project Specific Requirements section of the Request for Tender document and the Drawings , if any .
The Standards quoted are current as of September 2016 .
The text has been edited to specify only the types of roadworks performed by the Department and is applicable to all regions of the Northern Territory .
The text has been developed through consultation with Departmental officers with extensive experience in civil works in the Northern Territory .
This Standard Specification will remain unchanged until an updated version is published .
This specification is also available electronically in PDF from the Department ’ s Specification Services website : https : //infrastructure.nt.gov.au/specification-services/technical-specifications/roads .
Louise McCormick General Manager Transport and Civil Services December 2016 STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 2 INFORMATION For further information regarding this Standard Specification contact : - Manager Specification Services Department of Infrastructure , Planning and Logistics PO Box 61 Palmerston NT 0831 Telephone : ( 08 ) 8946 5021 Email : DocumentationServices.DoI @ nt.gov.au Third edition - December 2016 STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 3 STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS 2017 REFERENCE TEXT REFERENCE Read this Standard Specification in conjunction with the Project Specific Requirements and Drawings , if any .
Only those parts of the Standard Specification which refer to the works being carried out apply in addition to those items listed in the Schedule of Rates which is attached to the Response Schedules for the particular Contract .
This document may be used as a blanket reference specification referring generally to the standards of materials and workmanship required by the Department for roadworks .
PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS The selection of specific items or materials for the works being carried out are those items listed in the Schedule of Rates in the Response Schedules for the particular Contract and any items specified in the Project Specific Requirements section of the Request for Tender document .
Any additional work or any changes to the reference specification will be specified in the Project Specific Requirements section .
PRECEDENCE Any provision in the Request for Tender or on the project drawings shall override any conflicting provision in this Standard Specification .
HOLD AND WITNESS POINTS These apply whether Project Control or Quality Assurance is included in the project or not .
Refer to the definitions of Hold Points and Witness Points in the Miscellaneous Provisions section of this Standard Specification .
Tables of Hold and Witness Points are available via https : //infrastructure.nt.gov.au/specification-services/technical-specifications/roads .
SITE COPY Retain a copy of this document on site for the duration of the works .
COPYRIGHT This Standard Specification is based on the Department ’ s Roadworks Master Specification .
This document is copyright protected and the property of the Government of the Northern Territory and must not be retained , copied , or used without authority .
ISSN 2203-4188 Print edition ISSN 2204-8936 On-line edition STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 4 This page deliberately left blank .
STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 5 STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS 2017 REFERENCE TEXT CONTENTS 1 .
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS ......................................................................................................... 7 2 .
PROVISION FOR TRAFFIC ................................................................................................................ 14 3 .
CLEARING , GRUBBING AND REHABILITIATION ............................................................................. 25 4 .
EARTHWORKS ................................................................................................................................... 27 5 .
CONFORMANCE TESTING ................................................................................................................ 33 6 .
PAVEMENTS AND SHOULDERS ...................................................................................................... 47 7 .
STABILISATION .................................................................................................................................. 52 8 .
SPRAY SEALING ................................................................................................................................ 56 9 .
DENSE GRADED ASPHALT ............................................................................................................... 69 10 SLURRY SURFACING ........................................................................................................................ 79 11 MISCELLANEOUS CONCRETE ......................................................................................................... 83 12 DRAINAGE WORKS ........................................................................................................................... 87 13 PROTECTION WORKS ....................................................................................................................... 92 14 ROAD FURNITURE AND TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES ................................................................ 97 15 PAVEMENT MARKING ..................................................................................................................... 104 16 LANDSCAPE ..................................................................................................................................... 110 17 DUCTING AND CONDUITS .............................................................................................................. 121 18 TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNALS AND INTELLIGENT TRANSPORT SYSTEMS .............................. 122 19 TRAFFIC COUNTING STATIONS .................................................................................................... 125 20 STREET LIGHTING ........................................................................................................................... 128 21 DIRECTIONAL BORING ................................................................................................................... 131 22 PROTECTIVE COATINGS ................................................................................................................ 132 23 MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT .................................................................................................... 147 24 REFERENCED AUSTRALIAN STANDARDS ................................................................................... 157 25 OTHER REFERENCED AUTHORITIES AND DOCUMENTS .......................................................... 166 26 ACTS , REGULATIONS AND CODES ............................................................................................... 168 27 CIVIL STANDARD DRAWINGS FOR ROADWORKS ...................................................................... 169 28 NORTHERN TERRITORY CLIMATE ZONES TABLE ...................................................................... 180 STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 6 This page deliberately left blank .
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 7 1 .
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS STANDARDS 1.1 Conform to the following Standards , Acts and Publications unless specified otherwise : AS 1100 ( set ) Technical drawing AS 1348 Road and traffic engineering - Glossary of terms AS 1742 Manual of uniform traffic control devices Set AS 2187.1 Explosives - Storage , transport and use - Storage AS 2187.2 Explosives - Storage , transport and use - Use of explosives NTMTM NT Materials Testing Manual NTCP NT Codes of Practice NTTM NT Test Methods Aboriginal Land Rights ( NT ) Act Mining Titles Act and Mining Management Act Workplace Health and Safety ( National Uniform Legislation ) Act and Regulations Dangerous Goods Act and Regulations Railways of Australia ( ROA ) Code - Installation of Other Parties Services and Pipelines Within Railway Boundaries The Water Act The Energy Pipelines Act ( NT Gas ) ACMA Australian Communications Media Authority - any Standards , Acts , controls specifically required .
Refer to ACMA directly .
Standard Specification for Environmental Management , DIPL publication Standards in Conflict 1.1.1 Where conflict arises between a referenced standard and particular clauses of this specification this specification prevails .
Overseas Standards 1.1.2 Where no Australian Standard exists standards published by the British Standards Institute ( BSI ) or the American Society for Testing Materials are referenced .
Currency of Standards 1.1.3 Use Standards , and their amendments , current 3 months before the date for the close of tenders except where different editions and/or amendments are required by statutory authorities , including , but not limited to , NATA and the National Construction Code including the Building Code of Australia .
DEFINITIONS 1.2 The terms used in this specification are in accordance with the definitions laid down in AS 1348 unless specified otherwise in the Definitions clauses .
DRY DENSITY RATIO : The percentage ratio of the field dry density of a material to the modified maximum dry density of that material .
This property is also termed Relative Compaction .
EXTRACTION AREA : An excavation outside the formation limits for obtaining fill , gravel , rock and rubble .
Also known as Borrow Pit .
HOLD POINT : Obtain the Superintendent ’ s written approval for that particular part of the works .
PSRs Project Specific Requirements : - appear in RFT and refer to this document which is the Technical Specification for the project which is the subject of the RFT , - detail what selections have been made where selections need to be made - may include amendments to specified requirements published in this Standard Specification to tailor the specification to suit the project which is the subject of the RFT .
RFT : Request for Tender .
Technical specifications and conditions applicable to an RFT are equally applicable to an RFQ ( Request for Quotation ) .
SHALL : Indicates a mandatory requirement unless the context clearly indicates otherwise .
WITNESS POINT : Give the Superintendent sufficient prior notice , in writing , of an action so that that part of the works may be inspected .
THE CONDITIONS OF TENDER AND 1.3 CONDITIONS OF CONTRACT The Conditions of Tender and the Conditions of Contract contain additional requirements which apply to works carried out under any contract awarded by NT Government , including any works carried out using this specification .
ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT 1.4 The Standard Specification for Environmental Management applies for all construction and demolition work for building and civil works carried out by or on behalf of the Northern Territory Government .
The Standard Specification for Environmental Management takes precedence over this specification .
A copy of that document is available at : https : //infrastructure.nt.gov.au/specification- services/technical-specifications/environmental- management .
ESTABLISHMENT 1.5 General 1.5.1 Allow in the tender for establishment on site , including , but not necessarily limited to , the following : MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 8 MOBILISATION : Transportation and establishment on site , of all the requirements to complete the work .
DEMOBILISATION : Removal and transportation from site of all temporary and construction facilities and equipment .
Restoration of the site , on Practical Completion of the works , compatible with environs .
ONGOING COSTS : All indirect costs associated with the contract .
Provide , on request , details substantiating the amount shown in the Schedule of Rates .
PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS 1.6 Comply with all provisions in PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS ( PSRs ) in the Request For Tender ( RFT ) or on the project drawings .
Any conflicts must be advised in writing to the Superintendent for clarification .
CAMP SITE/COMPOUND/WORKSHOP 1.7 – HOLD POINT Hold Point - Obtain written permission from the owner or lessee of the land .
Pay all costs associated with the use of the site ( s ) .
Maintain all facilities in good condition .
Remove all facilities , unless otherwise agreed in writing with owner or lessee of land , and restore the site to a clean and tidy condition upon completion of the works .
Assume all responsibility for any current and consequential damage caused to the site as a result of occupation .
TIME LIMIT FOR ATTENDANCE 1.8 Unless specified otherwise , the works must be attended within the following time limits : Generally the work must be attended within 3 working days of notification .
For urgent call outs within and outside of normal working hours the Contractor must be mobilised within 2 hours of notification .
For priority works , which involve health , safety and security , the Contractor must be mobilised within 6 working hours of notification .
EXTRACTION AREAS AND WATER 1.9 SOURCES Extraction Areas Locations 1.9.1 Extraction areas will be allowed provided that all the clearances and approvals listed in the Approvals For Extraction Areas clause in the Standard Specification For Environmental Management are obtained .
Extraction areas are not be permitted within 125 metres of the road centreline .
Administration 1.9.2 Take responsibility for locating , selecting , operating and rehabilitating all extraction areas and water sources .
Crushing or Screening – Witness point 1.9.3 The crushing or screening plant to be used on the project subject to this contract must be certified as fit for use by a competent person .
The certification of fitness for use must have been issued not more than one year prior to the date of the scheduled completion of the works plus one calendar month .
A competent person is defined in the NT Work Safe Bulletin 09.01.16 Competent Persons for Inspection and Maintenance of Plant .
Comply with the guidance provided in the Safe Work Australia Code of Practice Managing Risks of Plant in the Workplace .
Witness Point – Provide documentary evidence of the certification that the plant is fit for use issued by a competent person .
Provide documentary evidence of that person ’ s skills and qualifications which indicate their competence as defined in the NT Work Safe Bulletin cited above .
This evidence is to be provided within 2 weeks of the award of the contract .
Operation of Extraction Areas 1.9.4 ACCESS Construct only one access road to each pit .
Confine all transport operations to the access road .
Provide and maintain adequate road drainage .
EXTRACTION Strip 100 mm minimum depth top layer throughout the area of operation .
Stockpile stripped material clear of drainage courses to a maximum height of 2 m. Ensure that side slopes of sand or gravel are not steeper than one vertical to two horizontal at any time when the excavation is unattended .
Remove or bury by-products of the excavation operations unless otherwise required .
LIMIT OF EXCAVATION Not within 6 m of any fence line or utility service .
Not within sight of road traffic .
Not within 125 m of any road or railway centre line .
Not within 25 m of a water course .
Maximum area : 1 ha .
Align the long side with the contour .
Maximum width : 50 m. Maximum depth : 2 m. Leave natural vegetation strips 25 m width between pits .
Stockpile cleared vegetation and subsequently spread over the surface of the extraction area .
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 9 Existing pits within 125 m of a public road may be used provided : No significant revegetation exists .
Extension proceeds away from the road .
Site is rehabilitated after use .
Rehabilitation of Extraction Areas 1.9.5 Progressively rehabilitate extraction areas .
Backfill all test pits .
Respread unused material and rip 0.5 m deep at 3 m spacing along the contours .
Remove all rubbish and debris .
Replace stockpiled topsoil and cleared vegetation uniformly over the extraction area .
Batter walls at three horizontal to one vertical where excavation is less than 1 m depth , and six horizontal to one vertical where depth exceeds 1 m. Rehabilitate any access road constructed for the project .
Stream Sites 1.9.6 Contact Department of Environment and Natural Resources ( DENR ) prior to conducting any work in a stream site .
EXCAVATION LIMITS Not within 200 m upstream or downstream of any road structure , pipeline or gauging station .
Not in a manner liable to cause erosion or further disturbance to the watercourse .
Not within 15 m of the trunk of a tree and not under the branches of any tree .
CONDITIONS Leave sizeable islands to ensure groupings of trees that will withstand stream bed erosion .
Maximum batter slope : Two horizontal to one vertical .
Inspection 1.9.7 Allow authorised personnel from DENR to enter the site at any time .
Records 1.9.8 Provide the following details on completion : List of areas used .
Chainages of area along the public road .
Direction and length of haul road .
Approximate volume of material removed from each site .
Provide suitable forms for such records to the Superintendent .
EXPLOSIVES – HOLD POINT 1.10 Provide evidence of the following requirements of NT WorkSafe : Licence to carry and store explosives .
Vehicle licensed to carry explosives .
Shot Firer ’ s Certificate .
Inspect and record the condition of all structures and services subject to possible effect by use of explosives before and after blasting operations .
Hold Point - Obtain approval from Superintendent before commencing blasting operations .
PLANT AND EQUIPMENT 1.11 1.11.1 Geo-spatial data If Geo-spatial data is provided by the Principal it is for information only .
The data must not be relied on as being accurate .
The data must not be uploaded to plant or equipment .
1.11.2 Specification Reference Refer to the Northern Territory Government Standard Specification for Environmental Management and to the RFT .
1.11.3 General Do not clean spray bars or other contaminated equipment on the work site .
Clean plant and equipment in a location and in a manner which prevents pollution of the surrounding environment .
Clean plant and equipment before it is brought on to the site and immediately before it leaves the site to make it pest and weed free .
Plant and equipment is to be inspected and maintained as necessary during the course of the works .
Emissions and fluid leaks are to be minimized by ensuring plant and equipment are well maintained , in good repair and in good working order .
1.11.4 Mobile Plant Machinery - Broadband Alarm Standards AS 4742 : Machine-mounted forward and reverse audible warning alarm ( withdrawn ) ISO 9533 : Earth-moving machinery - Machine- mounted audible travel alarms and forward horns - Test methods and performance criteria Definitions Broadband alarm : Pulsed acoustic signal that comprises a range of frequencies and sometimes referred to as quacker , woosher , non-tonal reversing beepers or white sound .
1.11.5 Broadband/White-Sound Alarm Requirement : Broadband Alarms ( White Sound ) must be fitted to all construction vehicles and mobile plant before commencement of works .
Ensure that installation and operations of the alarm/warning systems are sufficient before commencement of works , including , but not limited to : - All alarms clearly audible above the noise level of the machinery or vehicles .
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 10 - Alarms are automatically activated when reverse gear is selected in the vehicle to which it is fitted , or when the machine to which the alarm is fitted is switched on and is in use .
- Directional nature of the broadband alarm is appropriate for works .
SAFETY 1.12 Comply with the Work Health and Safety ( National Uniform Legislation ) Act and Regulations and any applicable Codes of Practice .
1.12.1 Work Health and Safety Management Plan - Hold Point Hold Point - If the Act requires it , provide a Work Health and Safety Management Plan within 14 calendar days of award of the contract .
Do not commence works until the Superintendent has advised that the Work Health and Safety Management Plan may be used .
Comply with the Work Health and Safety ( National Uniform Legislation ) Act and Regulations and any applicable Codes of Practice .
A person with control of a construction project , irrespective of monetary value of the contract , where five or more persons are working , or are likely to be working simultaneously on a construction site must ensure that : - a site-specific Work Health and Safety Management Plan is prepared before the work commences ; and - The plan is monitored , maintained and kept up to date during the course of the work .
The person with control of the construction project must ensure that the Work Health and Safety Management Plan includes , but is not limited to : - a statement of responsibilities , listing the names , positions and responsibilities of all persons who will have specific responsibilities on the site for Work Health and Safety ; - the detail of arrangements for ensuring compliance with the Work Health and Safety induction training requirements of this national standard ; - the detail of arrangements for the co- ordination of health and safety issues of persons engaged to undertake construction work ; - the detail of arrangements for managing Work Health and Safety incidents when they occur , including the identities of and contact details of all persons who will be available to prevent , prepare for , respond to and manage recovery from such incidents ; - any site safety rules , with the detail of arrangements for ensuring that all persons at the site , whether employees , contractors , suppliers or visitors , are informed of the rules ; - the hazard identification , risk assessment and risk control information for all work activities assessed as having safety risks ; and The safe work method statements for all high-risk construction work .
1.12.2 Safety Officer – Witness Point Witness Point - Appoint a Safety Officer and notify the Superintendent of the officer ’ s name .
Ensure the Safety Officer is capable and available at all times as required by the Standards .
The Superintendent retains the right to revoke the appointment of the Safety Officer at any time , and direct that another person be appointed .
1.12.3 Safety Practice Provide safety equipment , protective clothing and devices and first aid facilities .
Ensure that employees are instructed concerning hazards and how to avoid injury .
Observe good safety practices throughout the Contract .
1.12.4 Safety Helmets Adhere to the requirements of the Construction Safety Act .
FENCING AND SHORING OF OPEN 1.13 EXCAVATIONS Design , construct and maintain the excavation and shoring in a safe and satisfactory condition .
Support trenches in saturated or unstable ground with close timbered shoring or similar .
WORK ON RAILWAY SITES – HOLD 1.14 POINT Comply with Work Health and Safety ( N.U.L ) Act and Regulations .
Carry out work within railway sites to the approval of the owner and accredited operator of the railway .
The Contractor must comply with all requirements , conditions and directions of the owners and accredited operators of the Railway pursuant to the Northern Territory Rail Safety Act , when carrying out work under the Contract within 100 metres of the Railway obtain any approvals or licences required for such work .
Comply with the terms of any current existing interface agreement for work within the railway sites .
Provide documentation detailing all interfaces between the works under the Contract and the Railway or Railway land .
The Contractor must fully comply with the terms of the plan .
The contractor indemnifies in the Principal in respect of any claim made by or liability to any person arising out of : MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 11 - The performance of work on , over or near the Railway , and - The procurement or utilisation of a Railway track possession or track isolation ( including any postponement , improper use or delay in relinquishing them ) .
Give 14 days written notice to the owner and operator of intent to commence work and provide a work plan showing safe working conditions for the site .
Hold Point - Do not commence work until the work plan has been approved by the owner and operator of the rail system .
If work is required to be carried out within 3 metres of the actual rail line , this work must be co- ordinated through the Superintendent .
WORK IN THE VICINITY OF TRAFFIC 1.15 COUNTING STATIONS – HOLD POINT Hold Point - Prior to commencing any excavation , boring of holes , blasting , rock breaking , soil compaction or similar activity in the vicinity of traffic counter station detector loops , obtain the location of the cables from the Department , Transport Planning Division , Data Contracts Officer and pay all fees .
Follow all directions and instructions issued by the Transport Planning Division in relation to work in the vicinity of such cables .
PROJECT NOTICE BOARDS 1.16 Supply , erect and maintain Project Notice Boards , at locations nominated by the Superintendent and in accordance with ROAD FURNITURE AND TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES , within 2 weeks of establishment on site .
Refer to PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS SECTION in the RFT for specific Project Noticeboard details and requirements .
LEVEL CHECKING 1.17 Check levels of subgrade and final surface at 25 m intervals .
Check levels at centre line and to edges of pavement .
Check levels of intersections and parking areas at appropriate intervals .
Check levels using an independent and competent surveyor who is eligible for membership of the Institution of Surveyors Australia or the Institution of Engineering and Mining Surveyors Australia .
Survey Pegs Install temporary survey pegs along the extent of the works .
The survey pegs are to be installed in close proximity to the edges of the formation but still provide clearance for plant and equipment to be used without damaging or moving the survey pegs .
The survey pegs must be installed in pairs , one on each side of the pavement , positioned and marked to have the same chainage .
The survey pegs are to be spaced at 100m intervals longitudinally along the works Individual survey pegs are to be tied with high visibility flagging tape .
The survey pegs are to be marked with the design relative level of the finished pavement and the chainage at which each survey peg is located .
This information must be clearly legible throughout the duration of works .
The finished pavement design levels are at points in the centre of the pavement for pavements with equal numbers of traffic lanes in each direction of travel .
The finished pavement design levels are at points in the centre of 2 adjacent lanes which have opposite directions of travel for pavements with unequal numbers of traffic lanes in each direction of travel .
Any survey pegs which are damaged must be repaired or replaced and reinstated in their correct positions as soon as practicable .
Any survey pegs moved but not damaged must be reinstated in their correct positions as soon as practicable .
LEVEL AUDITING 1.18 The Superintendent may choose to audit any level survey submitted to show conformance with the specified tolerances .
Provide an experienced survey assistant when requested by the Superintendent to assist in audit checking .
CONTROL STATION CHECK SURVEY – 1.19 WITNESS POINT Refer to the RFT Preliminary Clause SURVEYS AND SETTING OUT .
Witness Point - Where results exceed the quoted tolerance notify the Superintendent and obtain directions .
CYCLE AND PEDESTRIAN SHARED 1.20 PATHS For concrete shared use paths provide 100mm minimum thick concrete to AS 1379 N25 with reinforcing mesh SL62 placed centrally .
Mesh material to AS/NZS 4671 , installation to AS 2870 .
All relevant design principles contained in AUSTROADS must be integrated in the design of cycle ways , pathways and associated infrastructure ( Austroads Guide to Road Design Part 6A : Pedestrian and Cyclist Paths ) .
Refer to Design drawings ( if any ) and conform to local Council requirements .
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 12 AS CONSTRUCTED INFORMATION - 1.21 WITNESS POINT Hard copies of documents are no longer required .
Electronic copies in Microsoft Word , Microsoft Excel , pdf , .dwg or .dgn , or as specified , are required .
Document all changes to and variations of the design as the work proceeds .
Provide amended versions of the information and drawings which reflect the as built conditions .
Provide PDF copies of drawings in A3 size format and provide the drawings in CAD format in AutoCad or Microstation .
Provide copies of text information in A4 portrait format in Microsoft Word , and/or PDF format .
Provide tables and schedules in Microsoft Excel and/or PDF .
Standard : To AS 1100 ( set ) Technical drawing .
Where the drawings are to be reduced , the annotation character heights shall be selected so that the annotation character heights as reproduced are not less than 1.8 mm .
Resolution to be a minimum of 600 dpi .
Provide the amended information and drawings to the Superintendent progressively as the work proceeds , with or before the claim for the variation which led to the need to amend the information and drawings to accurately reflect the as built condition .
Witness Point - Before the work commences provide a proposed procedure for recording and submitting the amended drawings .
Use an independent surveyor who is eligible for membership of the Institution of Surveyors Australia or the Institution of Engineering and Mining Surveyors Australia to record the changes and variations .
DIVING WORK 1.22 1.22.1 General Comply with the Work Health and Safety ( NUL ) Act and Regulations .
Comply with ADAS Operation Manual or DRDC ( formerly DCIEM ) Diving Manual or NOAA Diving Manual .
1.22.2 Standards AS/NZS 2299 Occupational diving operations AS/NZS 2299.1 Standard operational practice AS/NZS 2299.2 Scientific diving AS 2815 Training and certification of occupational divers AS 2815.1 Occupational SCUBA diver – Standard AS/NZS 2815.2 Surface supplied diving to 30 m AS 2815.3 Air diving to 50 m AS 2815.4 Bell diving AS/NZS 2815.5 Dive supervisor 1.22.3 Definitions ADAS Australian Diver Accreditation Scheme DRDC Defence Research and Development Canada NOAA National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration ( USA ) WHS ( NUL ) Work Health and Safety ( National Uniform Legislation ) Act , Regulations and applicable NT and Federal Codes of Practice 1.22.4 Diver Qualifications Provide evidence of competency for all personnel undertaking diving work ( general occupational diving or high risk diving as applicable ) .
Minimum competencies required are the competencies required by ADAS deemed by ADAS to be appropriate for the works to be undertaken .
Refer to the AS 2815 ( set ) .
1.22.5 Dive Safety Log Maintain and provide Dive Safety Log ( in accordance with Regulation 180 , of the WHS ( NUL ) Regulations ) .
To be provided for review on request and at completion of works .
Refer to AS 2299 ( set ) .
1.22.6 Dive Plan Submit a Dive Plan ( in accordance with Regulation 178 , of the WHS ( NUL ) Regulations ) .
To be submitted after contract award and at least 14 days prior to commencement of diving works .
Refer to AS 2299 ( set ) .
The Dive Plan is to include : - the method of carrying out the diving work to which it relates ; - the tasks and duties of each person involved in the dive ; - the diving equipment , breathing gases and procedures to be used in the dive ; - as applicable , dive times , bottom times and decompression profiles ; - hazards relating to the dive and measures to be implemented in the control of risks associated with those hazards ; - emergency procedures .
1.22.7 Crocodile Hazard Management Provide a Crocodile Hazard Management Plan where diving work is to occur in waters known to have , or suspected of having , crocodiles .
The plan can include , but not be limited to ; - Having spotters at water level and on a bridge - Minimizing movement of vessels once diving work commences to reduce risk of attracting crocodiles - Establishing a communication plan and having a communications system or methodology in place so that all parties conducting the activity can communicate with each other 1.22.8 Dive Cage Diving work in waters known to have , or suspected of having , crocodiles is to be carried out by divers who are protected by a dive cage .
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 13 This dive cage should be engineered for the task and can be mounted to either a service barge or other watercraft or lowered from a bridge , depending on the task environment .
1.22.9 Crocodile Net If a crocodile net is the only viable option provide details of the construction of the net and its support systems and provide details of the risk management plan which will be in place during use of the net .
1.22.10 Response if a crocodile is spotted Ensure or personnel move to a safe place .
Contact the Crocodile Management Unit of the Parks and Wildlife Service - Darwin All hours 0419 822 859 or 0401 118 776 or Office hours 8999 4691 - Katherine All hours 0407 958 405 or Office hours 8973 8849 If safe and practical to do so , monitor the movement of the crocodile ( s ) so that the personnel from the Crocodile Management Unit can be told of the crocodiles last known location .
TIME ALLOWED FOR ASSESSMENT 1.23 OF SUBMITTED DOCUMENTS This clause is related to documents which are to be submitted by the Contractor to the Superintendent for assessment and/or acceptance and/or approval and/or appraisal .
The documents subject to this clause include , but are not limited to : - Traffic Management Plan - Inspection and Test Plans - Project Control Plan - Quality Assurance Plan - Work Health and Safety Plan - Indigenous Development Plan - Contractor ’ s Environmental Management Plan which incorporates - Erosion and Sediment Control Plan - Acid Sulphate Soils Management Plan - Weed Management Plan - Asbestos Management Plan The Superintendent will provide a response in respect to the submitted documents to the Contractor within a reasonable time .
The length of time considered reasonable will depend on the complexity of the documents , the amount of information in the documents and the workload of the DoI personnel who will assess the documents .
The length of time considered reasonable can be negotiated between the Contractor and the Superintendent .
Any such negotiated time must be fair to both parties .
If the documents are rejected , not accepted , not approved or returned for modification , the Superintendent will have an additional reasonable time period to assess the amended documents .
The time taken by the Superintendent to assess submitted documents or to assess re-submitted documents and to respond to the Contractor will not be accepted as a reason for the Contractor to claim an extension of time nor to claim a variation for costs related to the preparation of , or modification to , documents to be submitted or re- submitted .
These time frames do not apply in emergency situations where faster responses are appropriate .
Resubmitted documents must be sent with the changes made clearly marked .
Changes should only be made to the plans to the extent required by the Superintendent .
Any changes not explicitly requested by the Superintendent but made in the resubmitted plans must be clearly visible in the document and the reasons for making the changes must be explained in a separate document or the covering email .
Changes not made obvious and not explained or made obvious but not explained will not be accepted under the contract whether this is advised to the Contractor or not .
Changes which were not requested but are made obvious and which are explained will be assessed during the re-assessment process .
Plans required in respect to works in specialised facilities such as health care facilities and secure facilities will be subject to responses in time frames to be negotiated .
OTHER REQUIREMENTS 1.24 Refer to Project Specific Requirements in the RFT .
PROVISION FOR TRAFFIC STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 14 2 .
PROVISION FOR TRAFFIC GENERAL 2.1 Minimise obstruction and inconvenience to the public .
Ensure public safety is accommodated at all work sites .
A traffic escort vehicle is required for all resealing works .
Assume responsibility for the safe conduct of traffic through , past or around the works , 24 hours a day , from possession of the site to completion of all works , defects liability period ( if any ) and handover .
Comply with the Acts , Regulations , Codes and Guidelines applicable to the works .
Comply with the requirements of Authorities which have jurisdiction over the works or the sites of the works .
Comply with the Work Health and Safety ( NUL ) Act and Regulations .
STANDARDS 2.2 Conform to the current editions of the following Standards and Publications unless specified otherwise : AS 1742.3 Manual of uniform traffic control devices - Traffic control devices for works on roads .
AS 1742.9 Manual of uniform traffic control devices – Bicycle facilities AS 1742.10 Manual of uniform traffic control devices – Pedestrian control and protection AS/NZS 1906.1 Retroreflective materials AS/NZS 3845.1 Road safety barrier systems AS 4191 Portable traffic signals AS/NZSSS ISO 31000 Risk management NTTM NT Test Methods .
NTMTM NT Materials Testing Manual .
AUSTROADS Guide to Road Design AUSTROADS Guide to Bridge Technology NT WorkSafe All Relevant Bulletins 2.3 DEFINITIONS Long term Applies when traffic guidance is required to operate for more than one shift , irrespective of whether it is day or night .
Short term Applies when work is started and completed in one shift and the road is returned to normal conditions by the end of that shift .
Traffic Controller The person responsible for the control of traffic on public roads utilising a stop-slow bat .
WORKZONE TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT 2.4 Traffic Management Personnel 2.4.1 All personnel engaged in the works must have a current valid NT Construction Induction White Card , or equivalent qualification recognised by WorkSafe NT .
Evidence must be available on site in the form of a card .
Only persons qualified in nationally accredited units of competency in WorkZone Traffic Management can be utilised for traffic management at worksites .
The four levels of accreditation are : − Workzone Traffic Supervisor ( WZ3 ) − Workzone Traffic Controller ( WZ2 ) − Workzone Traffic Management Plan Designer ( WZ1 ) − Escort mobile road marking operations ( WZ 4 ) The Superintendent may grant approval for the use of a “ Trainee Traffic Controller ” within the work site .
Such approval will only be considered after submission of a written request .
A Trainee Traffic Controller can not commence work until such approval has been granted and received in writing .
Trainee Traffic Controller 2.4.2 A Trainee Traffic Controller must meet all of the following criteria : − be an employee of the Traffic Control Provider , − hold a valid current Australian motor vehicle driver ’ s licence , − be registered with a Northern Territory Registered Training Organisation ( NT RTO ) to undertake the RII09 Resources and Infrastructure Industry Training Package unit of competency “ RIIWHS205D Control Traffic with a STOP/SLOW Bat ” ( or the replacement unit of competency if and when applicable ) , − only work under the direct supervision of a Controller ( WZ2 ) , − have commenced training to become a qualified Controller ( WZ2 ) and complete all assessments of competency within 8 weeks of registration .
The direct supervision of a Trainee Traffic Controller is defined as the constant personal oversight of the work by a Workzone Traffic Controller ( WZ2 ) .
WorkZone Traffic Controller ( WZ2 ) 2.4.3 The following prerequisites must be met to enable NT accreditation as a Traffic Controller ( WZ2 ) : − hold a valid current Australian motor vehicle driver ’ s licence , and either PROVISION FOR TRAFFIC STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 15 − successful completion of the RII09 Resources and Infrastructure Industry Training Package unit of competency “ RIIWHS205D Control Traffic with a STOP/SLOW Bat ” ( or the replacement unit of competency if and when applicable ) training course through an Northern Territory Registered Training Organisation , or − successful completion of the RII09 Resources and Infrastructure Industry Training Package unit of competency “ RIIWHS205D Control Traffic with a STOP/SLOW Bat ” ( or the replacement unit of competency if and when applicable ) training course through a Registered Training Organisation from another State or Territory AND successfully completed a bridging course through a Northern Territory Registered Training Organisation in the above unit of competency .
WorkZone Traffic Supervisor ( WZ3 ) 2.4.4 The following prerequisites must be met to enable NT accreditation as a Traffic Supervisor ( WZ3 ) : − hold a valid current Australian motor vehicle driver ’ s licence , and either − successful completion of the RII09 Resources and Infrastructure Industry Training Package unit of competency “ RIIWHS302D Implement Traffic Management Plan ” ( or the replacement unit of competency if and when applicable ) training course through an Northern Territory Registered Training Organisation , or − successful completion of the RII09 Resources and Infrastructure Industry Training Package unit of competency “ RIIWHS302D Implement Traffic Management Plan ” ( or the replacement unit of competency if and when applicable ) training course through a Registered Training Organisation from another State or Territory AND successfully completed a bridging course through a Northern Territory Registered Training Organisation in the above unit of competency .
WorkZone Traffic Management Plan 2.4.5 Designer ( WZ1 ) The following prerequisites must be met to enable NT accreditation as a Traffic Management Plan Designer ( WZ1 ) : − hold a valid current Australian motor vehicle driver ’ s licence , and either − successful completion of RII09 Resources and Infrastructure Industry Training Package unit of competency “ RIICWD503D Prepare Workzone Traffic Management Plans ” ( or the replacement unit of competency if and when applicable ) training course through an Northern Territory Registered Training Organisation , or - successful completion of the RII09 Resources and Infrastructure Industry Training Package unit of competency “ RIICWD503D Prepare Workzone Traffic Management Plans ” ( or the replacement unit of competency if and when applicable ) training course through a Registered Training Organisation from another State or Territory AND successfully completed a bridging course through a Northern Territory Registered Training Organisation in the above unit of competency .
Escort Mobile Road Marking 2.4.6 Operations ( WZ 4 ) The following pre requisites must be met to enable Northern Territory accreditation as an Escort mobile road marking operations ( WZ 4 ) : − hold a valid current Australian motor vehicle − driver ’ s licence , and either − successful completion of the RII09 Resources and Infrastructure Industry Training Package unit of competency “ RIICRM201D Escort mobile road marking operations ” ( or the replacement unit of competency if and when applicable ) training course through a Northern Territory Registered Training Organisation , or − successful completion of the RII09 Resources and Infrastructure Industry Training Package unit of competency “ RIICRM201D Escort mobile road marking operations ” ( or the replacement unit of competency if and when applicable ) training course through a Registered Training Organisation from another State or Territory AND successfully completed a bridging course through a Northern Territory Registered Training Organisation in the above unit of competency .
Traffic Escort Vehicle – Resealing 2.4.7 Works Provide a traffic escort vehicle for all work sites where resealing works are undertaken under the contract .
The vehicle must have , as a minimum , one rotating beacon light .
The escort vehicle is to be the lead vehicle for traffic permitted to pass through the work site at the direction of the traffic control personnel .
The escort vehicle is to control the speed of the traffic to ensure safety of road works personnel .
The driver of the escort vehicle is to have adequate skills and knowledge to be able to maintain safety of the public and of the roadworks personnel .
PROVISION FOR TRAFFIC STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 16 NT Accreditation in WorkZone Traffic 2.4.8 Management NT accreditation is provided by the following process : − Completion of training course ( or courses ) as outlined above , − Obtain WorkZone Traffic Management ID Card from NT Motor Vehicle Registry .
TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT PLAN 2.5 ( TMP ) Standard : To AS 1742.3 Traffic control for works on roads .
Provide a Traffic Management Plan and Generic Traffic Control Diagrams of a complex and noncomplex nature per activity as required for the scheduled works .
Traffic Management Plan – Hold 2.5.1 Point Hold Point – Submit the Traffic Management Plan , with the Traffic Control Diagrams prior to commencing the works .
The Traffic Management Plan ( TMP ) is required to be designed by a Northern Territory accredited Traffic Management Plan Designer .
Include the details of the TMP Designer ’ s name , accreditation number and date of expiry of accreditation on the TMP .
Design the TMP in conformance with the requirements of AS 1742 – ‘ Manual of uniform traffic control devices Part 3 : Traffic control devices for works on roads ’ .
Produce the plan by electronic means and submit electronically to the Superintendent .
Include sufficient details on the TMP to explain the potential hazards , the assessed risks and the proposed treatments for the proposed work activities and work site which may include some or all of the following : Project Information 2.5.2 − Purpose and Scope − Project Location − Site Constraints/Impacts − Traffic Management Objectives and Strategies − Principal for the Works ; Principal Contractor/Design Consultant including contact details − Responsibilities including role responsibility and authority of key personnel , management hierarchy including site representatives and contact details of the responsible personnel − Prior approvals ( if any ) granted by the Road Authority with relevant reference number .
Works on Roads 2.5.3 − Project scope inclusive of works to be undertaken , staging of works , duration of works ( work hours ) − Existing Traffic and Speed environment − Roles and Responsibilities − Traffic Management Responsibility Hierarchy − Project Representatives − Traffic Management Administration Statutory Requirements 2.5.4 − Work Health and Safety ( NUL ) Act and Regulations − Provide details on the TMP of responsibilities and authorities of all key personnel on the project including project manager , line managers ( site engineers , supervisors etc .
) , contractors and workers , safety personnel and traffic management personnel − Requirements of personal protective equipment , plant and equipment − Procedures for incidents or accidents Monitoring and Measurement 2.5.5 − Site Inspections and Record Keeping − TMP Auditing − Public Feedback − References Management Review 2.5.6 − TMP Review and Improvement − Variations to Standards and Plans − Attention to hazards for non-motorised road users Planning 2.5.7 − Risk Identification and Assessment – Critical element to identify and assess foreseeable potential hazards associated with the work activities and work site − Legal and Other Requirements – Confirmation of use of up-to-date information and legislation − Traffic Assessment ( Vehicular Traffic ) − Volume and Composition − Existing and Proposed Speed Zones − Intersection Capacity − Existing Parking Facilities − High Wide Loads − Public Transport Special Events and Other Works Non-motorised Road Users − Cyclists and Pedestrians − People with Disabilities − School Crossings PROVISION FOR TRAFFIC STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 17 Site Assessment − Access to Adjoining Properties − Environmental Conditions − Impact on Adjoining Road Network Works Programming − Work Sequence − Night Works − Emergency Planning − Consultation and Communication Approvals − Road , Utility and Service Authorities − Public Notification − Notification to Other Agencies Implementation 2.5.8 − Hazard Identification , Risk Assessment and Control − Traffic Control Diagrams − Traffic Control Devices − Signs − Pavement Markings − Variable Message Signs − Delineation − Temporary Speed Zones − Emergency Arrangements − Site Access − Communicating TMP Requirements Submission Of Traffic Control 2.5.9 Diagrams Provide specific or generic Traffic Control Diagrams ( TCD ) per activity as required and/or as specified .
Where a traffic management situation is not covered by a generic TCD , submit the specific TCD to the Superintendent 5 working days prior to undertaking the required works .
Submitted Traffic Control Diagrams shall in turn , become generic .
For Urgent Works , advise of the generic TCD or submit the specific TCD within 2 working days .
Provide amended TCDs , which incorporate changes which have been appraised by the Superintendent on site , within two working days of the appraisal of the change 2.6 AUDITS OF WORK SITE TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT Appropriately qualified and experienced Auditing Officers from the Department ’ s Road Projects group may perform random audits of traffic management at work sites as part of their daily routine duties .
The Auditing Officer will hold current NT accreditation as a Traffic Management Plan Designer .
Project Officers may collect information on behalf of , and for forwarding to , the Auditor .
Audits undertaken will include verification of : − The Traffic Management Plan held on site − The Traffic Control Diagram ( s ) held on site − Traffic control devices established in accordance with the Traffic Control Diagram − The correctness and currency of accreditation of all personnel associated with traffic management at the work site .
Where the Auditing Officer deems modifications to Traffic Management are required for reasons of public safety or safety on the work site , an Instruction to Contractor ( ITC ) will be issued requesting immediate correction .
If modifications are deemed necessary but not urgent , corrections are to be made at the earliest practicable opportunity .
Non Compliance 2.6.1 Where personnel associated with traffic management at work sites are found not to have current accreditation to an appropriate level in WorkZone Traffic Management , the Superintendent may direct the Contractor to cease work , make the site safe , and withdraw plant , equipment and personnel from the road reserve .
WORK IN RURAL AREAS – HOLD POINT 2.7 Hold Point - Undertake work during daylight hours only unless approval is given by the Superintendent for special circumstances .
WORK IN BUILT UP AREAS 2.8 Working Times – Hold Point 2.8.1 Program work , provide and install traffic management devices/controllers , equipment , materials etc. , accordingly so that traffic flows are not impeded during the following hours , from Monday to Friday , excluding Public Holidays : Table 2.1– Restricted Work Hours In Built Up Areas 0700 hours to 0900 hours .
1530 hours to 1730 hours .
This table is only an example of peak traffic periods in urban areas .
Hold Point - Obtain Superintendent ’ s approval if proposing to work inside these hours .
Remove or cover signs or devices as appropriate to stop confusion during these hours .
Further restrictions may apply should the Department deem it appropriate to do so .
Concessions to work within these hours may be approved by the Superintendent , should the need arise and the officer deems it necessary .
Do not operate construction vehicles used in conjunction with the proposed works , either SV plated or vehicles in excess of 19 m on public roads during peak traffic times ( see above , working times ) or in any way impede peak traffic PROVISION FOR TRAFFIC STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 18 flow during these times .
Vehicles in excess of 19 m in length are only permitted to travel on roads designated for road trains unless an appropriate permit from the Motor Vehicle Registry has been obtained in advance of using such routes .
Traffic Lanes 2.8.2 Maintain at least 2 lanes ( one in each direction ) open to traffic at all times unless permitted otherwise on duplicated roads and maintain at least one lane open on two lane roads with appropriate traffic control in place accordingly .
Obtain the written permission of the Superintendent if it is necessary to fully close a road .
Program works so that the closure of turning lanes is minimised .
Obtain prior written approval from the relevant Local Government or Council if traffic is to be detoured onto their road network or the proposed works affects their network/assets accordingly .
Provide a copy of all relevant approvals with the traffic management plan .
WARNING DEVICES 2.9 Take care when placing warning signs , work signs , traffic management devices , or plant and equipment within the road reserve to ensure that these do not interfere with or restrict sight lines , particularly at intersections and ensure that the devices are not obscured by trees or other objects .
Ensure that road work signs reflect the current conditions of the site .
Remove or cover signs such as T1-5 ( worker symbolic ) , temporary speed reductions and the like , when not appropriate , such as when no persons are on site .
Refer to AS 1742 for guidance on the appropriate use of these signs .
Works in Progress Signs 2.9.1 For proposed works which are expected to be in progress for greater than 14 days , display signs , sized 1200 x 900mm with 100mm high black Helvetica medium lettering on a white background displaying the following details : − The nature of the works .
− The start and end date of the works .
− The Contractor ’ s business name .
− The Contractor ’ s business phone number .
− The Contractor ’ s after hours phone number .
− The name of the Traffic Management Plan supervisor .
Display these signs prominently at the extremities of all works in progress and in addition to the work signs requirement .
The signs remain the property of the Contractor .
Multi Panel Signs 2.9.2 The use of multi panel sign configuration for “ Traffic Controller Symbolic ” & “ Prepare to Stop ” being mounted on one multi sign frame shall conform to AS 1742.3 .
The use of the “ Prepare to Stop ” sign is mandatory in conjunction with the symbolic traffic controller sign where traffic are required to stop at the controllers position , therefore the Department approves making this the exception to the “ No multi sign rule ” .
These signs must be on the one frame either side by side or one above the other .
The individual signs are to be 900 mm x 600 mm minimum each when used stand alone , but may be reduced in size on a multi panel sign frame provided that the legend and / or symbol size are not reduced .
The Department will allow a multi panel sign frame for this use only in accordance with the directions herein and those contained within AS 1742.3 .
Mount signs on Oz Spike posts or similar , or set in concrete in accordance with the requirement for permanent speed sign installation .
NT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS FOR 2.10 ROAD WORK SIGNS 2.10.1 Sign erection Refer to the Definitions clause .
Refer to Table 2.2 – Sign erection requirements Ensure that signs are clean , free of damage and comprise of a minimum of Class 1 retroreflective material in accordance with AS/NZS 1906.1 .
Duplicate all temporary work signs ( place on both sides of roads within the work site ) on all multilane work sites , irrespective of the duration of the works , unless there is insufficient room available to do so , such as the median width being not sufficient to accommodate the signs .
Where necessary , seek direction from the Superintendent where this condition can not be complied width .
2.10.2 Advance warning signs In urban areas T1-1 ( road work ahead ) signs and T2-16/17 ( end road work ) signs at short term work sites are not mandatory , however , they may be used if deemed appropriate .
Use these signs at all long term or rural work sites .
Star pickets & fence droppers 2.10.3 Do not use star pickets for support of road work signs , bunting , flagging , fencing , etc within 9 metres of the trafficked path .
Issues of sign , bunting , flagging , fencing , etc .
stability can be addressed by prudent use of properly manufactured sign legs , sand bags , Oz spike posts and or fence droppers .
PROVISION FOR TRAFFIC STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 19 Do not use star pickets or any other non frangible items such as steel drums , for delineation or any other purposes within 9 metres of the edge of the trafficked lanes .
Bollards , cones and flagging are appropriate alternatives .
Fence droppers may be used as sign supports or legs and bunting or flagging supports on the condition that that the droppers are securely embedded into the ground and the sign , bunting or flagging is sufficiently secured to the droppers .
Maintain a prudent use of end caps to ensure the minimisation of any hazards to workers and the public and the specified sign heights can be achieved .
Star pickets may be used for fencing support within the work site , provided appropriate action is taken to reduce any associated hazard for workers within the site and they are not within 9 metres of the travelled path of motorists .
2.10.4 Non-Standard signs – Hold Point Obtain specific approval from the Superintendent before using signs not included in AS 1742.3 .
2.10.5 Variable message signs ( VMS ) Where major disruptions or changes to the traffic part are likely to occur , provide electronic variable message signs in the following situations a minimum of 2 days before any changes occur , where changed conditions and or delays are to be experienced by the general public , particularly peak hour traffic ; − At all approaches to intersections , − At approaches to detours and / or , − At approaches to major works alterations .
Erect variable message signs on all approaches 7 days before “ turn on ” of new traffic signals .
Assume full responsibility for the safe location of the variable message signs .
Use electronic variable message signs capable of displaying a minimum text size as specified in AS 1742.3 and containing at least 3 lines with a minimum of 8 characters per line .
The Superintendent may provide details of the messages to be displayed and the locations of the variable message signs .
Do not , under any circumstances , use variable message signs for private advertising , within the NT Government road reserve or visible from the NT Government road reserve without the written approval of the Superintendent .
2.10.6 Multi Message Signs Do not use multi message signs .
Stand-alone signs must be used .
2.10.7 Work Zone Speed Limits - Mandatory Where work zone speed limits are being proposed to be changed , the proposed temporary speed limits must be approved by the Superintendent prior to implementation of the proposed speed limits .
Erect speed limit signs in accordance with clause 2.10.1 Sign erection .
All Traffic Management Practitioners must record in their Daily Diaries time , date and location of each approach , of speed limit installations and removals for legal purposes .
Retain these diaries for a minimum of 12 months from completion of the works if there were no reportable incidents at the site of the works .
If there was an incident , retain the logs until informed that they can be destroyed .
Provide copies of the diaries on request .
Table 2.2 – Sign erection requirements Long term rural areas : Place all signs a minimum 1m lateral clearance from the travelled path and a minimum of 1.5m from the lower edge of the sign to the ground .
Long term urban areas : Place all signs a minimum of 2.2m from the lower edge of the sign to the ground in locations where they could be obscured by parked vehicles , vegetation or trees or may interfere with pedestrian routes .
On traffic islands or medians the heights for signs shall conform to the “ short term all areas ” where it is deemed appropriate and only if they are not obscured by parked vehicles and if they do not interfere with pedestrian routes .
Short term all areas : Display all signs prominently and place a minimum of 200 mm from the lower edge of the sign to the ground , except regulatory signs such as speed , no parking signs etc , which shall be mounted a minimum of 1.5m from the lower edge of the sign to the ground .
Place all signs a minimum of 2.2m from the lower edge of the sign to the ground where they could be obscured by parked vehicles , vegetation or trees or may interfere with pedestrian routes .
PROVISION FOR TRAFFIC STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 20 2.10.8 Temporary Speed Limits – Hold Point Hold Point - Submit temporary speed limit authorisation applications to alter speed limits to the Superintendent , 2 working days prior to the implementation of temporary speed limits , for approval under the Control of Roads Act .
Place repeater speed limit signs along the road , which has a temporary speed limit imposed , after all intersections with other roads within the speed limited area .
Design the Traffic Management Plans so that speed limits lower than the following minimums are not required ; Table 2.3 – Target Lowest Speed Limits Application Target speed limit not lower than Urban or built up areas .
40 km/h Bridge works , when restricting traffic to one lane and only in conjunction with a stop-traffic situation .
A safety barrier conforming to the relevant Test Level in accordance with AS/NZS 3845.1 shall also be used .
40 km/h All other rural works .
60 km/h unless site conditions warrant a lower speed limit .
2.10.9 Road Safety Barriers Design , install and maintain all road safety barriers used within the NT Government ’ s road reserve in accordance with AS 1742.3 , AS/NZS 3845.1 and any other relevant and current Australian Standard associated with the works being proposed .
Failure to meet the requirements of the relevant and current standards may result in the project being suspended by the Department or other relevant authorities , such as NT Work Safe , without cost to that authority until the project meets the required safety standards .
EXCAVATIONS , STOCKPILES AND 2.11 GRADIENTS WITHIN WORK ZONES AND CLEAR ZONES 2.11.1 NT WorkSafe Guideline in Relation to Excavations Provide shoring to all trenching or excavations which are deeper than 1.5 metres and where a person is required to enter unless an engineer certifies that shoring is not required .
Provide a copy of the Engineer ’ s certification on request .
Comply with the provisions of the Code of Practice for Excavation Works available from Safe Work Australia .
Comply with the NT Work Safe Codes of Practice and Safe Work Australia Codes of Practice applicable to the works .
2.11.2 Requirements for excavations , stockpiles or other gradients Comply with the following Departmental requirements for excavations , stockpiles or other level change greater than 150 mm in addition to Appendix D of AS 1742.3 : 2009 Protection and delineation at excavation works .
Implement the minimum protection requirements in accordance with AS 1742.3 during each work day , however , if any excavations , stockpiles or other steps in level change greater than 150mm are to be left in place longer than one work shift or are left unattended for any period of time , during any day , overnight or weekend and adequate clearance in accordance with AS 1742.3 is not available , protect them by prudent use of approved road safety barriers , backfilling , covering and or removing from site accordingly .
TEMPORARY PAVEMENT MARKING 2.12 Where new pavement surfacing or existing pavement resurfacing is being undertaken , install temporary raised reflective pavement markers at the end of each day and prior to the loss of daylight at 24 m maximum spacing .
If so instructed by the Superintendent , temporary line marking at the end of each day may also be required until completion of the works when the permanent line marking is reinstated .
Only use temporary raised reflective pavement markers that conform to AS 1742.3 , Section 3.9 .
For long term road construction works where sealed detours merge into existing sealed pavements , or where sealed side roads merge into sealed detours , line mark transition areas in accordance with the standard drawing for Line Marking CS 1520 and in accordance with AS 1742 , including the setting out of arrows , letters , numerals and chevrons .
2.12.1 Removal of Temporary Line marking All line removal works must be carried out in such a manner as to not endanger the health , safety or amenity of employees , road users or the general public .
Carry out removal of markings in such a manner as to minimise damage to pavement surfaces .
Obliterate markings so as they are no longer recognisable as marking .
When arrows , letters or figures are to be removed , the removal pattern must be in the shape of a rectangle or square to minimise confusion to the motorist , PROVISION FOR TRAFFIC STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 21 particularly in wet weather and poor lighting conditions .
The removed marking and the material and the material used to remove the marking must be contained , collected and disposed of in an environmentally acceptable manner .
Refer to DLP Road Network Technical Directive RNDTD08-01 Removal of Line Marking .
TRAFFIC CONTROL - WITNESS 2.13 POINT Modify the Traffic Management Plan during the works to suit site conditions if required or requested by the nominated Departmental Contact Officer .
Witness Point - The Superintendent must appraise all changes to the TMPs and TCDs prior to implementation of any changes , unless there is an urgent need for amendments to mitigate hazards .
In situations where immediate hazard mitigation is necessary the changes may be implemented and the Superintendent advised of the changes as soon as practicable thereafter .
If an incident occurs within , adjacent to , on approach to or departure from the work site , make a photographic record of the traffic control devices , site conditions , placement of plant and equipment etc. , as soon as practical after the event .
Advise the Superintendent of the incident as soon as possible .
Only permit single lane operation of two way traffic when traffic is directed by accredited WZTM controllers and signs or portable traffic signals etc .
are employed , dependant on the site conditions and after obtaining the appropriate approvals .
Organise Police control as required , or as requested by the Northern Territory Police should the need arise .
SIDE TRACKS FOR DETOURS 2.14 Refer to PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS in the RFT for requirements .
2.14.1 Construction Provide side tracks for detours when it is impractical to provide for traffic on the existing road system .
Design and construct side tracks to conform to AGRD Austroads Guide to Road Design and the following minimum standards : Table 2.4– Side Track Minimum Requirements Part 1 Side track characteristic Roadway Type National Highway Secondary Highway Local Road Carriageway Width 10 m 8 m 6 m Design Speed 80 km/h 60 km/h 40 km/h Horizontal Curve radius with 3 % superelevation 250 m 150 m 50 m Vertical Curve radius ( crest ) 2,500 m 1,000 m 400 m Vertical Curve radius ( sag ) 1,000 m 600 m 400 m Pavement Width 8 m 6 m 4 m Gravel Pavement Thickness ( when specified ) 150 mm 100 mm 50 mm Lateral Clearance to Obstruction ( from edge of carriageway ) 2.5 m 1.2 m 1.0 m Table 2.5 – Side Track Minimum Requirements Part 2 Item Requirement Signs/Warning devices : As in Traffic Control Plan .
Guideposts : At all fills , curves and crests .
Flood gauge posts : At all floodways .
Total length at any one time : 5 km max .
Side track type : Gravelled/Sealed Refer to PSRs .
Compact top 150 mm to 95 % relative compaction .
Match side tracks neatly to the existing road system .
Provide sufficient resources to direct and assist traffic , when side tracks become restricted .
Carry out immediate remedial works when traffic is delayed by poor side track conditions or surface condition is dangerous .
Provide and maintain adequate drainage .
Ensure drainage measures do not cause or accelerate erosion .
PROVISION FOR TRAFFIC STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 22 2.14.2 Maintenance Maintain the existing road network , and all side tracks , in use by the public .
Prevent dust nuisance by water spraying at regular intervals to keep surface moist .
Do not use waste oil as a dust suppressant .
Remove debris and rubbish .
Maintain road signs and guide posts in a clean state .
Table 2.6 – Side Track Maintenance Requirements Surface type Maintenance required Sealed Surfaces : Patch and repair all surfaces .
Grade and roll shoulders .
Unsealed Surfaces : Regrade and roll to maintain a comfortable riding quality at design speed .
ACCESS TO ADJACENT 2.15 PROPERTIES AND SIDE ROADS Maintain access to adjacent properties and side roads at all times to a level appropriate for the type and frequency of traffic .
Provide and erect proposed and approved signs detailing alternative access , only after approval from the Superintendent is obtained .
Ensure adequate access is maintained for pedestrians and cyclists as required , including delineated access if existing paths are being closed as part of the works .
TEMPORARY PEDESTRIAN ACCESS 2.16 Conform to : AS 1742.9 and AS 1742.10 .
Maintain access for pedestrians , cyclists and persons with disabilities passing through and around the work site .
Where existing paths are to be demolished or will become inaccessible or modified due construction works , provide temporary access to a standard not less than the pre-existing or pre-construction standard .
Temporary access must ; − Be clearly delineated and have adequate width and height clearance .
− Be smooth , free draining and free of obstructions and loose material .
− Provide clear guidance where paths change direction .
− Be illuminated by temporary lighting in urban areas to assist path users where existing street lighting has been removed or affected by the works .
− Be arranged so that path users are clearly visible to vehicle drivers and plant operators at road crossing points .
TEMPORARY BRIDGING – HOLD 2.17 POINT Design and construct any temporary bridging in accordance with the Austroads Guide to Bridge Technology .
Hold Point - Obtain written approval from the Regional Manager , Road Projects prior to commencement of any such works .
Ensure all environmental approvals have been obtained prior to the commencement of the works .
Hold Point - Provide copies of approvals obtained by Contractor to the Superintendent prior to the commencement of the works .
Provide and erect signage , fencing , road safety barriers and or guard railing etc .
to prevent accidental access to the feature being bridged .
CONTRACTOR 'S PLANT AND 2.18 EQUIPMENT - HOLD POINT Provide public traffic right of way at all times unless traffic control is in use .
Keep parking and materials storage clear of trafficked areas and clear zones in accordance with applicable AUSTROADS guides .
Do not leave equipment or tools unattended as a hazard to the public .
Hold Point - On roads carrying significant traffic , floodlight the road and area within 50 m of the site when working at night , if approved by the Superintendent , to a ground level luminance of 10 lux minimum .
2.18.1 Mobile Plant - Broadband Alarm Standards AS 4742 : Machine-mounted forward and reverse audible warning alarm ( withdrawn ) ISO 9533 : Earth-moving machinery - Machine- mounted audible travel alarms and forward horns - Test methods and performance criteria Definitions Broadband alarm : Pulsed acoustic signal that comprises a range of frequencies and sometimes referred to as quacker , woosher , non-tonal reversing beepers or white sound .
Broadband/White-Sound Alarm Requirement : Provide all construction vehicles and mobile plant fitted with Broadband Alarms ( White Sound ) before commencement of works .
Ensure that installation and proper operations of the alarm/warning system is sufficient before PROVISION FOR TRAFFIC STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 23 commencement of works including but not limited to : - All alarms clearly audible above the noise level of the machinery or vehicle .
- Automatically activated when reverse gear is selected .
- Directional nature of the broadband alarm is appropriate for works .
2.18.2 Rotating Beacons on Plant Provide beacons or other vehicle mounted warning devices on the highest point of the cabin roof or superstructure of all plant and equipment and in accordance with clause 3.12 ‘ Vehicle mounted signs and devices ’ of AS 1742.3 where these are being used within the road reserve .
Fit beacons with globes rated at a minimum of 75 watts .
Do not use strobe lights .
Ensure that the light is operational whenever the plant or equipment is working on , or within 9 metres of , the roadway .
Ensure that the light is visible from all approaches and not obscured by exhaust stacks , back hoe arms etc. , or are covered in dust .
Protect the lights from damage by scrub etc .
ROAD WORK ZONE LENGTH 2.19 Conform to the requirements of AS 1742.3 .
TRAFFIC SIGNAL AND COUNT 2.20 STATIONS 2.20.1 Traffic Signals Prior to commencement of the works and for the duration of the works clear the work and co- ordinate with the Department ’ s Traffic Section for the appropriate region .
This includes all works within the trafficked lanes ; − 150 m prior to the stop line − 50 m past the stop line − that affects the normal daily traffic flow at the intersection or for road reserve or median excavations greater than 150 mm − within the area defined by the traffic signal poles and associated pits − between the traffic signal poles and associated traffic signal control cabinet 2.20.2 Traffic Count Stations Count Stations have in-pavement detection systems installed and cutting off or closing traffic lanes can have an impact on their operation .
Prior to the commencement of work within the trafficked lanes within 50 m of traffic signals or within 20 m of a count station controller , clear the work and co-ordinate for the duration of the works with the Department ’ s Traffic Section for the appropriate region .
A map of count station locations is available from Department ’ s Transport Infrastructure Planning Division , contact 8924 7531 , or from the Annual Traffic count reports at : https : //transport.nt.gov.au/publications .
PORTABLE TRAFFIC SIGNALS 2.21 Use portable traffic signals conforming to the requirements of AS 1742.3 and AS 4191 .
Complete the portable traffic signal authorisation form ( available from the Department ’ s Traffic section ) to seek formal approval from the Superintendent to use the proposed portable traffic signals and the proposed time settings .
Portable traffic signals are for short-term traffic control applications only .
Where traffic signal control is being proposed for periods greater than 2 months in a single location , consider the installation of temporary traffic signals .
For the area under the control of portable traffic signals , limit the lengths to no more than 1150 m. Use the time settings in the Time Settings clause as a guide for red time clearance and maximum green times .
Frequently observe the prevailing traffic conditions and vehicle speeds and amend the times for the site as appropriate .
Submit the changes to the Superintendent as soon as practicable thereafter .
2.21.1 Temporary Speed Limits – Hold Point Impose a controlled area speed limit not exceeding 80 km/h if the portable traffic signals would otherwise be in a higher speed limit zone .
Hold Point - Work zone speed limits require approval from the Superintendent prior to implementation .
2.21.2 Sight Distance Maintain a sight distance on the approach to portable traffic signals of not less than 150 metres .
If this can not be achieved , use appropriate advance warning signage to advise road users in advance of the sight line obstruction of the impending traffic signals ahead .
In cases where queuing traffic is extending past the advance warning signage , install further advance warning signs and speed zone signs further in advance , to prevent collisions at the end of the queue awaiting a green light .
Avoid excessive traffic queuing by use of , and adjustment of , appropriate time settings on the portable traffic signals whenever possible .
PROVISION FOR TRAFFIC STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 24 Time Settings 2.21.3 Table 2.7– General Time Settings Mode All Red Min .
Green Max .
Green Amber Manual : M F M S Fixed time : S F S S Vehicle Actuated : S F S S F : Fixed at 15 seconds .
M : Set the manual control switch each cycle .
S : Needs to be selected and preset by operator for each site .
Table 2.8 – Amber Time Approach Speed Amber Time Below 70 km/h Above 70 km/h 4 seconds 5 seconds RESTORATION 2.22 Upon completion of works : − Remove all temporary warning signage and other traffic control devices .
− Remove all temporary works and reinstate the areas to their original state , including the removal and disposal of seal and dragging windrows and debris back across the side track carriageway .
− Stabilize all areas impacted by the works to prevent erosion .
− Where applicable reseed with local native grasses and trees and shrubs .
− Comply with the requirements of the Environmental Approvals and Clearances issued by DIPL and DENR , Environment Heritage and the Arts Division , Environmental Assessment and Policy Section , for the project .
− Reinstate permanent traffic control devices temporarily removed during the works .
Other Requirements 2.23 ( If applicable ) Refer to PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS in the Request for Tender .
Table 2.9 - Red and Green Times All Red Period ( Sec ’ s ) Max .
Green Period ( Sec ’ s ) Distance Between Stop Lines at traffic Signals ( m ) – Clearance speed 20 km/h Distance Between Stop Lines at traffic Signals ( m ) – Clearance speed 40 km/h 2 30 0-30 0-50 5 35 34-45 50-90 10 35 45-75 90-150 15 40 75-105 150-210 20 40 105-135 210-270 25 45 135-165 270-330 30 45 165-195 330-390 40 50 195-250 390-500 50 50 250-310 500-620 60 60 310-365 620-730 70 70 365-415 730-830 80 80 415-465 830-930 90 90 465-525 930-1050 100 100 525-575 1050-1150 CLEARING , GRUBBING AND REHABILITATION STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 25 3 .
CLEARING , GRUBBING AND REHABILITIATION GENERAL 3.1 SPECIFICATION REFERENCE ; Refer to the Standard Specification for Environmental Management and to the RFT .
BURNING ; Do not light fires or burn any demolished material or vegetation either on or off the site .
CLEARING 3.2 DEMOLITION ; Remove fencing , buildings , kerbing , debris , drainage structures , old road surfaces and other structures as required .
REMOVAL ; Except for materials to be salvaged and retained by the Superintendent take possession of demolished materials and remove them from the site .
SALVAGED ITEMS ; A list of items to be salvaged is included in PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS in the RFT EXTENT ; Clear the site only to the extent shown on the drawings and specified in this section .
ACCESS ; Allow 3 metre wide cleared access ways around proposed culverts , gravel pits and stockpiles .
EXCESS CLEARING ; Where excess clearing has taken place beyond that specified or shown on the drawings pay compensation for the damage and rehabilitate the areas in accordance with the Reinstatement clause .
COMPENSATION ; Pay compensation ( To be charged as a negative variation to the Contract ) for excess clearing at the rate of $ 5 per square metre .
TREES TO BE RETAINED 3.3 Retain selected trees shown on the drawings or as directed .
PROTECTION ; Protect from damage trees which are required to be retained .
Do not remove topsoil from the areas within the dripline of the trees and keep the area free of construction equipment and materials .
DAMAGE ; If a tree , which is marked to be retained , is damaged and repair work is considered impractical , or is attempted and fails , remove the tree and the root system , if so directed .
Replace the tree with a tree of the same species and similar condition and size or pay compensation .
Compensation for damage to existing vegetation shall be borne by the Contractor as a negative variation to the Contract and determined as follows : Tree valuation rate : $ 10 per cm .
of tree circumference at a height 1 m above the ground .
Maximum valuation : $ 2500 per tree Minimum valuation : $ 250 per tree MULCHING 3.4 Mulch all cleared vegetative matter in mechanical brush chippers to a maximum size of 100 mm as the clearing work proceeds .
Do not stockpile cleared material for later mulching .
STUMPS ; Stumps and other material unsuitable for mulching may be buried in disused gravel pits during rehabilitation of the pits .
GRASSES ; Do not mulch grass clods , roots or other components containing viable propagules .
This material may be buried in disused gravel pits .
STOCKPILES ; Stockpile mulched material on the site at a maximum height of 2 m for use during reinstatement work .
URBAN AREAS ; Stockpile mulch on the site for reuse and deliver surplus mulch as directed by the Superintendent ( within 10 km of the site ) for use in local landscaping projects .
RURAL AREAS ; Stockpile mulch on the site for reuse and power blow surplus mulch into the adjacent natural vegetated areas adjacent to the works .
STRIPPING OF TOP LAYER 3.5 EXTENT ; Strip the top layer of natural material to a depth of 100 mm , for the full formation width .
Stockpile stripped material at sites within 1 km of the point of origin .
Stockpile heights not to exceed 2.0 m. Spread stripped material on areas to be landscaped and/or on road batters , following completion of earthworks .
TREATMENT OF EXISTING SEALED 3.6 SURFACE Rip the existing sealed surface .
Conform to the following : Table 3.1– Treatment of Existing Sealed Surface Specified Cover Over Existing Seal Maximum Seal Fragment Size Fill depth 500 mm or greater 1 m2 .
Fill depth less than 500 mm Remove seal from site .
Pavement resheeting only Remove seal from site and replace with similar volume of pavement .
CLEARING , GRUBBING AND REHABILITATION STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 26 SCARIFYING OF EXISTING ROADS 3.7 Remove seal from site .
Alternatively , demolished seal may be buried in table drains if approved by the Superintendent .
Provide 200 mm cover to buried material .
Scarify , both longitudinally and laterally , for the full width of the formation by ripping to a depth of 250 mm resulting in a maximum size of demolished seal of 100 mm .
Tyne spacing to be 500 mm maximum .
GRUBBING 3.8 Grub out and remove from the site all vegetation to a depth of 200 mm below subgrade surface in cut and 200 mm below natural surface under fills .
Fill grub holes and other excavations as required with standard fill material compacted to the density of the surrounding soil .
REINSTATEMENT 3.9 Reinstate any clearing undertaken during the contract to rehabilitate the area back consistent with its untouched surrounds .
This includes seeding , planting , watering and other measures necessary to rehabilitate the area .
MULCH ; Spread mulched material over the rehabilitated area , including batters and verges , to a uniform cover of 50 mm thickness .
DETOURS ; Where detours are specified in PROVISION FOR TRAFFIC , or otherwise agreed to , rehabilitate the detour areas in accordance with the requirements of this section .
CLEANING UP 3.10 Remove all excess fill , rubble and other debris from the site .
Dispose of the materials using a legal method .
OTHER REQUIREMENTS 3.11 ( If applicable ) Refer to PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS in the Request for Tender .
EARTHWORKS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 27 4 .
EARTHWORKS STANDARDS 4.1 Conform to the following Standard and Publication unless specified otherwise : AS 1289 ( set ) Methods of testing soils for engineering purposes .
NTMTM NT Materials Testing Manual .
NTTM NT Test Methods DEFINITIONS 4.2 CARRIAGEWAY : That portion of a road for the use of vehicles including shoulders and auxiliary lanes .
FORMATION WIDTH : Width of cut or fill including table drain ( s ) , and out to the points of any batters .
OFFLET DRAIN : Also described as a Table Drain Offlet .
Provides relief at regular intervals of run off concentration in Table Drain .
Drains water from Table Drain away from formation for dispersal into catchments .
SUBGRADE : Top 150 mm of material below subgrade surface unless specified differently in RFT or on drawings .
SUBGRADE SURFACE : The prepared surface immediately beneath the pavement and shoulder layers .
Also extends under footpaths , kerb and gutter , and surface structures .
SURFACE FORMATION : The formation of a road from material generally cut from the table drains .
UNPAVED AREAS : Those areas within the road reserve boundary which are not part of the road pavement , including any medians not paved , batters and table drains and blocks , but excluding footpaths and vehicle access strips .
UNSUITABLE MATERIAL Any material that does not conform to the properties specified for the replacement materials to be used .
If properties of the replacement materials to be used are not specified , then UNSUITABLE MATERIALS are materials which do not conform to the properties specified for standard fill .
EARTHWORKS IN CUT 4.3 Description 4.3.1 Operations necessary for excavation , irrespective of the type of material and subsurface conditions , including : - working cuttings so that material meeting standard fill requirements is used for the subgrade ; - disposal of excess excavated material ; - compaction of material below the subgrade surface ; and - shaping and trimming of formation within cuttings .
Excess Material – Hold Point 4.3.2 Haul and dump and spread excess material : − Not less than 125 metres from the new road centre line .
− To spoil dump sites specified .
Clear site of organic material/topsoil prior to stockpiling material .
− Spread excess material and sheet with topsoil .
Refer to PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS in the RFT .
Dumped material remains the property of the Principal .
Ensure dumps will not dam surface water and streams or damage the works or other property .
Ensure dumping is not in streams .
Haul , dump and spread the materials in legally acceptable locations using legal methods .
Comply with AAPA clearances .
Comply with Environmental Management approvals , including within the road reserve .
Hold Point - Obtain approval from Superintendent prior to hauling , dumping and spreading excess material .
Rock in Subgrade – Hold Point 4.3.3 Hold point - Obtain agreement from the Superintendent to the extent of the excavation .
Excavate rock encountered in the subgrade .
Avoid forming pockets of shattered material below the level of the excavation .
Remove all loose material .
Trim the excavation to shed water .
Replace excavated material with select fill compacted to 95 % relative compaction .
Unsuitable Material Below Subgrade 4.3.4 Surface other than Rock – Hold Point Hold point - Obtain directions from the Superintendent before works commence .
Excavate subgrade material which does not conform to the properties of standard fill as specified .
Dry out material with excessive moisture content to achieve a moisture content which permits specified compaction .
Replace excavated material with standard fill compacted to 95 % relative compaction .
EARTHWORKS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 28 Floodways : Replace unsuitable material with material conforming with the following : Angular or broken rock , free from organic matter and lumps of clay , complying with Table 4.1 – Grading - Suitable Fill Material Properties .
Table 4.1 – Grading - Suitable Fill Material Properties Maximum size : 100 mm .
Plasticity Index : 10 maximum .
Linear Shrinkage 5.0 maximum .
AS Sieve ( Mm ) Percentage Passing 75.0 40 - 100 19.0 15 - 50 2.36 0 - 25 Blasting and Overbreak 4.3.5 Ensure blasting is not excessive .
There will be no payment for overbreak beyond the limits of excavation specified .
Stability of Works , Rock Cuttings 4.3.6 Remove all loose material and rock which has been rendered unstable .
EARTHWORKS IN FILL 4.4 Description 4.4.1 Earthworks in fill includes winning , hauling , placing and compacting material on all prepared areas including holes , pits and other depressions .
Preparation Prior to Filling 4.4.2 Subsequent to stripping of topsoil , apply a minimum of three passes with maximum mass compaction equipment .
Benching 4.4.3 Cut a bench at the toe of the lower side batter when natural surface inclines at steeper than eight horizontal to one vertical .
Ensure the bench slopes downwards towards the centre line of the road and is 3 metres wide to provide a sound key for the toe of the fill .
Terrace the existing surface where side slopes are steeper than three horizontal to one vertical to provide a key for the fill .
Unsuitable Material Beneath Fill – Hold 4.4.4 point Hold point - Obtain directions from the Superintendent before works commence .
Remove unsuitable foundation material as directed before the fill is placed .
Replace excavated material with standard fill compacted to 95 % relative compaction .
Construction Methods 4.4.5 Fill by either the `` Compacted Layer '' , `` Rocky Material '' or `` Rock Fill '' method .
Mix to a homogeneous material before compacting .
Select appropriate method ( s ) .
COMPACTED LAYER METHOD Use where material generally does not contain cobbles , boulders or broken rock .
- Deposit and spread the material in uniform level layers to a maximum thickness of 250 mm loose measurement for the full width of fill .
- Compact each layer to the specified compaction ( refer Table 5.12 – Dry Density Ratios for Conformance ) before placing the next layer .
- Use standard fill for the subgrade .
ROCKY MATERIAL METHOD Use where material contains some cobbles and boulders ( maximum size 600 mm ) with sufficient fines for the work to be free of voids .
- Break up rocks bridging between adjacent material to prevent cavities being formed .
- Maximum rock dimension : 600 mm or one-half the height of fill at the section where the rock is placed .
- Spread material in layers approximately equal to the maximum rock size .
- Work the rocky material in each layer until it is firm and unyielding .
- Construct to the bottom of the subgrade layer .
ROCKFILL METHOD Use where material is predominantly cobbles or boulders with insufficient fines to fill voids .
- Place and work the material until interlock is achieved .
- Advance the fill by full width construction .
Side dumping shall not be undertaken .
The construction face shall be concave , with the shoulder face well in advance of the centre , except when filling in swamps or soft material when the advancing face ends shall be convex .
- Rock Dimensions .
Maximum vertical dimension : one-third of the height of fill being placed .
Maximum horizontal dimension : one-half of the height of the fill being placed .
- Construct to 300 mm below the bottom of the subgrade layer .
Within 300 mm of the bottom of the subgrade layer use the Compacted Layer Method or Rocky Material Method , with a maximum particle size of 150 mm .
EARTHWORKS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 29 FILL MATERIAL 4.5 Fill material properties specified below are typical requirements .
Refer to PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS in the RFT for any variations to these requirements .
General Fill 4.5.1 Use the best locally available material .
Use fill material , whether cut or borrow , that is free of organic matter and has a minimum soaked CBR at 95 % MMDD of 20 % , to AS 1289 , and a plasticity index between 2 % and 15 % .
Standard Fill 4.5.2 Conform to the following properties : Table 4.2 – Standard Fill Properties CBR 4 day soaked at 95 % MMDD to AS 1289 : Minimum 20 Maximum Particle Size : 100mm Plasticity Index : 2 % -15 % Select Fill 4.5.3 Select fill shall be comprised of gravel , decomposed rock or broken rock , free from organic matter and lumps of clay .
Conform to the following Grading and Properties : Table 4.3 – Grading – Select Fill AS Sieve ( mm ) % Passing ( Dry Weight ) 75.00 100 9.50 30 - 100 2.36 15 - 65 0.075 5 - 25 Table 4.4 – Select Fill Properties CBR , 4 day soaked at 95 % MMDD to AS 1289 : 30 minimum .
Plasticity Index : 2 - 15 % maximum .
Linear Shrinkage : 2 - 6 % .
Sand Clay Fill 4.5.4 Sand clay ( clayey sand ) may be used as an alternative to Select Fill .
Conform to the following Properties and Grading : Table 4.5 – Sand Clay Fill Properties CBR : 4 day soaked and 95 % MMDD to AS 1289 : 30 minimum Plasticity Index 15 % maximum Linear Shrinkage 1 - 8 % Table 4.6 – Grading – Sand Clay Fill As Sieve ( Mm ) % Passing ( Dry Weight ) 4.75 80 - 100 2.36 60 - 100 0.425 30 - 60 0.075 14 - 28 PREPARATION AND MAINTENANCE 4.6 OF SUBGRADE SURFACE Trim surface to the compliance tolerances specified free of depressions and free draining .
Maintain and repair any damage to the prepared surface prior to placing further material .
EARTHWORKS FOR DRAINAGE 4.7 Comply with the requirements of the Standard Specification for Environmental Management .
Stream Diversions 4.7.1 Excavate stream diversions as shown on the drawings .
Fill existing watercourses as shown on the drawings .
Divert streams temporarily where it is necessary for the construction of the work .
Ensure that existing waterways are not filled , altered , or diverted except where specified .
Levees 4.7.2 Construct using standard fill with a Plasticity Index of ; - 6 % minimum for areas north of a line connecting Birrindudu – Dunmarra – Wollogorang .
- 3 % minimum for areas on or south of a line connecting Birrindudu – Dunmarra - Wollogorang Compact in layers not exceeding 150 mm compacted thickness .
Construct in locations , and to dimensions shown on the drawings .
Table Drains 4.7.3 Construct to the dimensions shown on the drawings .
Grade to prevent ponding of water .
Discharge into culverts , offlet drains or watercourses .
Table Drain Offlets 4.7.4 Divert table drains into offlet drains at intervals not exceeding 150 m or as otherwise specified in PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS in the RFT .
EARTHWORKS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 30 Ensure the capacity of the offlet is not less than the capacity of the table drain , and is of similar cross section .
Align and grade offlet so that the water drains away without scour and damage to disperse as sheet flow or into natural watercourses .
Table Drain Blocks 4.7.5 Block table drains at offlets .
Construct blocks from standard fill conforming to the following requirements : Plasticity Index : - 6 % minimum for areas north of a line connecting Birrindudu – Dunmarra – Wollogorang .
- 3 % minimum for areas on or south of a line connecting Birrindudu – Dunmarra - Wollogorang Length : To extend from edge of shoulder to top of outer table drain batter .
Width : 3 metre minimum measured parallel to the road centre line .
Height : To edge of shoulders .
Compaction : Layers not exceeding 150 mm compacted thickness .
Catch Drains 4.7.6 Construct catch drains prior to earthworks in cut .
Depth : 500 mm ( minimum ) into solid ground .
Gradients : Ensure free flow , prevent ponding of water , prevent scour .
Outlets : As terrain permits construct at frequent intervals to reduce scour .
Construct a block on continuous grades to divert water into culverts or drains .
Offset : 2 m ( minimum ) and 4 m ( maximum ) beyond the edge of the cutting .
Divert the drain neatly around large rocks and trees .
WIDENING OF EXISTING FORMATION 4.8 Cut back the existing formation and pavement as shown on the drawings by not less than 150 mm on each edge to sound densely compacted material to form a uniform edge ( curved or straight where applicable ) .
Construct the widening by cutting and filling as specified .
TRIM AND COMPACT UNPAVED 4.9 AREAS Shape , grade and compact as specified .
See Table 5.6.2 - Test Frequencies for Soils - Part 3 of 3 .
SURFACE FORMATION 4.10 General 4.10.1 Form the road generally with material cut from the table drains , in accordance with the typical cross section .
Mix to a homogeneous material before compacting .
Allow for construction to the specified height above natural surface , either by local widening of table drains or importation of standard fill .
Pastoral Access Roads 4.10.2 For in situ pavement materials comply with the following : CBR 4 day soaked at 95 % MMDD to AS 1289 : 30 minimum .
Maximum particle size : 37.5 mm .
Plasticity Index : 4 - 12 % .
Alternatively sheet the in situ material with 150 mm imported material complying with the above , compacted to 95 % relative compaction .
BATTER PROTECTION BY GRASSING 4.11 Fill batters to have a surface layer 100 mm minimum thickness of stripped material , which is additional to the specified cross section .
Grassing 4.11.1 Refer to PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS in the RFT for extent of batters to be treated .
Seed Mixture and Fertiliser 4.11.2 Provide certified seed complying with the requirements in the LANDSCAPE Section .
Fertiliser to comply with Table 16.3 - Fertilisers in LANDSCAPE .
Refer to PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS in the RFT for application rate .
Grass Seed Application Technique 4.11.3 Conform to the LANDSCAPE Section .
Fabric protection to be used for all slopes steeper than 3:1 .
Fabric protection may consist of using jute mesh or equivalent in conjunction with hydromulching or the use of matting .
Smooth batters .
Form drains to control stormwater and prevent erosion until batter is grassed .
Place `` top layer '' soil from clearing operations over the batters to a depth of 50 mm .
Apply seed mixture , fertiliser , and protection .
Establish grass and keep damp by watering until flowering stage is reached .
EARTHWORKS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 31 Repair any erosion .
Reseed areas until establishment is achieved .
Acceptance 4.11.4 The minimum quality of grassing required for acceptance is ; - Establishment shall be uniform .
- Coverage rate : 98 % minimum of total area .
BRIDGE FOUNDATIONS 4.12 Conditions 4.12.1 The data shown on the drawings as to the character and depths of the various strata are approximate only , and no warranty , expressed or implied , is given by the Principal that the same or similar materials will be encountered during the progress of work .
Tenderers are advised to inspect copies of the bore logs and the original core samples .
Superintendent will advise where original samples are available for inspection .
Excavation – Hold point 4.12.2 GENERAL The extent of foundations is specified by dimension and reduced level .
Excavate to the required lines and levels .
Dispose of excess material in accordance with clause 4.3.2 Excess Material – Hold Point in 4.3 Earthworks In Cut .
PREPARATION Inspect and record the condition of all structures and services in the adjacent area prior to using pile drivers .
Hold point - Obtain Superintendent ’ s agreement with inspection record of current conditions .
Cut foundation to a firm surface either stepped or roughened , as directed .
Remove loose material .
Hold point - Obtain the Superintendent ’ s approval for the foundation surface before placing the blinding concrete .
Place a 50 mm thick layer of blinding concrete .
COFFER-DAMS SHORING AND SHEETING Design any coffer-dams required for the execution of the works .
Construct coffer-dams to adequate height and depth and as waterproof as necessary for proper performance .
Provide adequate clearance for : - construction of forms ; - inspection of interiors ; and - pumping from outside the forms .
Remove shoring and sheeting from inside the excavation .
Remove coffer-dams , sheeting and the like from the site when no longer required .
Do not damage the finished structure or disturb adjacent in situ material .
Remove obstructions from waterways .
Backfilling 4.12.3 Backfill the excavation up to natural surface level with excavated material or select fill .
The excavated material may be used for backfill provided it is free of wood , other organic and other extraneous or deleterious material .
Mix to a homogeneous material before compacting .
Place in horizontal layers not exceeding 150 mm compacted thickness .
Compact to the density ratio specified in Table 5.12 – Dry Density Ratios for Conformance in CONFORMANCE TESTING .
Compact using equipment that will not damage the bridge substructure .
FILL ADJACENT TO BRIDGE 4.13 STRUCTURES GENERAL Fill includes preparation of the fill area , supply , placing and compacting fill , drainage layers and piping , disposal of unsuitable material and trimming and protection of batters .
Place select fill against structures after 14 days from date of casting or after test results confirm 70 % of characteristic concrete strength achieved .
Avoid unbalanced loading on structures .
Do not operate mechanically driven vibrating rollers exceeding 1 tonne within 3 metres of the structures .
ABUTMENTS AND WINGWALLS Prepare the area as specified .
Compact select fill in horizontal layers not exceeding 150 mm compacted thickness in areas adjacent to abutments and wing walls extending horizontally a distance equal to two times the height of the adjacent structure , or as specified .
Prevent water from ponding behind abutments and wing walls .
Provide weep holes and drain pipes as specified .
COMPACTION 4.14 Mix to a homogeneous material and compact with no compaction planes and free of cracking to conform to the Dry Density Ratios specified in Table 5.12 – Dry Density Ratios for Conformance in CONFORMANCE TESTING and to 4.15 Conformance .
EARTHWORKS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 32 CONFORMANCE 4.15 4.15.1 Existing Surface Levels – Witness Point Witness point - Obtain inspections of any disputed existing surface levels with the Superintendent prior to any stripping or earthworks operations .
Quantities are based on the existing surface levels prior to the stripping of the top layer .
Allow for suitable material to replace the stripped layer ( Cut and Fill ) in the items for EARTHWORKS .
Tolerances 4.15.2 Finish earthworks to a smooth compacted and uniform surface within the following limits : Formation Width : Not less than specified .
Subgrade Surface : Maximum 25 mm below and not above specified level .
Subgrade Width : Not less than specified .
Extend 150 mm minimum beyond the back of kerb .
Batter : Not steeper than the specified slope .
Maximum variation at any point from specified plane of batter shall be 150 mm in earth and 300 mm in rock .
Unpaved Areas/ Table Drain Invert : Maximum 75 mm above or below specified level free of depressions capable of ponding water .
Maximum 40 mm adjacent to kerbs .
4.15.3 Proof Rolling – Witness Point – Hold point Proof roll all areas and obtain satisfactory results before ordering conformance testing of those areas .
Hold point - Submit a proof rolling procedure to the Superintendent for approval including the proposed method of preparing the areas and the extent of proof rolling .
Witness point - Give the Superintendent not less than 24 hours notice of the location and commencement time for the proof rolling .
Plant Requirements ; use plant in proof rolling procedures that comply with the following requirements : Static smooth wheeled rollers with a mass of not less than 12 tonnes and a load intensity under either the front or rear wheels of not less than 6 tonnes per metre width of wheel .
Pneumatic tyred plant with a mass of not less than 20 tonnes and with a ground contact pressure under either the front or rear wheels of not less than 450 kPa per tyre and a ground contact area of not less than .035 sq.m .
per tyre .
Check areas for level tolerance and layer thickness before proof rolling .
Proof roll each layer immediately following completion of compaction .
If proof rolling is carried out at a later time , water the surface and roll with the test roller prior to commencement of proof rolling .
Compliance ; the proof rolling requirements are deemed to comply when an area withstands proof rolling without visible deformation or springing .
Remedial work ; remove and reconstruct areas that deform or break up .
4.15.4 Conformance Testing – Hold point Ordering procedures ; refer to CONFORMANCE TESTING for testing requirements and test ordering procedures .
General Fill Conformance testing will be carried out on each layer of fill .
Subgrade Subgrade surface will be tested only when it is within level tolerance and conforms to proof rolling .
Check subgrade surface levels prior to testing .
Hold point – Obtain the Superintendent ’ s approval of subgrade conformance prior to placing further material .
OTHER REQUIREMENTS 4.16 Refer to PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS in the RFT .
CONFORMANCE TESTING STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 33 5 .
CONFORMANCE TESTING GENERAL 5.1 The Contractor will be responsible for process control testing .
The Superintendent will carry out all conformance testing nominated to be the Superintendent 's responsibility through Panel Period Contracts .
The Contractor will be responsible for ordering the conformance tests .
DEFINITIONS 5.2 CBR California Bearing Ratio .
CONFORMANCE TESTING The testing to be carried out by the Superintendent to ensure that the work complies with the contract documents .
ITP Inspection Test Plan NATA National Association of Testing Authorities , Australia .
NTCP Northern Territory Codes of Practice NTTM Northern Territory Test Method ( and NT Materials Testing Manual ) NTMTM Northern Territory Materials Testing Manual – available at http : //www.nt.gov.au/infrastructure/publicatio ns/materialstesting/documents/Materials- Testing-Manual.pdf PROCESS TESTING The testing required to be carried out by the Contractor to ensure that the work is in accordance with the contract documents .
STANDARDS 5.3 Northern Territory Test Methods ( NTTM ) and NT Codes of Practice ( NTCP ) for materials testing are given in the Northern Territory Road Projects Materials Testing Manual ( NTMTM ) .
The methods contained in the Materials Testing Manual shall take precedence over all other test methods and procedures , and are used in conjunction with relevant Australian Standards .
When testing can not be performed to the test methods stated below , these methods may be substituted with State Road Authority test methods so testing can be performed .
The following standards are referred to in this section ( see REFERENCED DOCUMENTS for full titles of Standards ) ; AUSTRALIAN STANDARDS AS 1141 Methods for testing and sampling aggregates .
AS 1141.11.1 - Particle size distribution by sieving .
AS 1141.14 - Particle shape , by proportional calliper .
AS 1141.15 - Flakiness index .
AS1141.18 - Crushed particles .
AS 1141.20.1 - Average least dimension of aggregate by direct measurement ( size≥10 mm ) .
AS 1141.20.2 - Average least dimension of aggregate by direct measurement ( size 5 mm & 7 mm ) .
AS 1141.23 - Los Angeles value .
AS 1141.24 - Sodium sulphate soundness .
AS 1141.40 - Polished aggregate friction value - Vertical road-wheel machine .
AS 1141.41 - Polished aggregate friction value – Horizontal bed machine .
AS 1289 Methods of testing soils for engineering purposes .
AS 1289.3.1.1 - Liquid limit – Four point Casagrande method .
AS 1289.3.2.1 - Plastic limit – Standard method .
AS 1289.3.3.1 - Plasticity index .
AS 1289.3.4.1 - Linear shrinkage .
AS 1289.3.6.1 - Particle size distribution .
AS 1289.5.1.1 - Determination of the dry density/moisture content relationship – Standard compaction .
AS 1289.5.2.1 - Determination of the dry density/moisture content relationship - Modified compaction .
AS 1289.5.8.1 - Field density using a nuclear surface moisture- density gauge .
AS 1289.6.1.1 - Determination of a California Bearing Ratio of a soil AS 2341 ( set ) Methods of testing bitumen and related road making products .
AS/NZS 2341.2 - Dynamic viscosity ( coefficient of shear ) by flow through a capillary tube .
AS 2341.3 - Determination of kinematic viscosity by flow through a capillary tube .
CONFORMANCE TESTING STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 34 AS/NZS 2341.4 - Determination of dynamic viscosity by rotational viscometer .
AS 2341.12 - Determination of penetration .
AS/NZS 2341.13 - Long-term exposure to heat and air .
AS 2891 Methods of sampling and testing asphalt .
AS/NZS 2891.3.1 Bitumen content and aggregate grading – Reflux method .
AS/NZS 2891.3.2 Bitumen content and aggregate grading – Centrifugal extraction method .
AS/NZS 2891.3.3 Bitumen content and aggregate grading – Pressure filter method .
AS/NZS 2891.5 Determination of stability and flow – Marshall procedure .
AS/NZS 2891.7 Determination of maximum density of asphalt AS/NZS 2891.8 Voids and density relationships for compacted asphalt mixes .
AS/NZS 2891.9.1 Determination of bulk density of compacted asphalt - Waxing procedure .
AS/NZS 2891.9.2 Determination of bulk density of compacted asphalt - Presaturation method .
AS/NZS 2891.9.3 Determination of bulk density of compacted asphalt - Mensuration method .
AS 4049.3 Paints and related materials – Pavement marking materials Part 3 : Waterborne paint – for use with surface applied glass beads .
NT CODES OF PRACTICE NTCP 102.1 Testing field compaction for conformance NTCP 103.1 Site selection by the stratified random technique .
NT TEST METHODS NTTM 204.1 Cement content of stabilised materials – Heat of neutralisation NTTM 204.7 Rate of spread of lime or cement NTTM 204.8 Stabiliser distribution NTTM 215.1 Standard ball penetration test NTTM 216.1 Measurement of layer thickness NTTM 304.1 Determination of skid resistance with the portable skid tester NTTM 305.1 Determination of pavement surface texture depth - sand patch method NTTM 404.1 Retroreflectivity testing of pavement marking NTTM 404.3 Retroreflectivity testing of pavement marking – wet condition AUSTROADS TEST METHODS AGPT04H Austroads Guide to Pavement Technology Part 4H : Test Methods AGPT/T103 Pre-treatment and Loss on Heating of Bitumen Multigrade and polymer Binders ( rolling thin film oven [ RTFO ] test ) AGPT/T111 Handling Viscosity of Polymer Modified Binders ( Brookfield Thermosel ) AGPT/T112 Flash Point of Polymer Modified Binders AGPT/T121 Shear Properties of Polymer Modified Binders ( ARRB ELASTOMETER ) AGPT/T122 Torsional Recovery of Polymer Modified Binders AGPT/T124 Toughness of Polymer Modified Binders ( ARRB Extensiometer ) AGPT/T131 Softening Point of Polymer Modified Binders AGPT/T231 Deformation Resistance of Asphalt Mixtures by the Wheel Tracking Test .
MAIN ROADS WESTERN AUSTRALIA , TEST METHODS .
WA 730.1 Bitumen Content and Aggregate Grading .
ITP SUBMISSION – HOLD POINT 5.4 Hold Point - Submit ITPs , detailing all procedures and test plans to be undertaken to complete the project , before commencing work .
SPECIFIC TESTS 5.5 Conduct field density testing using Nuclear Density Gauges in accordance with NTCP 102.1 and AS 1289.5.8.1 .
CONFORMANCE TESTING STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 35 Conduct CBR moulding using a compaction hammer conforming with the requirements of AS 1289.5.1.1 or AS 1289.5.2.1 .
Where tests are required that are not included in the manual use the appropriate Australian Standard .
PANEL PERIOD CONTRACTORS 5.6 The Principal has in place Panel Period Contracts with NATA accredited testing companies .
The Superintendent will provide a list of the Panel Period Contractors to be used for conformance testing on this contract when the contract is awarded .
The Superintendent reserves the right to use other NATA accredited laboratories when panel contractors are unable to carry out specific tests .
ORDERING TESTING 5.7 When required , in accordance with the contract documents , order the conformance testing in writing directly from the Panel Period Contractors .
Order all testing using the Department ’ s Test Request Form .
Include on the order the following information : - Lot boundaries including start and finish chainages , length and width - Type of layer - Type of tests required - Date and time when lot will be ready for testing Start with the first Contractor on the list and rotate in sequence for each set of tests .
Do not bypass any Panel Period Contractor on the list unless that Panel Period Contractor provides a written explanation that he is unable to carry out the required testing to the time frames listed in the Table “ Testing and Reporting Completion Times ” .
In this instance , the written explanation must be provided to the Superintendent at the same time as the order for testing .
Panel Period Contractors that are unable to carry out the required testing will be placed at the end of the rotation sequence .
Conformance Testing 5.7.1 The Superintendent will pay for all conformance testing directly to the Panel Period Contractor selected to perform the conformance tests required under this contract and nominated as the Superintendent ’ s responsibility .
If any tests fail to meet specification , all retesting costs will be a negative variation to the contract .
Failures in bitumen tests refer to Superintendent .
When testing has been ordered and the site is not ready for testing at the time specified by the Contractor , the Contractor will bear the cost of time and travel incurred by the Panel Period Contractor and the Superintendent , where applicable .
Process Testing 5.7.2 The Contractor is responsible for the ordering up and payment for all process tests carried out .
NOTICE OF TESTING – WITNESS 5.8 POINT Give the Panel Period Contractor written notice in advance of each stage of the works requiring conformance testing , including re- testing .
Witness point - Provide the Superintendent with a copy of the order for testing simultaneously with the order being sent to the Panel Period Contractor .
Any communication with the Panel Period Contractors , other than the ordering of testing or inquiring on the timing of test results , must be forwarded through the Superintendent .
Provide the Superintendent with the results of process control testing as identified in the relevant ITP with all requests for conformance testing .
Witness point - Notify the Superintendent prior to any rework of failed lots .
TABLES - TEST FREQUENCIES , 5.9 COMPLIANCE TESTING Test frequencies as per tables ; Table 5.1 – Test Frequencies for Bitumen Spray Sealing Table 5.2 – Asphalt Testing Frequencies - During Works Table 5.3 – Asphalt Testing Frequencies – After Works Completion Table 5.4 – Number of Cores per Lot Table 5.5 - Test Frequencies For Soils – Part 1 of Table 5.6 - Test Frequencies For Soils – Part 2 of Table 5.6.2 - Test Frequencies For Soils - Part 3 of 3 Table 5.7 - Test Frequencies for Aggregates and Pavement Surfaces , Table 5.8 - Sampling Frequencies For Fresh Concrete and Table 5.9 - MMDD Curing Times CONFORMANCE TESTING STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 36 Table 5.1 – Test Frequencies for Bitumen Spray Sealing Test No .
Property Cutback Bitumen/ Emulsions Straight Run Binder Initial Seal on New Works Polymer Modified Bitumen Initial Seals on New Works Polymer Modified Bitumen Reseal Works AS/NZS 2341.2 or AS 2341.3 or AS 2341.4 Dynamic Viscosity ( 60ºC ) 1 per 15,000L 1 per 15,000L - - Dynamic Viscosity ( 135ºC ) - 1 per 15,000L - - AS 2341.12 Penetration ( 25ºC ) - 1 per 15,000L - - AG : PT/T121 Consistency ( 60ºC ) - - 1 per 15,000L 1 per 20,000L AG : PT/T121 Stiffness at 150C ( kPa ) - 1 per 15,000L 1 per 20,000L AG : PT/T111 Dynamic Viscosity ( 165ºC ) - - 1 per 15,000L 1 per 20,000L AG : PT/T122 Torsional Recovery at 25ºC , 30s ( % ) - - 1 per 15,000L 1 per 20,000L AG : PT/T131 Softening Point ( oC ) - 1 per 15,000L 1 per 15,000L 1 per 20,000L AS/NZS 2341.13 Durability of base binder 1 per project 1 per project AG : PT/T112 Flash Point ( oC ) min .
1 per project 1 per project 1 per project 1 per project AG : PT/T103 Loss on Heating ( % mass ) max .
1 per project 1 per project 1 per project 1 per project AG : PT/T124 Toughness at 4oC , 100mm ( Nm ) min .
1 per project 1 per project 1 per project 1 per project CONFORMANCE TESTING STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 37 Table 5.2 – Asphalt Testing Frequencies - During Works Test Method No .
Test Method Minimum Test Frequency Daily Production < 100 tonnes Daily Production > 100 tonnes - Mixing temperature Every mix Every mix - Laying temperature Every 30 minutes Every 30 minutes - Asphalt surface temperature at commencement of compaction Every Mix Every mix AS/NZS 2891.3 or WA730.1 Bitumen content 1 No .
1 per 100 t * AS/NZS 2891.3 or WA730.1 Particle size distribution 1 No .
1 per 100 t * AS/NZS 2891.5 Stability 1 No .
1 per 100 t * AS/NZS 2891.5 Flow 1 No .
1 per 100 t * AS/NZSSS2891.7.1 AS/NZSSS2891.7.3 Maximum Density 1 No .
1 per 100 t * AS 2341.3 Viscosity of Binder 1 per 5,000 L 1 per 10,000 L * One test per nominated tonnage or part thereof .
All sampling is to be performed at the plant from safe sampling platforms .
Binder sampling is to be conducted on the binder in actual use , either at transfer to the bitumen tank on the asphalt plant or from the tank itself .
Table 5.3 – Asphalt Testing Frequencies – After Works Completion Test Method No .
Test Method Frequency AS 2891 Thickness of layer 1 per core AS/NZS 2891.8 Air Voids of compacted asphalt layer 1 per core AS/NZS 2891.9 Insitu Density 1 per core AGPT/T231 Wheel track testing ( composite sample ) 1 per Type or 1 per 1000 t Carry out density testing as soon as practicable after completion of works .
Do not test within 200 mm of an edge and longitudinal joint and within 1 metre of a transverse joint .
Do not test odd shaped areas completed by hand placing of asphalt .
Conform to the following number of cores per lot : Table 5.4 – Number of Cores per Lot Area ( m2 ) > 5000 1000 – 5000 500 – 1000 50 – 500 < 50 No .
of Cores 1 per 1000m2 or minimum 10 1 per 500m2 or minimum 6 4 3 1 CONFORMANCE TESTING STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 38 Table 5.5 - Test Frequencies For Soils – Part 1 of 3 Type Of Test General Fill Standard Fill Select Fill/Sand Clay Fill Subgrade Sub-Base Basecourse Bridge Backfill Using Std .
Fill Bridge Backfill Using Select Fill Culvert Backfill Using Std.Fill Culvert Backfill Using Select Fill Field Density ( FDD ) by NTCP 102.1 and AS 1289.5.8.1 1 in 3,000 m2 ( min .
of 3 tests per lot ) 1 in 3,000 m2 ( min .
of 3 tests per lot ) 1 in 3,000m2 ( min .
of 3 tests per lot ) 1 in 1,000 m2 ( min .
of 3 tests per lot ) 1 in 1,000 m2 ( min .
of 3 tests per lot ) 1 in 1,000 m2 ( min .
of 3 tests per lot ) 3 tests per 100 m3 3 tests per 100 m3 3 tests per 10 m3 3 tests per 10 m3 Modified Compaction ( MMDD ) by AS 1289.5.2.1 1 per FDD 1 per FDD 1 per FDD 1 per FDD 1 per FDD 1 per FDD 1 per FDD 1 per FDD 1 per FDD 1 per FDD Particle Size Distribution by AS 1289.3.6.1 - - 1 per each 2,000 m3 - 1 in 5000 m2 ( min.of 1 test per lot ) 1 in 5000 m2 ( min.of 1 test per lot ) - 1 per 300 m3 - 1 per 300 m3 Plasticity Index by AS 1289.3.1.1 , AS 1289.3.2.1 , AS 1289.3.3.1 1 per each 2,000 m3 1 per each 2,000 m3 1 per each 2,000 m3 1 in 5,000 m2 ( min.of 1 test per lot ) 1 in 5000 m2 ( min.of 1 test per lot ) 1 in 5000 m2 ( min.of 1 test per lot ) 1 per each 300 m3 1 per each 300 m3 1 per each 300 m3 1 per each 300 m3 Linear Shrinkage by AS 1289.3.4.1 1 per each 2,000 m3 1 per each 2,000 m3 1 per each 2,000 m3 1 in 5,000 m2 ( min.of 1 test per lot ) 1 in 5000 m2 ( min.of 1 test per lot ) 1 in 5000 m2 ( min.of 1 test per lot ) 1 per each 300 m3 1 per each 300 m3 1 per each 300 m3 1 per each 300 m3 California Bearing Ratio by AS 1289.6.1.1 1 per each 2,000 m3 1 per each 2,000 m3 1 per each 2,000 m3 1 in 5 FDD ( min.1 of test per lot ) 1 in 5 FDD ( min.1 of test per lot ) 1 in 5 FDD ( min.1 of test per lot ) 1 per each 300 m3 1 per each 300 m3 1 per each 300 m3 1 per each 300 m3 * run = 1 pass of cement spreader ; FDD – Field Dry Density ; MMDD – Maximum Modified Dry Density CONFORMANCE TESTING STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 39 Table 5.6 - Test Frequencies For Soils – Part 2 of 3 Type Of Test Subgrade Sub-Base Basecourse Pavement Layer Thickness by NTTM 216.1 - 1 per FDD 1 per FDD Ball Embedment by NTTM 215.1 - - 1 in 5,000 m2 Pavement Degree of Saturation prior to Sealing by AS 1289 - - 1 in 5,000 m2 Stabiliser Spread Rate by NTTM 204.7 1 per run * 1 per run 1 per run Stabiliser Content by NTTM 204.1 1 per 1000m2 with a min .
of 3 tests 1 per 1000m2 with a min .
of 3 tests 1 per 1000m2 with a min .
of 3 tests Stabiliser Distribution by NTTM 204.8 1 per 1000m2 with a min .
of 3 tests 1 per 1000m2 with a min .
of 3 tests 1 per 1000m2 with a min .
of 3 tests Soluble Salt Content of Construct .
Water - - 1 per water source * run = 1 pass of cement spreader ; FDD – Field Dry Density ; MMDD – Maximum Modified Dry Density Table 5.6.2 - Test Frequencies for Soils - Part 3 of 3 Type of Test Unpaved areas ( including unpaved medians , batters , table drains and blocks ) Field Density ( FDD ) by NTCP 102.1 and AS 1289.5.8.1 1 for every 100 lineal metres or part thereof Modified Compaction ( MMDD ) by AS 1289.5.2.1 1 per each 3 FDD tests Plasticity Index by AS 1289.3.1.1 , AS 1289.3.2.1 , AS 1289.3.3.1 For Table Drain blocks only - 1 per each 3 blocks CONFORMANCE TESTING STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 40 Table 5.7 - Test Frequencies for Aggregates and Pavement Surfaces Type Of Test Aggregate Pavement Marking Pavement Surface Particle Size Distribution by AS 1141.11 1 in 250 t ( Minimum of 3 ) - - Los Angeles Abrasion Value by AS 1141.23 1 in 250 t - - Particle Shape by AS 1141.14 at 2:1 ratio 1 in 250 t - - Flakiness Index by AS 1141.15 1 in 250 t ( Minimum of 3 ) - - Average Least Dimension by AS 1141.20.1 , AS 1141.2 * 1 in 250 t ( Minimum of 3 ) - - Sulphate Soundness by AS 1141.24 1 in 1,000 t - - Percentage of Crushed Faces by AS 1141.18 1 in 250 t - - Polished Aggregate Friction Value by AS 1141.40 or AS 1141.41 - - 1 in 20,000 m2 Surface Texture Depth by NTTM 305.1 - - 1 in 5,000 m2 Skid Resistance by NTTM 304.1 - - As nominated by Superintendent Roughness - - As nominated by Superintendent Retroreflectivity of Pavement Marking by NTTM 404.1 & NTTM 404.3 - 1 per 1,000 lin .
m - Wear Assessment of Road Marking Paints – Image Analysis to AS 4049.3:2005 Appendix K , Method A Photographic Method - As nominated by Superintendent - * Take Average Least Dimension samples only from the stockpile on the project site .
Table 5.8 - Sampling Frequencies For Fresh Concrete Type of Test Frequency Number of samples Slump - AS 1012.3 Per truck Per truck as required Making , curing and compressive strength of concrete - AS 1012.8 and AS 1012.9 1 truck pour 1 set of cylinders * 2 truck pour 2 sets of cylinders * 3 - 5 truck pour 3 sets of cylinders * 6 - 10 truck pour 4 sets of cylinders * 11 + truck pour 4 sets of cylinders plus 1 additional set of cylinders per every additional 1 to 5 trucks after the first 10 trucks * * A set of cylinders consists of 3 cylinders unless directed otherwise .
CONFORMANCE TESTING STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 41 Table 5.9 - MMDD Curing Times Material Type Plasticity Index ( PI ) ( AS 1289.3 ) Field Moisture Content ( FMC ) Curing time – minimum Non plastic Sand PI < 2 Any 2 hours Non Plastic Gravels Absorbent stone PI < 2 FMC < 2 % MC , below OMC 6 hours Low Plasticity Gravel and Sands PI up to 10 FMC < 2 % MC , below OMC 6 hours Medium Plasticity Gravel and Sands PI 10 to 20 FMC < 1 % MC , below OMC 12 hours Heavy clays 20 + FMC < 2 % MC , below OMC 24 hours up to 7 days MC - Moisture Content ; FMC – Field Moisture Content ; OMC – Optimum Moisture Content ; MMDD – Maximum Modified Dry Density Irrespective of FMC all materials must be cured for a minimum of 2 hours , after preparation .
Check and report sub-base and basecourse thickness to nearest 5 mm at each modified compaction test sample site .
CONFORMANCE TESTING RESULTS 5.10 The Panel Period Contractor will provide interim and NATA endorsed test results to the Contractor within the following scheduled times ( in working days – Monday to Friday ) from the time of ordering the tests .
The interim test results will comprise of final , completed test results and are not preliminary estimates .
Interim test results may not be NATA endorsed .
For work in remote areas increase the testing and reporting completion times by a minimum of 2 days .
CONFORMANCE TESTING STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 42 Table 5.10 – Testing and Reporting Completion Times – Part 1 of 2 Attribute being tested Time Allowed for Interim Report in Working Days ( Monday to Friday ) Time Allowed for NATA Endorsed Report in Working Days ( Monday to Friday ) SOILS Field Density 3 5 Modified Compaction * * 3 5 Modified Compaction – Oversize * * 3 Pavement Layer Thickness 2 4 Particle Size Distribution 3 5 Plasticity Index ( Liquid Limit , Plastic Limit ) * * 3 Linear Shrinkage 3 Moisture Content 1 3 CBR – Soaked ( Completion time includes Modified Compaction ) * * 7 9 Cement Content of Stabilised Materials ( Heat of Neutralisation ) 3 5 Bitumen Content of Stabilised Materials 2 4 Stabiliser Spread Rate 1 3 Soluble Salt Content of Construction Water 2 4 Standard Ball Penetration Test 1 3 Unconfined Compressive Strength ( 7 Day result ) excluding compaction 8 10 AGGREGATE Specific Gravity 2 4 Particle Size Distribution 2 Particle Shape , by Proportional Calliper 2 Flakiness Index 2 Average Least Dimension ( Direct Measurement ) 2 Clay and Fine Silt ( Settling Method ) 2 Particle Density and Water Absorption of Fine Aggregate 3 5 Particle Density and Water Absorption of Coarse Aggregate 3 CONFORMANCE TESTING STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 43 Table 5.11 – Testing and Reporting Completion Times – Part 2 of 2 Attribute being tested Time Allowed for Interim Report in Working Days ( Monday to Friday ) Time Allowed for NATA Endorsed Report in Working Days ( Monday to Friday ) AGGREGATE ( cont ’ d ) Los Angeles Value 2 4 Pavement Surface Texture Depth 2 Crushed Particles 2 Sulphate Soundness 8 10 CONCRETE Consistency of Concrete – Slump Test 1 3 Making , Curing and Compressive Strength ( 28 day result ) * * * 29 31 Making , Curing and Compressive Strength ( 7 day result ) * * * 8 10 ASPHALT Bitumen Content and Aggregate Grading 3 5 Stability and Flow of Mix 3 Air Voids and Density Relationship 4 6 Density of Thin Lift Asphalt by Nuclear Gauge 2 4 Bulk Density of Asphalt 4 6 Kinematic Viscosity of Bitumen 3 5 BITUMEN Dynamic Viscosity ( 60ºC ) 1 3 * * Time for completion may be extended by each additional day required for the curing of materials and each additional overnight stay .
* * * From Date of Sampling .
Lot Testing 5.10.1 Conformance of compaction will be based on lots .
Give each lot a lot number .
Number the lots using a logical system .
Maintain a register of all lots and lot numbers .
Include the location of each lot on the lot register .
Provide a copy of the lot register to the Superintendent upon request .
Lots defined by the contractor must be clearly marked out on the construction site .
Lots of work will be selected by the Contractor , based upon : - A lot will represent no more than one shift 's production .
- A lot will be continuous and will have been brought to completion at the same time .
- A lot will be composed of essentially homogeneous material with no distinct changes in attribute values .
Each lot will be subject to conformance testing in accordance with NTCP 102.1 .
Defective sections will be excluded from the lot to be tested and identified as a separate lot , and will also be subjected to lot testing .
Quality of the lot will be judged as conformance or non-conformance of each lot .
This will be based on all tests conducted on the lot in accordance with NTCP 102.1 .
CONFORMANCE TESTING STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 44 Conformance of materials is based on samples from the finished works .
When lots fail to satisfy the conformance criteria , reprocess the entire lot and resubmit for retesting .
Should the lot under consideration be subdivided then each subdivision will be classed as a lot and each subdivided lot will be subject to lot testing .
Non-conforming lots which are subdivided after testing will be treated as separate lots and each and every subdivided lot will be retested .
Conformance of Compaction of Soils 5.10.2 Density test locations will be selected by the laboratory on a stratified random basis in accordance with NTCP 103.1 .
In situ density is expressed as a percentage of the Maximum Modified Dry Density .
One Modified Dry Density test for each in situ density test will apply .
In situ density will be determined and reported in accordance with NTCP 102.1 and relevant Australian Standards .
A minimum of three tests will apply to each and every lot .
The Mean Dry Density Ratio ( R ) is calculated as follows : n x R i = ∑ xi = an individual test result n = the number of results in the lot .
The Characteristic Mean Dry Density Ratio ( Rc ) is calculated as follows : s k R Rc ∗ − = where : R = the mean dry density ratio for the lot k = the multiplier in Table 5.13 – Multiplier Values for Soils .
s = the standard deviation .
The Standard Deviation ( s ) is calculated as follows : ( ) ( ) 1 2 − − = ∑ n R x s i where : xi = an individual test result R = the mean of n results N = the number of test results in the lot .
When less than six tests are used to determine conformance of a lot the Mean Dry Density Ratios in Table 5.12 – Dry Density Ratios for Conformance , Column A apply .
When six or more tests are used to determine conformance of a lot the Characteristic Mean Dry Density Ratios in Table 5.12 – Dry Density Ratios for Conformance , Column B , apply .
CONFORMANCE TESTING STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 45 Table 5.12 – Dry Density Ratios for Conformance Works Components A Mean Dry Density Ratio ( R ) % ( “ n ” is 3 to 5 ) B Characteristic Mean Dry Density Ratio ( Rc ) % ( “ n ” is 6 or greater ) Natural surface to subgrade , fill , batters , table drain blocks , fill for water course , unpaved areas 95.0 or greater 94.9 or less 95.0 or greater 94.9 or less Conformance Non-conformance Subgrade , shoulder sub-base , unsealed pavement base , shoulder base , select fill , levees , structures and culverts in fill , bridge foundation backfill , bridge abutment fill 95.0 or greater 94.9 or less 95.0 or greater 94.9 or less Conformance Non-conformance Sealed pavement basecourse 100.0 or greater 99.9 or less 99.0 or greater 98.9 or less Conformance Non-conformance Sealed pavement sub-base Stabilised basecourse 98.0 or greater 97.9 or less 97.0 or greater 96.9 or less Conformance Non-conformance Backfill all test excavations with the material and density ratio specified for that layer stabilised with at least 3 % cement ( by mass ) .
Table 5.13 – Multiplier Values for Soils Values of the Multiplier k for Characteristic Mean Dry Density Ratio ( Rc ) Number of tests per lot ( n ) k 6 0.50 7 0.54 8 0.56 9 0.59 10 0.61 15 0.68 20 0.72 CONFORMANCE TESTING STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 46 Conformance of Compaction for Asphalt 5.10.3 Relative compaction ( R ) is the percentage ratio of the insitu density of the compacted asphalt and the reference density of the asphalt for a particular lot .
The reference density will be the mean of the maximum density measurements determined from the asphalt testing for a particular lot .
The Characteristic Value of Relative Compaction ( Rc ) is calculated as follows : s k R Rc ∗ − = where : R = the mean density ratio for the lot k = the multiplier in Table 5.14 – Multiplier Values for Asphalt .
s = the standard deviation .
The Standard Deviation ( s ) is calculated as follows : ( ) ( ) 1 2 − − = ∑ n R x s i where : xi = an individual test result R = the mean of n results n = the number of test results in the lot .
Table 5.14 – Multiplier Values for Asphalt Values of the Multiplier k for Characteristic Mean Density Ratio ( Rc ) Number of tests per lot ( n ) k 5 or less 0.0 6 0.719 7 0.755 8 0.783 9 0.808 10 0.828 The work represented by a lot will be assessed as the characteristic value of insitu air voids where : Characteristic Value of Air Voids ( % ) = 100 – Rc Other Requirements 5.11 Refer to PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS in the RFT .
PAVEMENTS AND SHOULDERS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 47 6 .
PAVEMENTS AND SHOULDERS 6.1 STANDARDS Conform to the following Standards and Publication unless specified otherwise : AS 1141 Methods for sampling and testing aggregates .
AS 1289 Methods of testing soils for engineering purposes .
NTMTM NT Materials Testing Manual .
NTTM NT Test Methods 6.2 DEFINITIONS BASE ( BASE COURSE ) : That upper-most layer of constructed material immediately above the subgrade or sub-base and below the pavement surface ( sealed or unsealed ) extending for the full width of the pavement and shoulder .
IRI International Roughness Index .
PAVEMENT : That portion of a road constructed for the structural support of , and to form the running surface , for traffic .
The pavement structure refers to the pavement layers , in combination , above the subgrade surface , to support the traffic loadings .
May be sealed or unsealed .
Excludes the shoulders .
SHOULDER : That layer of material immediately above the sub-base or subgrade and adjacent to the pavement .
May be sealed or unsealed .
SUB-BASE : One or more layers of material placed over the subgrade and below the basecourse extending for the full width of the pavement and shoulder .
6.3 MATERIAL PROPERTIES 6.3.1 Natural Gravel Obtain natural gravel from sources of naturally occurring deposits .
Produce required properties by crushing , screening , mixing or other processes necessary .
Ensure particles are tough , durable and of a tightly binding nature free of organic or other deleterious materials .
Conform to Table 6.1 - Natural Gravel Particle Sizes and Table 6.2 - Natural Gravel Properties in the finished condition .
Table 6.1 - Natural Gravel Particle Sizes AS Sieve ( mm ) Percentage Passing Type 1 Type 2 Type 3 Type 4 75.0 100 - - 100 37.5 80-100 100 - 80-100 19.0 50-80 70-100 100 60-100 9.5 35-65 50-80 70-100 50-95 4.75 25-50 35-65 50-80 40-80 2.36 15-40 25-50 35-65 30-65 0.425 7-20 10-30 15-35 20-50 0.075 3-13 4-16 6-20 5-25 Refer to PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS in the RFT for requirements .
Generally Type 2 or Type 3 for Base ( Sealed/Unsealed ) , Type 1 , Type 2 , Type 3 or Type 4 for Sub-base , and Type 3 for Shoulder Material .
6.3.2 Fine Crushed Rock Manufacture from hard rock quarry operations by crushing clean , hard , durable rock free from natural gravel , clay , loam or other deleterious substances .
Conform to Table 6.3 – Fine Crushed Rock Particle Sizes and Table 6.4 – Fine Crushed Rock Properties in the finished condition .
Refer to PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS in the RFT PAVEMENTS AND SHOULDERS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 48 Table 6.2 - Natural Gravel Properties Attribute Application Northern Area - Sealed base Southern Area – Sealed Base * Unsealed Base And Shoulder Material Sub-Base Liquid Limit ( LL ) 25 % max 30 % 35 % max 30 % max Plasticity Index ( PI ) 1-6 % 1 - 10 % 4 – 12 % 1-10 % Linear Shrinkage ( LS ) 0-3 % 0 - 6 % 2 – 8 % 0-6 % PI x % passing 0.425 mm Sieve 180 max 300 max 400 max 400 max California Bearing Ratio ( CBR ) 4 day soaked ( AS 1289 ) 80 min 80 min 50 min 30 min at a relative density of 100 % MMDD 100 % MMDD 95 % MMDD 95 % MMDD ( Highest CBR value to be reported ) Los Angeles Abrasion ( LAA ) Loss 50 max 60 max 60 max 50 max * Note : Southern Area- Sealed Base * applies to south of a line connecting Birrindudu - Dunmarra - Wollogorang .
Table 6.4 – Fine Crushed Rock Properties Liquid Limit ( LL ) 25 % max .
Plasticity Index ( PI ) 1 - 6 % Linear Shrinkage ( LS ) 3 % max .
Dust Ratio ( DR ) ( % passing 0.075 mm ) / ( % passing 0.425 mm ) x 100 25 - 50 CBR , 4 day soaked at 100 % MMDD at 2.5 mm penetration ( AS 1289 ) 100 min .
Los Angeles Abrasion ( LAA ) Loss : coarse grained rock fine grained rock 35 % max .
25 % max .
PI x % passing 0.425 mm sieve 180 max .
6.3.3 Blends of Natural Gravel and Fine Crushed Rock Not permitted in urban areas for sealed pavements .
Conform to Table 6.1 - Natural Gravel Particle Sizes and Table 6.2 - Natural Gravel Properties in the finished condition .
Use for heavily trafficked situations and where material is available .
Refer to PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS in the RFT .
6.3.4 Sand Clay Comply with this clause when sand clay forms an integral part of the pavement and/or shoulder design .
Table 6.3 – Fine Crushed Rock Particle Sizes AS Sieve ( mm ) Percentage Passing 37.5 100 19.0 90 - 100 13.2 75 - 90 9.5 60 - 80 4.75 38 - 60 2.36 25 - 45 0.425 12 - 26 0.075 6 - 14 PAVEMENTS AND SHOULDERS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 49 Obtain Sand Clay from sources of naturally occurring deposits .
Produce required properties by screening , mixing or other processes necessary , to produce a material of a tightly bound nature , free of organic or other deleterious materials .
Conform to the following requirements in the finished condition : PARTICLE SIZE DISTRIBUTION Table 6.5 – Particle Size Distribution – Sand Clay AS Sieve ( mm ) Percentage Passing 4.75 80 - 100 2.36 60 - 100 0.425 30 - 60 0.075 14 - 28 PROPERTIES Table 6.6 – Sand Clay Properties Plasticity Index ( PI ) : 20 % maximum for sealed roads ; 15 % maximum for unsealed roads .
Linear Shrinkage ( LS ) : 1 % - 8 % .
CBR : 4 day soaked at 95 % MMDD to AS 1289 .
50 minimum 6.4 CONSTRUCTION 6.4.1 Process Control Testing – Hold Point Hold Point - Provide the Superintendent with a program and procedure for process control testing for the project within 14 days of the awarding of the contract and before work is commenced on site .
Base the process control testing on lots and comply with clause 5.10.2 Conformance of Compaction of Soils .
Include the following activities , as applicable : − Extraction Area ( Borrow Pit ) investigative sampling , on a grid basis − Extraction Area ( Borrow Pit ) confirmatory sampling , on a windrow/ stockpile basis − On-formation testing , on a lot basis .
Include the following elements of the work in the process control testing program as applicable ; − Fill − Sub-grade − Sub-base − Base course − Shoulders − Stabilisation Refer to PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS in the RFT .
Rework and retest failed lots a maximum of two times subsequent to an initial test failure .
Following a third test failure rip up , remove and replace the entire failed layer before carrying out any further testing .
Where relevant , provide additional process control testing procedures for concrete , bitumen and other elements subject to conformance testing by the Superintendent .
The Contractor is responsible for the ordering up and payment of all process testing costs .
Refer to the Conformance Testing clauses in MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT .
6.4.2 Production of Natural Gravel and Sand Clay Materials Extraction Area ( Borrow Pit ) Work extraction areas ( borrow pits ) to achieve conforming material .
Control depth of winning to avoid contamination of gravel by clay and other fine materials .
Use front-end loaders or dozers to win , push up and windrow materials .
Use of other plant requires approval from Superintendent .
Screen , blend and condition materials to achieve specified material property requirements .
6.4.3 On-formation Mixing and Placing Place material in uniform layers over subgrade surface or lower layers of the pavement .
Remove segregated and contaminated material from the site .
Remove deleterious materials , rocks , refuse and organic materials such as timber , branches , roots and the like by manual stick picking methods .
Do not place material on a previous layer that has : - become waterlogged or cracked ; and/or - otherwise deteriorated .
Mix the material uniformly throughout with water to achieve the specified conforming Dry Density Ratio .
Ensure water is clean and free from oil , alkali , organic or any other deleterious substances , and that the total soluble salts content is less than 3,000 mg/litre ( total dissolved salts ) .
Provide evidence of construction water salt content level .
6.4.4 Compaction Compact in uniform layers not less than 100 mm nor greater than 200 mm compacted thickness .
Achieve a homogeneous mass with no compaction planes .
Conform to the Dry Density Ratios specified in Table 5.12 – Dry Density Ratios for Conformance in CONFORMANCE TESTING .
6.4.5 Final Pavement Surface Final pavement layers must be in a homogeneous , uniformly bonded condition free from layering , cracking , disintegration or surface tearing .
The finished pavement layer must be dense , even textured and tightly bonded , free of laminations and roller indentations .
The pavement layer must retain these characteristics after rotary brooming and be suitable to receive bituminous surfacing .
PAVEMENTS AND SHOULDERS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 50 Allow the top 75 mm of the pavement layer to dry back to a Moisture Ratio ( Rm ) equal or less than 65 % for FCR and 70 % for natural gravel .
Moisture Ratio ( Rm ) is defined as follows : Rm = ( 100 x wf ) wr where : Rm = Moisture Ratio , in percent wf = field moisture content , in percent wr = adjusted optimum moisture content , in percent .
The Superintendent will carry out all testing to determine the Moisture Ratio .
Remove sticks and any loose material .
Ensure surface is free of cracking .
Do not introduce new material to the surface after final compaction .
Where pavement thickness is 200 mm or greater , scarify to not less than 100 mm depth and recompact where finish not achieved .
Where pavement thickness is less than 200 mm scarify and recompact to full depth where finish not achieved .
6.5 RECONSTRUCTION AND REHABILITATION OF EXISTING PAVEMENTS 6.5.1 Widening Saw cut back the existing pavement by not less than 150 mm width on each edge to sound material .
Excavate boxing for widening to the required depth below finished surface .
Construct subgrade as specified in EARTHWORKS .
Construct pavement and shoulder as specified .
6.5.2 Strengthening by Granular Overlay on Existing Pavement This clause is not applicable to pavements which are not sealed .
Saw cut across existing pavement at each end of work .
Cut shall be vertical and at least 100 mm deep to allow smooth transition to new work .
If sealed , remove seal from existing pavement .
Scarify local high spots to 75 mm below finished surface .
Construct a strengthening layer over the full width of the existing pavement and shoulder and the widening as specified .
6.5.3 Strengthening by Granular Overlay on Re-worked Existing Sealed Pavement This clause is not applicable to pavements which are not sealed .
Saw cut across existing pavement at each end of work .
Cut shall be vertical and at least 100 mm deep to allow smooth transition to new work .
Cut and/or add top-up gravel where required to achieve levels and gradelines .
Wet mix existing seal into existing base layer , with pulveriser-mixing plant , to nominal depth specified .
Moisture condition and compact re-worked existing pavement to the Dry Density Ratios specified in Table 5.12 – Dry Density Ratios for Conformance in CONFORMANCE TESTING for sub-base requirements .
Construct a new strengthening basecourse layer over the full width of the re-worked pavement and shoulder , and any widening , to thickness specified .
Moisture condition and compact pavement to the Dry Density Ratios specified in Table 5.12 – Dry Density Ratios for Conformance in CONFORMANCE TESTING for sealed base course requirements .
6.6 SUPPLY TO STOCKPILE Comply with the following stockpile requirements ; - Clear the site .
- Ensure the area is free draining .
- Spread and compact a 75 mm thick layer of sub-base gravel to 95 % relative compaction .
- Trim stockpile to a uniform shape for ease of measurement .
6.7 CONFORMANCE 6.7.1 Tolerances Refer MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS , 1.17 Level Checking and 1.18 Level Auditing .
Table 6.7 - Final Surfaces Tolerances Final surfaces shall conform to the following : Level : Kerbed or Asphalt : 0 mm to +10 mm .
Level : Otherwise : -20 mm to +20 mm .
Straight Edge Deviation : maximum 5 mm in 3 m. Compacted Thickness : not less than specified .
Width : not less than specified .
Sub-base Surface Level : not higher than specified .
Surface Roughness at 80 km/h : IRI 2.4 maximum .
6.7.2 Proof Rolling – Hold Point – Witness Point Proof roll all areas and obtain satisfactory results before ordering conformance testing of those areas .
Hold point - Submit a proof rolling procedure to the Superintendent for approval including the method of preparing an area and the extent of proof rolling .
PAVEMENTS AND SHOULDERS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 51 Witness point - Give the Superintendent not less than 24 hours notice of the location and commencement time for the proof rolling .
Plant Requirements ; use plant in proof rolling procedures that comply with the following requirements : - Static smooth wheeled rollers with a mass of not less than 12 tonnes and a load intensity under either the front or rear wheels of not less than 6 tonnes per metre width of wheel .
- Pneumatic tyred plant with a mass of not less than 20 tonnes and with a ground contact pressure under either the front or rear wheels of not less than 450 kPa per tyre and a ground contact area of not less than .035 m2 per tyre .
Check areas for level tolerance and layer thickness before proof rolling .
Proof roll each layer immediately following completion of compaction .
If proof rolling is carried out at a later time , water the surface and roll with the test roller prior to commencement of proof rolling .
Compliance ; the proof rolling requirements are deemed to comply when an area withstands proof rolling without visible deformation or springing .
Remedial work ; remove and reconstruct areas that deform or break up .
6.7.3 Conformance Testing – Hold Point Ordering procedures ; refer to the CONFORMANCE TESTING section for testing requirements and test ordering procedures .
Only the finished compacted base , sub-base and shoulder conforming to proof rolling , level tolerance and layer thickness will be tested .
Pavements and shoulders will be considered as separate lots .
Hold point – Obtain the Superintendent ’ s approval for pavement conformance prior to any surfacing work .
Backfill and compact all test holes with cement stabilised quality material which is the same as the layer being tested .
6.7.4 Ride Quality Surface Roughness ( IRI ) to be less than 2.4 .
Ride quality requirements represent an absolute upper limit and all field values to be less than value specified .
Lotting and averaging out of field values not permitted .
Rectify all areas where Surface Roughness exceeds specified level .
Exclusions are listed below in the Exclusions to specified roughness limits clause .
Surface roughness testing is to be carried out as directed by the Superintendent .
When lots fail to meet the conformance criteria , rejection of the lot or payment adjustments will be applied .
Refer to Table 23.3 - Rate of Payment Adjustments in MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT , Rate of Payment Adjustment clause .
6.7.5 Roughness testing sequence Data must be collected in the sequence shown in the table within 5 days of completion of testing of the relevant pavement layer .
Ensure that ; the pavement is free of loose material and debris when testing is done , for unbound granular bases , measurements must be undertaken prior to sweeping of the pavement , and free water is not present on the pavement when testing is undertaken .
Table - Testing sequence for pavement type Pavement type Testing sequence Spray seal on granular base Before application of spray seal and after completion of the final wearing surface .
Asphalt Overlays and Thin Shape correcting Surfaces ( thickness < 50 mm ) After all rehabilitation work is complete but before asphalt overlay has commenced .
Also required on final wearing course .
Asphalt pavement ( thickness 50 mm and over ) Prior to , and after , the application of the final wearing course .
6.7.6 Exclusions to specified roughness limits Unless specified otherwise in the PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS ( PSRs ) , the following areas are excluded from the requirement to achieve an IRI of less that 2.4 : - Roundabouts - Railway lines ( 35 m after the event ) - Bridge joints ( 35 m after the event ) - Intersections ( stop bar to stop bar ) - Inspection pit covers and related surface defects within the wheel paths ( 15 m including the event ) - Side streets specified in the PSRs deemed to affect pavement ride quality ( the width of the side street plus 30 m after the event ) - Surface defects related to existing culverts which are not part of the works under the Contract ( width of culvert plus 30 m after the event ) , and - Cattle grids .
6.8 OTHER REQUIREMENTS Refer to PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS in THE RFT .
STABILISATION STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 52 7 .
STABILISATION 7.1 STANDARDS Conform to the following Standards and Publication unless specified otherwise : AS 1141 Methods for sampling and testing aggregates .
AS 1160 Bitumen emulsions for construction and maintenance of pavements .
AS 1289 Method of testing soils for engineering purposes .
AS 1478.1 Chemical admixtures for use in concrete .
AS 1672.1 Limes and limestones - Limes for building .
AS 2157 Cutback bitumen .
AS 3972 Portland and blended cements .
NTMTM NT Materials Testing Manual .
NTTM NT Test Methods 7.2 DEFINITIONS OPTIMUM MOISTURE CONTENT : The amount of water by mass , expressed as a percentage of the dry mass of the material , at which maximum modified dry density is obtained with the stabiliser added .
7.3 MATERIALS 7.3.1 Stabiliser Lime : Calcium Hydroxide ( Hydrated Lime/Slaked Lime ) Ca ( OH ) 2 or Calcium Oxide ( Quicklime/Burnt Lime ) CaO conforming to AS 1672.1 .
Do not use dolomite limes ( CaMg ( CO3 ) 2 ) .
Do not use agricultural lime ( Calcium Carbonate CaCO3 ) .
Cement : Type GP or GB .
Supply and store stabilisers in a manner that protects against the weather and moisture .
7.3.2 Additives Follow manufacturer 's recommendations when using retarders and water reducing additives .
7.3.3 Water Ensure water is clean and free from oil , alkali , organic matter and other deleterious substances , and that the total soluble salts content is less than 3,000 mg/litre ( total dissolved salts ) .
For Southern Regions amend the maximum salt content as instructed by the Superintendent .
7.3.4 Curing Agent Surface applied curing membrane other than the use of water to be either : Bitumen emulsion ARS Grade 320. or Cut-back bitumen Class AMC 2 or AMC 3 .
7.3.5 Materials to be Stabilised Refer to PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS for details of materials to be stabilised .
7.4 IN SITU STABILISATION 7.4.1 Preliminary Trial Preliminary trial only for projects greater than 1000 m2 in treated area .
Locate trial section within the works area .
Carry out a preliminary trial of the proposed operation to determine : - effectiveness of mechanical plant ; - passes necessary to achieve the specified mixing ; - optimum curing time between preliminary and final mixing ( lime stabiliser only ) ; and - field moisture content and plant pattern to achieve final compaction .
- Carry out all necessary process control testing for this purpose .
Conform to Dry Density Ratios specified in Table 5.12 – Dry Density Ratios for Conformance in CONFORMANCE TESTING .
7.4.2 Preparation of Layer Scarify existing pavement sections and new material , where necessary , full depth before spreading .
Tyne the surface lightly when quicklime is used .
Compact lightly to reveal irregularities in the spread material and to permit the stabilising equipment to traverse the area without excessive displacement of the surface .
Shape and trim the surface to the alignment , levels and cross-sections necessary to produce the final levels and compacted thickness .
7.4.3 Commencement and Continuity of Work Complete full width stabilisation in one day .
Cease stabilising during the following conditions : - Wet weather or if rain is likely to fall .
- Windy periods which could cause loss of stabiliser , or dust nuisance .
STABILISATION STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 53 7.4.4 Spreading – Hold Point Select spread rate to achieve an unconfined compressive strength of 1.5 to 2.0 MPa .
Calibrate and check spread rate prior to commencement .
Adopt the following rate for tender purposes : Cement : 6 kg/m2 .
Hydrated Lime : 8 kg/m2 .
Hold point - Assess spread rate based upon test results of materials to be stabilised .
Obtain the Superintendent 's approval of the spread rate .
QUICKLIME Water the spread material sufficiently to allow full slaking .
Avoid overwatering .
LIME SLURRY Initial mixing in separate paddle mixer or similar .
Use mechanical sprayer with agitation to maintain a lime/water ratio within ±10 % of initial ratio .
Lime/water ratio : Generally between 1:2 ( i.e .
1 tonne per 2000 litres ) and 1:0.8 ( i.e .
1 tonne per 800 litres ) , measured by mass .
7.4.5 Mixing Use plant capable of : - mixing the stabiliser with the nominated material uniformly over the full depth to be stabilised ; and - adding water uniformly to the materials while mixing with application rate between 0 to 10 % ( by mass ) of the material being mixed .
Resultant mix to be uniform in colour and free of lenses , pockets or clumps of stabiliser .
Pulverise clayey material until at least 90 % passes 19 mm sieve .
Add water to the materials during mixing to achieve a moisture content suitable for compaction .
CEMENT STABILISATION Commence compaction and finishing immediately following satisfactory mixing .
LIME STABILISATION Shape the treated layer to the approximate section after satisfactory mixing and lightly compact .
Cure for a period of 24 to 72 hours .
Commence final mixing .
Add water during final mixing if necessary to achieve moisture content suitable for compaction .
Resultant mix to be uniform in colour and free of lenses , pockets or clumps of lime .
7.4.6 Compaction Compact parallel to the centre line of the pavement and for the full depth of the stabilised layer .
Commence compaction at the lower edge of the pavement and work progressively towards the crown or the higher edge .
Allow for progressive and uniform overlap between passes .
Wet the surface lightly after compaction to reduce moisture loss and lay the dust when necessary .
CEMENT STABILISATION Complete the compacting and finishing within two hours of adding water .
7.4.7 Finishing Final surface shall be smooth , dense , closely knit , free from compaction planes and cracks and finished to the tolerances specified .
Filling or addition of material to the surface of the pavement to meet tolerance requirements will not be permitted .
Maintain the surface material at not less than its specified optimum moisture content during all finishing operations .
Reconstruct non-complying areas at no cost to the Principal .
7.4.8 Construction Joints LONGITUDINAL JOINTS Minimise longitudinal joints by stabilising the full width of traffic lanes or wider as one continuous operation .
Joints to be straight or follow road curvature as appropriate .
TRANSVERSE JOINTS Form joints following any break in excess of two hours in the continuity of the stabilisation operations .
Cut the end of the material to a plane face at an angle not exceeding 45 degrees from the vertical .
Check the surface adjacent to the joint with a straight edge prior to recommencement and further cut back the joint as necessary to achieve surface tolerance .
7.4.9 Curing Keep the finished surface damp ( without leaching ) until further construction or curing operations are carried out .
Alternatively cure by applying a bitumen emulsion or a bitumen primer as specified .
Apply the bituminous curing membrane as soon as possible after mixing and compaction but no STABILISATION STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 54 later than 24 hours after relative compaction results are available .
Application rate for bitumen emulsions to be 0.3 to 0.45 litres per square metre .
Maintain clear of vehicular traffic for four days .
7.5 PLANT MIX STABILISATION 7.5.1 Stabiliser Content – Hold Point Refer to PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS in the RFT for cement content percentage rate to be used for tender purposes .
Hold point - Assess the cement content based upon test results of materials to be stabilised .
Obtain the Superintendent 's approval for the cement content .
7.5.2 Preliminary Trial For projects over 1000m2 in treated area .
Locate trial section within the works area .
Carry out a preliminary trial of the proposed operation to determine : - effectiveness of mechanical plant ; and - field moisture content and plant pattern to achieve final compaction .
Test stabilised material for conformance with Table 5.12 – Dry Density Ratios for Conformance in CONFORMANCE TESTING .
7.5.3 Commencement and Continuity of Work Complete full width stabilisation of pavement in one day .
Do not stabilise during wet weather or if rain is likely to fall .
7.5.4 Care of Existing Surface Avoid damage to existing surface on which the mix is placed .
Repair any damage .
7.5.5 Mixing Mixing plant to be capable of maintaining the mix proportions .
Add cement and water to material to be stabilised and mix for a minimum period of 30 seconds .
Material to be uniform and without segregation .
BATCH MIXER Scales used for weighing cement for batching plants will be used solely for that purpose .
Proportion the dry materials by mass .
CONTINUOUS MIXER Proportion the dry materials by volume .
Use a continuous feeder which allows feed rate of different aggregate sizes to be adjusted separately .
7.5.6 Delivery Minimise segregation during loading and unloading and discharge directly into the hoppers of paving machines without spillage .
Provide open trucks with tarpaulins .
7.5.7 Laying PAVING MACHINE Deposit and spread the pavement material in one operation using self-propelled mechanical tamper-spreader .
Lay material uniformly without segregation to produce a uniform surface texture and required thickness .
GRADER LAYING To be used on minor work only .
Spread the material in one layer not less than 75 mm nor more than 200 mm compacted thickness .
7.5.8 Compaction , Finishing , Construction Joints and Curing Conform to the requirements specified for in situ stabilisation .
7.6 CONFORMANCE 7.6.1 Tolerances For stabilised layers conform to the tolerances specified in the PAVEMENTS AND SHOULDERS section and with Table 7.1 – Stabilised Layers Conformance : 7.6.2 Testing – Hold Point STABILISER APPLICATION RATE The Contractor shall be responsible for checking the application rate .
Determine the stabiliser application rate in accordance with NTTM 204.7 .
STABILISATION STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 55 Table 7.1 – Stabilised Layers Conformance Dry Density Ratio : Refer Table 5.12 – Dry Density Ratios for Conformance IN THE CONFORMANCE TESTING Section .
Stabiliser Application Rate/Content ±10 % of the designated value averaged for each lot Stabiliser Distribution : [ i ] Stabiliser content shall not vary by more than 0.5 % absolute between top and bottom half of a layer at any location as determined in accordance with NTTM 204.8 .
[ ii ] Stabiliser content shall not vary by more than ±0.5 % from the designated value in any point .
Moisture Content during Compaction : [ i ] [ ii ] ±1.5 % of moisture content determined at preliminary trial .
±1.5 % of optimum moisture content .
[ i ] apply if a preliminary trial is carried out ( i.e .
total area over 1000m2 ) [ ii ] apply if a preliminary trial is not carried out ( i.e .
areas under 1000m2 ) Take samples for Liquid Limit , Plastic Limit , Linear Shrinkage , California Bearing Ratio from the unstabilised pavements .
Refer to CONFORMANCE TESTING for Test Frequencies .
Correct application deficiencies by the application of additional stabiliser and remixing if mixing has already commenced .
STABILISER CONTENT The Superintendent will carry out conformance testing .
COMPACTION The Superintendent will carry out conformance testing .
Check areas for level tolerance and layer thickness before testing .
Only the finished compacted pavement complying with level tolerance and layer thickness will be tested .
Dry Density Ratios will be determined 24 hours after final compaction .
Backfill test holes within 24 hours of testing with new stabilised material .
Hold point - Superintendent to approve conformance of stabilised layer prior to priming .
7.6.3 Rideability Surface roughness testing will be carried out by the Superintendent at the discretion of the Superintendent .
7.7 OTHER REQUIREMENTS Refer to PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS in the RFT .
SPRAY SEALING STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 56 8 .
SPRAY SEALING 8.1 STANDARDS Conform to the following Standards and Publications unless specified otherwise : AS 1141 Methods for sampling and testing aggregates AS 1141.14 - Particle shape , by proportional caliper AS 1141.15 - Flakiness index AS 1141.18 - Crushed particles in coarse aggregate derived from gravel AS 1141.20.1 - Average least dimension – Direct measurement ( nominal size 10 mm and greater ) AS 1141.20.2 - Average least dimension – Direct measurement ( nominal sizes 5 mm and 7mm ) AS 1141.23 - Los Angeles value AS 1141.24 - Aggregate soundness – Evaluation by exposure to sodium sulphate solution AS 1141.25.1 - Degradation factor – Source rock AS 1141.26 - Secondary minerals content in igneous rocks AS 1141.29 - Accelerated soundness index by reflux AS 1141.40 - Polished aggregate friction value – Vertical road wheel machine AS 1141.41 - Polished aggregate friction value – Horizontal bed machine AS 1141.50 - Resistance to stripping of cover aggregates from binders AS 1160 Bituminous emulsions for the construction and maintenance of pavements AS 1742.3 Manual of uniform traffic control devices – Traffic control for works on roads AS 1906.3 Retroreflective materials and devices for road traffic control purposes – Raised pavement markers AS 2008 Residual bitumen for pavements AS 2106.2 Methods for the determination of the flash point of flammable liquids ( closed cup ) - Penksy Martens closed cup method AS 2157 Cutback bitumen AS 2341 ( set ) Methods of testing bitumen and related roadmaking products AS 2341.6 - Determination of density using a hydrometer AS 2341.9 - Determination of water content ( Dean and Stark ) AS/NZS 2341.13 - Long-term exposure to heat and air AS 2758.2 Aggregates and rock for engineering purposes - Aggregate for sprayed bituminous surfacing AS 2809.5 Road tank vehicles for dangerous goods - Tankers for bitumen based products AS 3568 Oils for reducing the viscosity of residual bitumen for pavements AS 3706 Geotextiles – Methods of Test AS 3706.1 - General requirements , sampling , conditioning , basic physical properties and statistical analysis AS 3706.2 - Determination of tensile properties – Wide strip and grab method AS 3706.3 - Determination of tearing strength – Trapezoidal method NORTHERN TERRITORY TEST METHODS NTTM 215.1 Standard bell penetration test NTTM 304.1 Determination of skid resistance with the portable skid tester AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR TESTING AND MATERIALS ASTM D86 Standard Test Method for Distillation of Petroleum Products at Atmospheric Pressure ASTM D445 Standard Test Method for Kinematic Viscosity of Transparent and Opaque Liquids ( and Calculation of Dynamic Viscosity ) ASTM D1298 Standard Test Method for Kinematic Viscosity of Transparent and Opaque Liquids ( and Calculation of Dynamic Viscosity ) AUSTROADS AGPT04H-08 Austroads Guide to Pavement Technology – Part 4H : Test Methods AGPT04K-09 Guide to Pavement Technology – Part 4K : Seals AGPT/T103 Pre-treatment and Loss on Heating of Bitumen Multigrade and polymer Binders ( rolling thin film oven [ RTFO ] test ) AGPT/T108 Segregation of Polymer Modified Binders AGPT/T109 Ease of Remixing of Polymer Modified Binders AGPT/T111 Handling Viscosity of Polymer Modified Binders ( Brookfield Thermosel ) AGPT/T112 Flash Point of Polymer Modified Binders SPRAY SEALING STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 57 AGPT/T121 Shear Properties of Polymer Modified Binders ( ARRB ELASTOMETER ) AGPT/T122 Torsional Recovery of Polymer Modified Binders AGPT/T131 Softening Point of Polymer Modified Binders AGPT/T132 Compressive Limit of Polymer Modified Binders AGPT/T142 Rubber content of digested crumb rubber binders - Trichlor bath method AGPT/T190 Specification Framework for Polymer Modified Binders and Multigrade Bitumens AP-C87-15 Austroads Glossary of Terms AP-G41-08 Bituminous Materials Sealing Safety Guide AP-T68/06 Update of the Austroads Sprayed Seal Design Method AP-T235-13 Guide to the Selection and Use of Polymer Modified Binders and Multigrade Bitumens AP-T236-13 Update of Double/Double Design for Austroads Sprayed Seal Design Methods NT Weeds Management Act 8.2 DEFINITIONS Reference should be made to AUSTROADS – AP-C87-15 Austroads Glossary of Terms to give definitions on all aspects of Bituminous Surfacing works where required .
ADHESION AGENT : A substance used for the purpose of promoting the adhesion between binder and aggregate .
ASTM American Society For Testing And Materials COARSE GRAINED AGGREGATE : Where the average grain size of the constituent minerals is greater than 1mm .
The average grain size is determined optically under a petrographic microscope or by calibrated hand lens .
CUTTER ( Kerosene ) : A light petroleum distillate added to bitumen to temporarily reduce its viscosity .
DEPARTMENT , THE / DIPL Department of Infrastructure , Planning and Logistics .
FINE GRAINED AGGREGATE : Where the average grain size of the constituent minerals is less than 1mm .
The average grain size is determined optically under a petrographic microscope or by calibrated hand lens .
FLUX OIL : A petroleum distillate added to bitumen to produce a long term reduction in its viscosity .
NATA National Association of Testing Authorities NTCP Northern Territory Code of Practice NTMTM NT Materials Testing Manual – available at https : //infrastructure.nt.gov.au/technical- information/materials-testing-manual NTTM NT Test Method PMB Polymer Modified Binder PRECOATING MATERIAL : A material used for pre-coating aggregate to promote adhesion of bitumen .
Do not use Diesel .
PRIME : An application of a Primer to a prepared base without cover aggregate to provide penetration of the surface temporary waterproofing and to obtain a bond between the pavement and the subsequent seal or asphalt .
It is a preliminary treatment to a more permanent bituminous surface .
No Diesel products .
PRIMERSEAL : An application of primer binder with a fine cover aggregate to a prepared base to provide penetration of the surface and retain a light cover aggregate .
RESEAL : A seal applied to an existing sealed , asphalt or concrete surface .
SAMI : Strain Alleviating Membrane Interlayer SEAL : A sprayed application of bituminous binder into which aggregate is incorporated .
May include more than one application of binder and aggregate , and may include geotextile fabric .
8.3 SCOPE Spray sealing treatments include : Prime Primerseal Enrichments Initial Seal or Reseal : - With conventional bitumen , cutback bitumen or bitumen emulsion binder - With modified binder - Incorporating geotextile fabric reinforcement .
Spray sealing work consists of : - Supply and delivery of materials .
- Storage and handling of raw materials .
- Precoating of aggregate .
- Preparation of pavement surfaces .
- Preparation of bituminous materials .
- Recording of spray sealing works .
SPRAY SEALING STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 58 - Sampling of Bituminous Products .
- Application of primer and/or primerbinder and/or binder .
- Spreading and rolling of aggregate .
- Removal of loose aggregate .
- Traffic Control .
- Installation of temporary pavement markers .
- Installation and retrieval of after-care signage .
- Traceability of works and materials .
8.4 MATERIAL REQUIREMENTS 8.4.1 Aggregates Aggregates must be clean , hard , durable , skid resistant , dry crushed stone , or gravel of uniform quality free from noxious weeds and other deleterious material , and conform with the properties specified .
Minimum two crushed faces .
Nominate source of aggregate supply .
Submit to the Superintendent current NATA endorsed test result certificates providing evidence that the nominated aggregate supply conforms to specified properties .
Aggregate used for testing must be sampled from project site .
Conform to Table 8.7 – Aggregate Grading and Average Least Dimension ( ALD ) , and to Table 8.8 – Aggregate Properties .
Refer to Clause 8.21 for Tables 8.4.2 Supply of Aggregate Supply and stockpile aggregate if a requirement to do so is shown in PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS in the RFT .
8.4.3 Cutter Cutter is to be Kerosene or Jet A1 Aviation Turbine Fuel – conform to Table 8.1 - Cutter Oil Properties .
8.4.4 Precoat and Adhesion Agents Adhesion Agents are to be in the concentrated form and not contain Diesel as part of the mixture .
Precoat all aggregates to conform to the following : Precoat mixture is to be 100/0/100/1 and not contain Diesel as part of the mixture .
Bitumen residue ( by mass ) : 50 % .
Kerosene ( by Mass ) 50 % Adhesion agent ( by mass ) : minimum 1 % 8.4.5 Bitumen Standard Classes of bitumen to conform to the requirements of AS 2008 .
Manufacture all AS 2008 bitumens in a refinery and have NATA endorsed certificates of manufacture .
Durability Value in accordance with AS/NZS 2341.13 is to be a minimum of 7 days with no maximum value .
Multigrade bitumen to comply with AGPT/T190 .
8.4.6 Cut Back Bitumen Conform to the requirements of AS 2157 and Table 8.2 - Cut Back Bitumen Properties .
Designation is by AMC class .
8.4.7 Bitumen Emulsion Refer to PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS in the RFT for details of type of emulsion to be used .
Table 8.1 - Cutter Oil Properties Refer to AS 3568:1999 , Table 1 for complete specification requirements .
Property Min .
Max Test Method Density at 15 oC , km/m3 775 830 ASTM D1298 AS 2341.6 Distillation Initial Boiling Point oC 140 - ASTM D86 Distillation Final Boiling Point oC - 280 ASTM D86 Flash Point oC ( Penksy -Martens closed cup ) 38 - AS 2106.2 Water content , % by volume - 0.1 AS 2341.9 Viscosity , mPa.s at 40 oC - 2.0 ASTM D445 Table 8.2 - Cut Back Bitumen Properties Class ( AS 2157 ) Viscosity ( Dynamic ) at 60°C ( Pa.s ) Approx .
Parts Bitumen To Cutter Spraying Temp .
( °C ) Light AMC 00 0.008 - 0.016 100 - 100 Ambient AMC 0 0.025 - 0.05 100 - 80 35 - 55 Medium AMC 2 0.22 - 0.44 100 - 40 75 - 100 AMC 3 0.55 - 1.10 100 - 30 95 - 115 AMC 4 2.0 - 4.0 100 - 20 110 - 135 Heavy AMC 5 5.5 - 11.0 100 - 12 120 - 150 AMC 6 13.0 - 26.0 100 - 7 135 - 160 AMC 7 43.0 - 86.0 100 - 3 150 - 175 SPRAY SEALING STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 59 Conform to the requirements of AS 1160 .
Utilise within 90 days of manufacture .
Spraying temperature : 60 % bitumen content 30 to 60 °C .
8.4.8 Polymer Modified Binder A mixture of Standard Class bitumen and elastomeric polymer or crumb rubber additive .
All conformance testing to be carried out in accordance with Austroads and Australian Standard Test Methods .
Base binders for the production of PMB must meet the specification limits outlined in Table 8.9 – Base Binder for Polymer Modified Bitumen , from the refinery .
All base binders must be process tested for conformance to ensure compliance before manufacture into PMB ’ s .
Polymer Modified Binders must conform to the requirements outlined in Table 8.10 – Polymer Modified Binders for Sprayed Sealing Applications .
Manufacture of Polymer Modified Binders must meet the requirements of the Guide to the Manufacture , Storage and Handling of Polymer Modified Binders , Australian Asphalt Pavement Association , 2013 .
Refer to Clause 8.21 for Tables 8.4.9 Geofabric Use non-woven , polyester , isotropic , needle punched fabric for geotextile reinforced seals .
Conform to Table 8.3 – Geofabric Properties .
Supply certificate of compliance with the respective AE Lot data .
Include Traceability of Batch Numbers with the respective AE Lot data .
8.5 SPRAYERS AND PERSONNEL Sprayers must have current calibration accredited by a tester nominated on the Australian Asphalt Pavement Association ( AAPA ) website .
All calibrated sprayers must be listed on the AAPA website .
A copy of the calibration certificate must be with the vehicle at all times .
Calibrate sprayers yearly .
Ensure sprayer driver and operator are skilled and trained with an understanding of sprayer calibration and an appreciation of the requirements of the work .
Ensure relevant personnel understand the types and quantities of the various materials and mixtures to be used .
Bitumen Spraying plant and equipment must be in good working condition at all times .
Table 8.3 – Geofabric Properties Property Test Method Units Value Mass per unit area AS 3706.1 g/m2 140 min Wide strip tensile strength in both directions .
AS 3706.2 kN/m 8.0 min Elongation range in both directions .
AS3706.2 % 40 – 60 5 % Secant modulus in both directions .
AS3706.2 kN/m 5.0 min Trapezoidal tear strength in both directions .
AS3706.3 N 240 min Melt temperature - °C 250 min Supply certificate of compliance with the respective AE Lot data .
Include Traceability of Batch Numbers with the respective AE Lot data .
8.6 PREPARATION OF PAVEMENT Remove raised reflective pavement markers .
Repair any damage to the pavement surface caused by the removal of raised reflective markers with an emulsion/sand mixture before sealing .
Remove deleterious materials , rocks , refuse and organic materials such as timber , branches , roots and the like by manual stick picking methods .
Sweep the entire pavement surface to remove loose stones , dust , dirt and foreign matter immediately before spraying .
Do not use steel brooms on Fine Crushed Rock type or low plasticity type materials or on airstrips .
Maintain the prepared surface .
Remove adherent patches of foreign material with a steel scraper .
Dampen the prepared surface lightly immediately before spraying ( for priming and primersealing only ) .
Remove water from the surface of primed or sealed pavements before applying binder .
Do not allow traffic on the prepared surface .
SPRAY SEALING STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 60 8.7 SETTING OUT New works to be set out by a qualified surveyor .
Include pavement widening .
Resealing works to follow existing seal .
8.8 BINDER COAT REQUIREMENTS 8.8.1 General Rectify bleeding or flushing seals during the defined defects period at your own cost .
References Austroads Technical Report AP-T68/06 – Update of the Austroads Spray Seal Design Method Austroads - Guide to the Selection and Use of Polymer Modified Binders and Multigrades – AP-T235-13 ( 2013 ) Standard Specification for Roadworks , Spray Sealing ( Department of Infrastructure ) AS2008 - Bitumen for Pavements ( 2013 ) Table 8.4 - Binder type requirements PRIMING AND PRIMER SEALING Region Binder Type All Class C240/C320 Applied in cutback form TACK COAT AND ENRICHMENT Region Binder Type All CRS170/60 Applied in emulsion form INITIAL SEAL WORK Region Binder Type Darwin , Katherine , East Arnhem Tennant Creek , Alice Springs S10E RESEALING WORK Region Binder Type All S10E SAMI WORK ( Using 14mm aggregate ) Region Binder Type All S25E Definitions S10E – A class of polymer modified bitumen , used for spray seal work , with an elastomeric modifier , conforming to specified binder properties in the Standard Specification for Roadworks It must be manufactured from bitumen that conforms to the classes in AS 2008 .
SAMI – Strain Alleviating Membrane Interlayer .
A layer of seal sprayed onto an existing cracked surface , prior to asphalt resurfacing .
Requirements Selection of binder type other than those specified above can be considered in special circumstances and to the approval of the Executive Director Civil Construction ( Chief Engineer ) Civil Services .
For example , resealing a heavily cracked surface may require a S20E or S25E binder type or crumb rubber S45R .
Material properties for S10E binders and other binder types are contained in the Standard Specification for Roadworks , Spray Seal section .
For further guidance refer to Austroads - Guide to the Selection and Use of Polymer Modified Binders and Multigrades ( TT1357 2012 ) Heat to spraying temperature , generally between 180°C and 200°C , but do not exceed the maximum .
Avoid heating bitumen in quantities excess to requirements Prevent foaming .
Ensure product meets the requirements of the specification at point of delivery .
8.8.2 Prime , primer seals and enrichment coats Provide bitumen complying with Table 8.9 – Base Binder for Polymer Modified Bitumen .
Refer to Clause 8.21 for Tables Refer to PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS in the RFT for cut back requirements .
Cut-back bitumen mixed on site : Heat bitumen to a temperature appropriate for achieving final spraying temperature making allowance for incorporation of the unheated cutter .
Add unheated cutter to heated bitumen and circulate until a homogeneous mixture is achieved .
Spray immediately circulation is complete .
Allow at least three days to elapse after priming before applying the binder coat .
Keep traffic off the primed surface for this period .
Use a primer seal if traffic can not be kept off surface for 3 days .
8.8.3 Straight Run Binder Coats Do not use Straight Run Binder Coats unless you have prior approval from the Executive Director Civil Construction ( Chief Engineer ) .
Provide bitumen Class 320 complying to AS 2008 Ensure product meets the requirements of the specification at point of delivery .
SPRAY SEALING STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 61 8.8.4 Polymer Modified Binder Coats Provide bitumen in conformance with Table 8.9 – Base Binder for Polymer Modified Bitumen blended with the required polymer as follows : Prepare the product in a manufacturing or blending plant that complies with the Guide to the Manufacture , Storage and Handling of Polymer Modified Binders , Australian Asphalt Pavement Association , 2013 .
Refer to Clause 8.21 for Tables Refer to PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS in the RFT for Initial seal coat Class and Reseal coat Class .
Ensure product meets the requirements of the specification at point of delivery .
Store , mix , heat and spray the polymer modified binder as recommended by the polymer manufacturer .
Both coats of two coat seals shall contain polymer .
− Initial seal coat : Class S10E − Reseal coat : Class S10E 8.8.5 Binder Coats , Tender Quantities Refer to PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS in the RFT for spray rates used as a basis for calculating tender quantities .
8.9 SAMPLING OF BINDER 8.9.1 Test Request Darwin Urban areas – Test requests are to be sent to the panel period contractor to witness sampling and arrange testing .
All other areas - the supplier is to sample and deliver the sample to Departmental staff within 48 hours .
8.9.2 Supply of Sampling Containers Supply all sampling containers as required for sampling purposes .
- Sample containers are to be leak proof and having a capacity of not less than one litre .
- Sample containers must be clean , rust free and capable of receiving a product at high temperatures .
8.9.3 Definition of Sampling - A sample is three containers of product collected at the same time from the same supply source .
- One sample container is for the Contractor ’ s analysis .
- Two sample containers are for the Department to analyse .
Note : Refer to the Superintendent for requirements if samples are non- conforming 8.9.4 Frequency of Samples Refer to CONFORMANCE TESTING .
8.9.5 Collection of Samples – WITNESS POINT Take samples prior to addition of adhesion agents .
Conformance test sampling is to be collected at point of delivery .
Ensure bulkers and road tankers have adequate sampling cocks installed so as samples can be taken on transfer from the bulker to the sprayer .
Do not take bituminous samples from the spray wagon , except for prime samples .
Witness Point – Take samples from the point of delivery on transfer from the bulker to the sprayer or as directed .
Where transfer is for works in the urban area or for small works ensure that conformance testing is ordered and samples are taken at the point of transfer from bulker to sprayer .
All sampling must be in accordance with Australian or Austroads standards .
The supplier is to perform the sampling .
Ensure staff carrying out sampling are competent in sampling methods .
Ensure sampling techniques do not allow contamination of the samples .
Where samples are not collected , 10 % reduction adjustments ( Table 23.1 – Payment Adjustments in MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT ) will apply to the total materials represented .
8.9.6 Sample Identification Samples must be clearly identified with permanent marker on adhesive labels on each tin .
Mark samples with the following information on the container at the time of collection .
- Container number .
- Sample number .
- Date and time of sample taken .
- Designation or Classification of Materials .
- Sample Temperature .
- Tanker/Sprayer Identification Number .
- Name of Supplier .
- Road Name and number .
- Site Identification .
- Location and Chainage .
Reseals - Maintain an electronic register of all samples which includes the information listed above .
Provide a copy of this register to the Superintendent on request .
8.9.7 Storage and Delivery of Samples Store all samples taken to prevent accidental damage or contamination .
Submit sample containers at the completion of each days spraying .
SPRAY SEALING STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 62 8.10 STOCKPILE SITES 8.10.1 Stockpiles of materials Stockpiles in urban areas are not permitted .
Urban areas for Darwin region is nominated as – North of Cox Peninsula Road ( Stuart Highway ) , West of Trippe Road ( Arnhem Highway ) and the end of seal on Gunn Point Road .
Other urban areas are nominated as being within , and extending to , town boundaries .
Existing stockpile sites – clean to suit .
Provide a separate site for each aggregate size .
Allow 15 metres between adjacent sites .
Ensure sites are well drained and on hard ground .
Avoid contamination by dust .
Maintain access roads and stockpile sites .
Do not allow stockpiled aggregates to become wet due to rain .
Cover all stockpiles with sheet plastic or similar material .
Avoid sites under trees , telephone lines , overhead transmission lines or where overhead clearance is less than 6 metres .
Clear all vegetation within the existing stockpile boundary only .
Remove from site any non-conforming aggregate .
For work in or close to regional centres , towns and urban areas ( 50 km ) , remove all unused aggregate from stockpile sites at conclusion of work .
For rural work , prepare unused aggregate into one neat and tidy stockpile , per aggregate size .
Aggregate remaining in stockpiled areas becomes property of the Northern Territory Government at Practical Completion stage .
Neatly stockpile all waste materials from the screening process .
8.11 PRECOATING AGGREGATE All aggregates used must be dry before precoating .
No precoat is required for SAMI and Emulsion seals , unless stated in the response schedules .
Apply a uniform film of precoating material to the all aggregate used for sealing purposes .
Aggregate which has been excessively precoated will be rejected .
Precoating is to take place at pre-approved site stockpile locations unless otherwise approved by the Superintendent .
All precoating must be performed with a powered shaking screen deck precoater , which removes dust , dirt and oversize materials and evenly applies precoat to the aggregate .
8.12 ADHESION AGENT Adhesion agent must be used .
Do not use diesel based adhesion agents .
Use 1 % adhesion agent in the binder .
Written Superintendent approval must be obtained for variation of this rate .
Circulate in binder for 20 minutes before spraying .
Provide the Superintendent a copy of the Safety Data Sheet information of the adhesion agent prior to its intended use .
8.13 SPRAYING – WITNESS POINT Witness Point - Give the Superintendent 48 hours notice of intention to spray bitumen .
Store bitumen at lowest practical temperature and for the shortest possible duration .
Comply with Table 8.5 – Temperature Control Requirements for Polymer Modified Binders .
Seek approval to vary these requirements .
Remove bitumen from the site when temperature limits are exceeded .
8.13.1 Atmospheric Conditions Commence spraying only when pavement temperature - is in excess of 20 °C , or - has been in excess of 15 °C for at least one hour .
For cutback work , commence spraying when pavement temperature is in excess of 10 °C .
For emulsion work , commence spraying when pavement temperature is in excess of 5 °C .
Cease spraying if rain threatens , or in windy or dusty conditions .
Table 8.5 – Temperature Control Requirements for Polymer Modified Binders Property Straight Run Binder Polymer Modified Binder Temperature at point of spraying 175 to 185 °C 180 to 200 °C Holding time at spraying temperature 7 days max , 2 days max .
Temperature for medium term storage 130 to 150 °C 140 to 160 °C Holding time for medium term storage 30 days 7 to 10 days SPRAY SEALING STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 63 Protect the work in the event of a sudden change in weather by closing the affected section of road or by rigidly controlling traffic speed .
8.13.2 Preparing the Sprayer Circulate the mixture .
Check the horizontal and vertical alignment and the cleanliness of the spraybar and its extensions .
Determine the appropriate number of nozzles for the width to be sprayed .
Ensure the end nozzles fitted are EAN18W .
Check that the nozzles in use are symmetrical about the sprayer .
Check the alignment and setting of the nozzle to ensure that the fans of material from intermediate nozzles are parallel and at an angle of 30 deg .
to the centre line of the spraybar .
Ensure that the fans from the end nozzles are parallel to each other and at an angle of 45 degrees to the centre line of the spraybar .
Set the height of the spraybar so that the lower faces of the nozzles are 250 mm ( or that specified on the calibration certificate ) above the pavement when the sprayer is full .
Fit an end shield to the spraybar when necessary to prevent spraying material on the kerb , or to counter any wind effects which would compromise uniform spraying .
Position the guide rod to conform to the setting out and edges of spray .
Check by making a dummy run .
8.13.3 Application Spray Rates – Hold Point Application spray rates shall be determined by the Superintendent , using appropriate Austroads design methods .
For new seals and reseals , supply the following to the Superintendent , 3 working days prior to the planned commencement of sealing , to allow the spray rates to be calculated : - Particle Size Distribution ( 1 per 250 tonne - minimum 3 tests ) - Average Least Dimension ( ALD ) ( 1 per 250 tonne - minimum 3 tests ) - Flakiness Index ( FI ) of the aggregate , ( 1 per 250 tonne - minimum 3 tests ) - Ball Penetration testing ( for new seal work ) - Dryback results ( for new seal work ) Refer to Conformance Testing for sampling requirements of aggregates .
Hold Point – Do not commence spraying until the spray rates are advised by the Superintendent .
Spray rates to be at 15°C adjusted in accordance with Table 23.2 – Bitumen Equivalent Volumes .
For primers , primer seals and polymer modified binders , the rate of application refers to the whole of the mixture , including all modifiers , cutback materials , combining oils and adhesion agents .
For enrichments and emulsion seals , the rate of application refers to the whole of the mixture .
8.13.4 Preparation for Sprayer Run – Witness Point Record the volume and temperature of the sprayer contents while it is on level ground .
Supply Sprayer Tank dips before and after each sprayer run .
Witness Point - Allow visual inspection when requested .
Determine the length of sprayer run from the available quantity in the sprayer and the application rate .
Ensure the area to be sprayed is not greater than the area that can be covered by aggregate in the loaded trucks .
Start and finish each spray run on a protective strip of paper placed on the pavement .
The paper to be wide enough to ensure the sprayed material is being discharged correctly over the full width of spray .
Place sufficient protective paper to protect road fixtures .
Place paper on the pavement and masking around areas to be sprayed or wherever the sprayer is stationary on the road pavement .
Seal joins are only allowed where linemarking is to be placed .
No joins are allowed in wheel paths .
Excess overspray and spills must be removed before sealing works proceed .
8.13.5 Installation of Temporary Pavement Markers Temporary Pavement Markers to conform to AS 1906.3 .
Spacings of temporary pavement markers to be in accordance with AS 1742.3 or as directed by the Superintendent .
8.13.6 Sprayer Run Attain uniform spraying speed before spraying commences .
Avoid an excess or deficiency of material due to faulty overlap at longitudinal joints when spraying a road in half-widths .
Overlap to be 300 mm with an intermediate nozzle .
Do not use end nozzles on an overlap .
Make allowances for “ Fog Spraying ” when joining to existing seals .
SPRAY SEALING STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 64 Cease spraying before the level of material in the tank falls to a level which reduces the full discharge of the pump .
Remove and dispose of all paper as per the Environmental Management Plan .
Clean off any sprayed material from road fixtures .
8.13.7 Hand Spraying Plan work to minimise the requirement for the use of a hand sprayer .
Any strips of pavement not adequately covered with sprayed material to be sprayed later with the hand attachment .
8.14 APPLICATION OF GEOFABRIC – HOLD POINT Hold Point - Submit details of proposed machinery and method of application .
Overlap longitudinal and transverse joints 150 mm minimum .
Place longitudinal joints in the fabric along lane boundaries within 100 mm of lane marker .
Trim the fabric as required to achieve this .
Bond the fabric to the pavement with a tack coat sprayed 100 mm wider than the fabric and in accordance with the Superintendent ’ s directions for location .
Use Standard Bitumen class C320 for the tack coat .
Place the fabric under tension when laying , using suitable machinery , ensuring that folds or creases do not occur .
Use equipment to place fabric that does not cause undue migration of the underlying tack coat into the fabric .
Upon completion of placing of fabric and prior to application of the second/top binder coat , roll the fabric with minimum 4 passes of a pneumatic multi-wheel roller .
Carry out rolling of the geofabric at a constant roller velocity with no acceleration or deceleration .
Use Standard Class C320 binder for the second / top binder coats .
8.15 APPLICATION OF AGGREGATE – HOLD POINT Load aggregate into appropriate aggregate spreading trucks using an approved loader which does not contaminate the aggregate with dust , dirt and oversize stone while applying pre- coat .
Hold Point – Obtain approval from the Superintendent for use of the proposed aggregate loader before commencing loading operations .
Apply aggregate to sprayed binder within : - 10 minutes where the pavement temperature is 20°C or greater .
- 5 minutes where the pavement temperature is between 15 and 20 °C .
Polymer Modified Binders : Apply aggregate within 5 minutes irrespective of pavement temperature .
Apply aggregate to emulsion coat before the emulsion breaks .
Use “ cut off plates ” on spreader boxes to ensure that the correct widths are covered in aggregate , without overlap .
In trafficked areas , apply both coats of a two coat seal on the same day .
Where not trafficked apply the second coat on the following day .
8.15.1 Aggregate Spread Rates Spread the aggregate evenly and uniformly over the sprayed surface at a rate complying with Table 8.6 – Aggregate Spread Rates .
Use a mechanical spreader , manual spreader boxes are not to be used .
Rerun or hand cover bare or insufficiently covered areas after the first spreading .
Remove all excess aggregate .
8.15.2 Rolling Rate Roll the treated surface with self-propelled rubber tyred rollers with a minimum tyre pressure of 600 kPa and a minimum wheel load of 1 tonne .
Roller speed on the first pass to be between 5 and 10km/h , with subsequent passes between 15 and 25 km/h .
Conform to the following : - Entire area to receive one roller pass immediately after covering .
- 75 % of rolling within 1 hour of covering .
- 100 % of rolling within 2 hours of covering .
Minimum Rolling Rate : 1 roller hour per 2,000 litres of binder .
Ensure a uniform distribution of aggregate .
Drag broom to distribute surplus aggregate but do not dislodge embedded aggregate .
Drag broom before 50 % of rolling is complete .
Drag brooms are not to be rotary brooms .
For two coat treatments , double the specified rolling rate if the second coat is to be applied immediately or the surface is not to be trafficked .
Roll in daylight hours only .
Sweep all loose aggregate from the carriageway at completion of rolling .
Ensure aggregate on the final surface is uniformly distributed and firmly held by the binder .
SPRAY SEALING STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 65 Table 8.6 – Aggregate Spread Rates STRAIGHT RUN BINDER COATS Aggregate Size Traffic Volume Application Rate m2/m3 10 mm and greater > 200 vehicles/day 900/ALD 10 mm and greater < 200 vehicles/day 850/ALD 7 mm and less 900/ALD POLYMER MODIFIED BINDER COATS Aggregate Size Traffic Volume Application Rate m2/m3 10 mm and greater < 300 vehicles/day 750/ALD 10 mm and greater > 300 vehicles/day 800/ALD 7 mm and less 160 – 200 TWO COAT SEALS First coat Aggregate Size Traffic Volume Application Rate m2/m3 10 mm and greater > 200 vehicles/day 950/ALD 10 mm and greater < 200 vehicles/day 900/ALD Second Coat Aggregate Size Number of Thicknesses Application Rate m2/m3 10 1 1050 – 1100 / ALD 7 ( ALD known ) 1 1100 – 1150 / ALD 5 or 7 ( no ALD ) 1 250 - 300 5 or 7 ( no ALD ) 2 175 - 225 Adjust drag broom to distribute surplus aggregate , but not to dislodge embedded aggregate .
Ensure aggregate on the final surface is uniformly distributed , and firmly held by binder .
Re-roll the surface after sweeping to ensure uniform bedding of aggregate in binder .
8.15.3 Rolling Rate Airstrips Roll the treated surface with at least one self- propelled rubber tyred roller with a minimum weight of 20 tonnes .
Roll the treated surface with self-propelled rubber tyred rollers with a minimum tyre pressure of 600kPa and a minimum wheel load of 1 tonne .
Rubber Tyred Minimum Rolling Rate : One roller hour per 800 litres of binder .
Steel Drum Roller Minimum Rolling Rate : One pass on the second coat .
Ensure a uniform distribution of aggregate .
Drag broom to distribute surplus aggregate but fo not dislodge embedded aggregate .
Drag broom before 50 % of rolling is complete .
Drag brooms are not to be rotary brooms .
Ensure aggregate on the final surface is uniformly distributed and firmly held by the binder .
Roll in daylight hours only .
Using a suction type broom to sweep all loose aggregate from the carriageway at completion of rolling , remove from site .
Re-roll the surface after sweeping to ensure uniform bedding of aggregate in binder .
8.16 TRAFFIC ON RESEALS Cross reference ; PROVISION FOR TRAFFIC , Workzone Traffic Management , 2.4.7 Traffic Escort Vehicle – Resealing Works .
Co-ordinate work to minimise traffic delays .
Prohibit traffic - until at least 3 passes of a roller has taken place or until sufficient rolling has taken place to prevent damage to the applied seal , whichever is greater ; and - from adjacent strip of roadway during spraying .
8.17 WASTE MATERIAL In urban areas , remove all excess aggregate by suction broom .
Ensure no aggregates are distributed onto the verge .
Remove from the site and dispose of all waste material .
Clean and remove all aggregate from the shoulders and verges in urban areas .
Urban areas aggregate removal / sweeping regime : Initial sweep after rolling has concluded Second sweep after 24 hours Third sweep after 48 hours .
8.18 REPORTING 8.18.1 Spraysheets Supply to the Superintendent at the end of each days production spraysheets ( paper or electronic formats are acceptable ) that record the following information for all spray runs conducted .
- Contractors Name - Project Details - Contract Number - Specification schedule number SPRAY SEALING STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 66 - Road Name - Product Type Sprayed - Precoat type used , Precoat litres / m3 - Aggregate supplier , Aggregate Type , Aggregate size - Run number , Start Time of spray run - Pavement Temperature , Ambient Temperature - Start Chainage of spray run – actual km of road - End chainage of spray run – actual km of road - Total Length , Width of spray run - Total area of spray run - Temperature of product at spraying - Start Dip , End Dip - Total sprayed hot , Correction factor , Total sprayed cold - Application rate cold - Ordered application rate - Percent of application rate ordered - Number of rollers used - Bitumen sample number - Signature of contractor representative - Signature section for client representative 8.19 CONFORMANCE - TOLERANCES Final surfaces shall conform to the following : Aggregates are to conform to Table 8.8 – Aggregate Properties .
Refer to Clause 8.21 for Tables Skid Resistance determined by NTTM 304.1 .
Skid resistance testing may be carried out by the Superintendent .
Final surfaces with non-conforming skid resistance will be rejected .
Rectify non-conforming work by methods approved by the Superintendent .
Rectification work be at the Contractor ’ s expense , including the cost of testing .
Remove from the site binder which has been overheated or has deteriorated or become contaminated prior to its application to the road .
Spray rates applied at less than 95 % or more than 105 % of the rate indicated in the procedure will be rectified by resurfacing at the contractors expense inclusive of all materials .
8.20 ADJUSTMENT TO VOLUMES FOR SPRAY RATES This includes the prime coat , enrichment coat , emulsion coat , primerseal and seal coats .
Refer to MEASURMENT AND PAYMENT for schedules of adjustments .
8.21 TABLES Table 8.7 – Aggregate Grading and Average Least Dimension ( ALD ) Sieve Size ( mm ) % Passing ( Dry Mass ) Nominal Size of Aggregate 20 mm 16 mm 14 mm 10 mm 7 mm 5 mm 26.5 100 19.0 85 - 100 100 16.0 - 80 - 100 100 13.2 0 - 15 0 – 20 85 - 100 100 9.5 0 - 5 0 – 2 0 - 15 85 - 100 100 6.7 0 - 2 0 - 5 0 - 15 85 - 100 100 4.75 0 - 2 0 - 5 0 - 15 85 - 100 2.36 0 - 2 0 - 5 0 - 15 1.18 0 - 2 0 - 5 Min .
ALD ( 1 ) 12.0mm 9.5mm 8.0mm 5.5mm 3.5mm 2.5mm Note : ( 1 ) .
Test Methods AS 1141.20.1 , AS 1141.20.2 - Direct Measurement .
SPRAY SEALING STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 67 Table 8.8 – Aggregate Properties Aggregate Property Traffic Count ( AADT : Two Lanes ) Less Than 300 VPD 300 to 6,000 VPD More Than 6,000 VPD AS 1141.14 Misshapen Particles : Calliper Ratio 2:1 25 % maximum 15 % maximum 12 % maximum AS 1141.15 Flakiness Index 35 maximum 30 maximum 25 maximum AS 1141.23 Los Angeles Abrasion ( LAA ) : - Fine Grained Aggregate 30 % maximum 25 % maximum 20 % maximum - Coarse Grained Aggregate 40 % maximum 35 % maximum 30 % maximum AS 1141.24 Sulphate Soundness 15 % maximum 12 % maximum 10 % maximum AS 1141.40/41 Polished Aggregate Friction Value 40 minimum 40 minimum 45 minimum AADT - Annual Average Daily Traffic ; VPD - Vehicles Per Day AS 1141.18 - Crushed particles in coarse aggregate derived from gravel .
Ensure 80 % minimum by mass are classified as crushed particles .
AS 1141.25.1 - Degradation factor – Source rock ( Washington Degradation Test ) .
Igneous rocks shall have a minimum value of 50 .
AS 1141.26 - Secondary minerals content in igneous rocks shall not exceed 25 % .
AS 1141.29 - Accelerated soundness index by reflux .
Igneous rocks shall have a minimum value of 94 .
AS 1141.50 - Resistance to stripping of cover aggregates from binders .
The maximum stripping value of precoated aggregate ( precoat shall contain 1 % adhesion agent . )
shall be 10 % .
Table 8.9 – Base Binder for Polymer Modified Bitumen Property Specification limit minimum Specification limit maximum Viscosity at 60oC , Pa.s 140 380 Viscosity at 135oC , Pa.s 0.25 0.65 Penetration at 25oC ( 100g , 5s ) , pu ( pu unit is 0.1mm ) 40 Flashpoint oC 250 N/A Matter Insoluble in toluene , percent mass N/A 1.0 Short Term effect of heat and air ( Rolling Thin film Oven Test ) Viscosity of residue at 60oC as a percentage of original N/A 300 Long term effect of Heat and air , days 7 Density at 15oC , t/m3 TBR SPRAY SEALING STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 68 Table 8.10 – Polymer Modified Binders for Sprayed Sealing Applications Test Method Binder Property PMB Class S10E S15E S20E S25E S35E S45R AGPT/T121 Consistency at 60 °C ( Pa.s ) min .
250 700 700 5000 300 1000 AGPT/T121 Underlying Viscosity at 60 °C ( Pa.s ) TBR TBR TBR TBR TBR TBR AGPT/T121 Stiffness at 15 °C ( kPa ) max .
140 140 140 95 180 180 AGPT/T142 Rubber Content by analysis ( % ) min NA NA NA NA NA 10 AGPT/T132 Compression Limit at 70 °C , 2kg ( mm ) min .
NA NA NA NA NA 0.2 AGPT/T121 Elastic Recovery at 60 °C , 100s ( % ) min .
NA NA NA 85 NA 25 AGPT/T111 Viscosity at 165 °C ( Pa.s ) max .
0.55 0.55 0.55 0.8 0.55 4.5 AGPT/T112 Flash Point ( °C ) min .
250 250 250 250 250 250 AGPT/T103 Loss on Heating ( % mass ) max .
0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 AGPT/T122 Torsional Recovery at 25 °C , 30s ( % ) .
22 - 50 32 - 62 45 - 74 54 - 85 16 - 32 25 - 55 AGPT/T131 Softening Point ( °C ) .
48 - 64 55 - 75 62 - 88 82 - 100 48 - 56 55 - 65 AGPT/T108 Segregation value ( % ) max .
8 8 8 8 8 8 AGPT/T109 Ease of remixing ( % ) max 2 2 2 2 2 2 Notes : 1 .
Class of PMB : S=Sealing , E=Elastomeric Polymer , R=Granulated Crumbed Rubber 2 .
NA means not applicable for that PMB class , TBR = To be reported 3 .
AGPT Test Methods are available from Austroads Guide to Pavement Technology Part 4H : Test Methods 4 .
S35E must be manufactured with Polybutadiene ( PBD ) polymers ( To be used only if approved by the Superintendent , as an alternative to S10E ) .
8.22 OTHER REQUIREMENTS Refer to PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS in the RFT .
DENSE GRADED ASPHALT STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 69 9 .
DENSE GRADED ASPHALT 9.1 CONTRACTORS RESPONSIBILITIES The Contractor is responsible for the production and placing of the registered and approved design mix in accordance with the technical requirements of this specification .
The Contractor must undertake conformance testing in accordance with CONFORMANCE TESTING and maintain a record of test results in accordance with the Contractor ’ s Quality System .
9.2 STANDARDS Conform to the following Standards and Publications unless specified otherwise : AS 1141 ( set ) Methods for sampling and testing aggregate .
AS 1160 Bituminous emulsion for the construction and maintenance of pavements .
AS 2008 Bitumen for pavements .
AS 2150 Hot mix asphalt – a guide to good practice .
AS 2157 Cut back bitumen .
AS 2758 ( set ) Aggregates and rock for engineering purposes .
AS 2891 ( set ) Methods of sampling and testing asphalt .
AUSTRALIAN ASPHALT PAVEMENT ASSOCIATION ( AAPA ) Guide to the manufacture , storage and handling of polymer modified binders ( Available via http : //www.aapa.asn.au/documents/item/308 ) Advisory Note 7 Guide to the manufacture , storage and handling of binders for spray sealing ( and hot mix asphalt ) ( available via http : //www.aapa.asn.au/technology-and- publications/advisory-notes ) AUSTROADS AGPT04B Austroads Guide to Pavement Technology Part 4B Asphalt AGPT04H Austroads Guide to Pavement Technology Part 4H : Test Methods AGPT/T103 Pre-treatment and Loss on Heating of Bitumen Multigrade and polymer Binders ( rolling thin film oven [ RTFO ] test ) AGPT/T111 Handling Viscosity of Polymer Modified Binders ( Brookfield Thermosel ) AGPT/T112 Flash Point of Polymer Modified Binders AGPT/T121 Shear Properties of Polymer Modified Binders ( ARRB ELASTOMETER ) AGPT/T122 Torsional Recovery of Polymer Modified Binders AGPT/T131 Softening Point of Polymer Modified Binders AGPT/T190 Austroads Framework Specification for Polymer Modified Binders and Multigrade Bitumen NT PUBLICATIONS NTCP 103.1 Site selection by the stratified random technique NTCP 107.1 Ride Quality NTMTM Northern Territory Materials Testing Manual – available at https : //infrastructure.nt.gov.au/te chnical-information NTTM Northern Territory Test Method OTHER PUBLICATIONS MRWA Main Roads Western Australia , Test Methods 9.3 DEFINITIONS COARSE GRAINED AGGREGATE : Where the average grain size of the constituent minerals is greater than 5 mm .
The average grain size is determined optically under a petrographic microscope .
FINE GRAINED AGGREGATE : Where the average grain size of the constituent minerals is less than 5 mm .
The average grain size is determined optically under a petrographic microscope .
IRI International Roughness Index ( IRIqc ) JOB MIX : Adjusted blend composition of registered mix design based on production trial .
NTCP Northern Territory Code of Practice NTMTM Northern Territory Materials Testing Manual – available via https : //infrastructure.nt.gov.au/technical- information NTTM Northern Territory Test Method RAP Reclaimed Asphalt Pavement REGISTERED MIX DESIGN : An asphalt mix which has been placed on the Department ’ s Asphalt Mix Design Register and approved for use by the Superintendent .
VLD Vehicles per lane per day DENSE GRADED ASPHALT STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 70 WARM MIX ASPHALT : Warm Mix Asphalt ( WMA ) ” is asphalt that contains a warm mix additive , or utilises a warm mix process , that has the ability to reduce the mixing and compaction temperature requirements below the typical temperatures used for that application .
9.4 TRAFFIC CATEGORIES Unless specified otherwise , the traffic categories shown in Table 9.1 - Mix Type and Binder Type for Traffic Categories and the mix types shown in Table 9.2 - Mix type designations shall be used to determine the required mix design level and binder type .
Refer to Clause 9.13 for Tables Urban areas are defined as follows : − Darwin region urban area is nominated as North of Cox Peninsular Road ( Stuart Highway ) , west of Trippe Road ( Arnhem Highway ) and the end of seal on Gunn Point Road − Katherine , Tennant Creek and Alice Springs urban areas are defined as the areas within the respective town boundaries .
9.5 MATERIALS 9.5.1 Coarse Aggregates Coarse aggregates must consist of crushed stone , with a minimum of 3 crushed faces , which is clean , hard , of high strength , angular , which has adequate skid resistance , which is durable and free from laminated particles , clay and other aggregations of fine material , soil , organic matter and any other deleterious material .
Coarse aggregate must not fracture under compaction equipment or deteriorate rapidly .
Coarse aggregate materials must conform to the requirements of Table 9.3 - Properties - Coarse Aggregates : Refer to Clause 9.13 for Tables 9.5.2 Fine Aggregates Fine aggregates must consist of clean , hard , sharp , washed , durable natural sand and/or material manufactured from crushed stone of uniform quality free from clay and other aggregations of fine material , soil , organic matter and any other deleterious material .
Where crushed fine materials are from sources other than the source of the coarse material used in the asphalt mix , the parent rock must meet all requirements listed in Table 9.3 - Properties - Coarse Aggregates .
Fine aggregates must meet the requirements of Table 9.4 - Properties - Fine Aggregate .
Refer to Clause 9.13 for Tables 9.5.3 Mineral Filler Filler must consist of mineral material consisting of natural or crushed mineral materials , hydrated lime or cement with a particle size less than 0.075 mm .
Filler must be dry , free from lumps , clay , organic material or any other deleterious material , and complies in all respects with the requirements of AS 2150 .
9.5.4 Bituminous Binder - Witness Point Refined bitumen must be Class 320 , conforming to the requirements of AS 2008 .
Polymer Modified Binders ( PMB ) must comply to the requirements of Austroads Framework Specification for Polymer Modified Binders and Multigrade Bitumen , AGPT/T190 .
Properties of PMB grades referred to in this specification are outlined in Error !
Reference source not found ..
Refer to Clause 9.13 for Tables Bitumen handling and storage must be in accordance with AAPA Guide to the manufacture , storage and handling of polymer modified binders and with AAPA Advisory Note 7 Guide to the manufacture , storage and handling of binders for spray sealing ( and hot mix asphalt ) .
Witness Point - Demonstrate that the binder used for asphalt manufacture has been handled according to these requirements .
9.5.5 Bitumen Emulsion A rapid setting bitumen emulsion , conforming to requirements of AS 1160 when applied as a tack coat .
9.5.6 Additives Additives such as bitumen adhesion agents , hydrated lime and the like may be proposed to be used in the mix , provided that full details of the type of additive are provided .
The material must be nominated and shown as part of the mix design in accordance with the Asphalt Mix Design clause .
9.5.6 Reclaimed Asphalt Pavement ( RAP ) Crush and screen RAP from milling or excavation of existing asphalt pavements .
It must be well graded , free flowing and have a consistent grading and bitumen content .
The nominal size of the RAP material must not be greater than the maximum size of the manufactured asphalt material to which it is being added .
RAP material must not contain tar binder and must be free of contaminants such as unbound granular base material , concrete , clay , soil , organic matter or any other deleterious material .
Processed RAP material must be placed in separate stockpiles prior to use .
Where RAP material has been stockpiled for some time and DENSE GRADED ASPHALT STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 71 is no longer in a free-flowing condition , reprocessing must be undertaken to ensure that the material is free flowing at the time of incorporation into the manufacturing of new asphalt materials .
RAP addition in manufactured asphalt must not exceed : - 15 % by mass in base layers ; and - 10 % by mass in the wearing coarse .
9.6 ASPHALT MIX DESIGN 9.6.1 Mix Type and Design Traffic Category Refer to PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS in the RFT for mix type and design traffic category requirements .
9.6.2 Design Mix Requirements – Hold Point All asphalt mixes proposed for use on Northern Territory Government ( NTG ) works shall be registered in accordance with the Department ’ s Code of Practice for Registration of Asphalt Mix Designs .
Hold Point - Asphalt materials must not be used until the mix has been registered and the Superintendent approves the mix for use .
Approval of a registered asphalt mix for use under the Contract does not relieve the contractor from employing suitable manufacturing and handling techniques to ensure performance of the mix .
The Contractor must also satisfy all contractual obligations in regards to rectification of defects .
The manufacturer must notify the Superintendent of any proposed changes to the components or proportions of components used in the registered mix .
Hold Point - Where it is proposed to change the source grading or nature of the components or binders , new mix designs must be carried out in accordance with Department ’ s Code of Practice for Registration of Asphalt Mix Designs .
Registration of mix designs must be renewed every 2 years from the date of acceptance .
If a registered mix has unsatisfactory handling or field performance , the Contractor or Superintendent may request the mix be de- registered .
9.7 SURFACE PREPARATION 9.7.1 New Construction – Witness Point Witness Point - Give the Superintendent not less than 24 hours notice of the location and scheduled commencement time of surface preparation works for each work program .
The contractor must prepare existing surfaces to ensure that asphalt construction can be completed in accordance with the requirements of this specification .
The Contractor must : - ensure that the surface has been adequately prepared so that the specified asphalt material density can be achieved .
If the Contractor suspects that the base layer is inadequate for asphalt construction the Contractor must inform the Superintendent ; - ensure that the surface has been adequately prepared to achieve shape and level requirements where required ; - ensure that the exposed granular base layer is tightly bound and free from vegetation and other foreign matter ; - ensure there are no laminations or false pavements within the exposed surface ; - remove all foreign matter by sweeping or other means ; and - ensure that exposed granular layers have sufficiently dried back to the requirements of the Final Pavement Surface clause in PAVEMENTS AND SHOULDERS prior to the application of the bituminous spray primer seal .
The Contractor must apply a bituminous spray seal prime coat to the exposed granular surface as specified in .
SPRAY SEALING .
Refer to PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS for details of the bituminous seal .
Prior to laying base or wearing surface asphalt all depressions greater than 25 mm must be filled with an asphalt correction course layer .
Minimum asphalt layer thicknesses must be observed during this procedure .
9.7.2 Resurfacing of Existing Bitumen and Concrete Surfaces All vegetation and loose and extraneous matter must be removed prior to the application of bituminous resurfacing materials .
Depressions greater than 25 mm must be filled with an asphalt correction course layer .
Minimum asphalt layer thicknesses must be observed during this procedure .
9.7.3 Cold Planing Unless otherwise specified or directed by the Superintendent , cold planing shall be carried out in such a manner as to leave a uniform surface parallel with the specified ultimate finished surface of the pavement .
All loose materials must be removed from the planed surface prior to placing asphalt .
DENSE GRADED ASPHALT STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 72 Exposed granular materials must be watered , re-compacted to form a tight and hard surface and , where specified , must be primed or resurfaced with a 7 mm emulsion bituminous seal prior to pacing asphalt .
The bituminous seal must be supplied and applied in accordance with SPRAY SEALING .
Temporary Works Where the cold planed surface is to be opened to traffic , the surface must be cleaned of all loose material and both transverse and longitudinal ramps must be installed in accordance with the Temporary Ramps sub- clause in the Spreading clause in this work section or other means to provide for the safe passage of traffic .
Hold Point -This work must be approved by the Superintendent before the section is opened to traffic .
All temporary ramping materials and/or other measures must be removed prior to placing new asphalt .
Shape and Roughness Where surface shape of an existing pavement is corrected by cold planing , the application of the resurfacing asphalt layer is considered to be new work .
For the purposes of measuring ride quality , the asphalt surfacing following correction of surface shape by cold planing will be designated as new work and roughness limits specified in Error !
Reference source not found .
must be achieved .
Refer to PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS in the RFT for designated areas of cold planing excluded as new work .
9.7.4 Tack Coat Apply a fine spray of bitumen emulsion lightly and evenly over the whole of the area to be covered with asphalt .
The pavement must be dry and dust free before any application of tack coat .
Apply tack coat by spray bar fitted to mechanical sprayer .
Hand spray only in areas where it is impractical to use a spray bar .
Protective splash boards or spray skirts must be used to eliminate over spray beyond the surface where tack coat is being applied .
Application rate of Residual Binder must be between 0.1 – 0.2 litres/square metre unless otherwise directed by the Superintendent .
Allow the tack coat to ‘ break ' before laying the asphalt .
Clean and tack coat existing surfaces against which new work is to be laid .
Re-apply Tack coat where damaged by construction traffic or weather .
9.8 MIXING Asphalt materials must be manufactured in a plant capable of consistently producing asphalt that complies with the approved registered mix design .
The asphalt material must meet manufacturing temperature requirements out lined in Table 9.6 – Acceptable Temperature Ranges by Materials .
Refer to Clause 9.13 for Tables 9.8.1 Asphalt Material Storage Asphalt may be stored in hot storage facilities for a period not exceeding 24 hours from the time of manufacture .
9.9 TRANSPORT AND SUPPLY 9.9.1 Transport Asphalt materials must be transported by trucks with clean trays which permit seamless discharge of the asphalt material to the receiving hopper .
All transport vehicles must be free from oil leaks .
The asphalt material must be covered with suitable tarps to reduce the rate of cooling during transport .
Delivery trucks must be fitted with adjustable tailgate ( s ) to allow control of the mix during discharge into the receiving hopper .
All delivery dockets must provide information that can trace each load to the manufacturing cycle and also point of placement .
Delivery dockets must record : - Unique Docket Number - Time of Departure - Temperature at point of discharge from the manufacturing plant - Product Type and Bitumen Type - Mass of Materials – Individual load tonnage and cumulative tonnage 9.9.2 Rate of Supply The frequency of asphalt material deliveries must be planned to achieve a uniform rate which is in line with the capacity of spreading and compaction processes .
Rate of delivery must allow continuous placing of the asphalt material having regard to ; - the number of haulage vehicles available ; and - the haulage distance to the work site .
Cooling must be minimised by prompt delivery and placement of the asphalt material at the site .
DENSE GRADED ASPHALT STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 73 9.10 SPREADING 9.10.1 General - Witness Point Witness Point - Give at least 24 hours notice before commencement of asphalt material spreading .
The asphalt material must be laid at a uniform thickness to the tolerances listed in Error !
Reference source not found .
The paving operation must be one continuous operation where practical .
Where a break in paving occurs due to a planned stop or prolonged delay period a transverse joint must be constructed .
Asphalt that has cooled below acceptable initial rolling temperature ( s ) must be removed from site and replaced prior to initial rolling .
Asphalt must not be laid when rain is imminent .
Paving must cease during heavy or continuous rain , or in wet conditions where the material will not adhere or key to existing surfaces .
Remove from site all rain affected and/or temperature depleted materials .
9.10.2 Mechanical Spreading The spreading machine must have a capacity of placing not less than 250 tonnes of asphalt material per hour .
Paving machines must be self-propelled and equipped and operated with an electronic levelling apparatus .
Where limited quantities of asphalt are required , or the area to be paved is restricted or of limited width , such as footpaths or parking areas , other spreaders approved by the Superintendent may be used .
9.10.3 Hand Spreading Hand spreading will be permitted only in locations where spreading with a paving machine is impractical .
Hand work may be used to correct localised depressions and/or irregularities .
Spreading of excess material over newly placed asphalt during joint matching is not permitted .
All excess material must be removed and discarded from the site .
Broadcasting of asphalt over the mat is not permitted at any time .
9.10.4 Laying Pattern - Witness Point Work must be completed as one continuous operation where practical .
Witness Point - Provide a construction program and paving plan at least 7 working days prior to commencement of works .
Paving plans must be confirmed prior to the commencement of each shift .
9.10.5 Construction Joints Paving plans must detail the construction processes and procedures .
Use processes and procedures which minimise longitudinal and transverse construction joints .
Longitudinal joints must be located within the lane line of the pavement or the traffic sump line .
Longitudinal joints must not be located under wheel paths .
Construction joints must be minimised within intersections and the braking zones in approaches and acceleration zones of intersections .
Longitudinal joints must be laterally off-set by 100 mm and transverse joints by 500 mm when paving multiple layers .
During paving overlap each adjoining lane by at least 25 mm to form an even transverse surface .
Proud asphalt material must be raked back immediately to form a ridge along the top of the joint .
Where excess material remains in place , this material must be removed from the joint area prior to compaction rolling .
Following rolling the resultant joint must be smooth and of similar texture to the pavement in general .
9.10.6 Transverse Joints Form transverse joints by cutting with a purpose-built asphalt cut off wheel or diamond saw to form a vertical face .
All waste asphalt is to be removed from site .
When constructing transverse joints , ensure that the joint and the approaches to the joint do not deviate more than 5 mm under a 3 metre straight edge .
Cut back existing pavement to a true level surface with no deviation .
Cut back must be a minimum of 200 mm or be sufficient in length to match existing pavement levels and to also maintain cross falls .
Exposed joint faces must be treated with bitumen emulsion tack coat prior to placing asphalt against them .
Transverse Match of Overlay to Existing Pavement : Saw cut existing asphalt pavement 20 mm depth along the match line of joint .
Remove taper wedge of existing asphalt pavement along the overlay side of match joint .
Feather the asphalt overlay down to the existing pavement to achieve a maximum slope of 1 in 10 and for the full width of the pavement .
Ensure depth of overlay above existing pavement in taper wedge area is not less than 20 mm .
9.10.7 Longitudinal Joints All longitudinal joints must be parallel to and follow the shape of the road alignment unless directed otherwise by the Superintendent .
Edges must not remain unsupported unless directed otherwise by the Superintendent .
Unsupported edges must be cut back at least 75 mm if adjacent runs are not paved within the time taken to cool below acceptable paving DENSE GRADED ASPHALT STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 74 temperatures .
All unsupported edges left over- night must be cut back prior to paving adjacent runs .
All open faces must be treated with bitumen emulsion tack coat prior to paving .
9.10.8 Temporary Ramps Provide compacted asphalt ramps measuring a maximum 1 % grade relative to existing surrounding pavement grades , where transverse joints are left overnight under traffic .
Longitudinal Ramps must be a minimum of 300 mm wide under traffic , and must be visually monitored at all times for the period the ramps are in use .
All costs relating to temporary works must be included in the Contractors cost proposal and will be deemed to have been included in the contract price .
No additional payment will be made for temporary works .
9.11 COMPACTION 9.11.1 Compaction Generally All plant and equipment used for the execution of the works must be free of oil and fuel leaks .
Compaction methodology must be used so that rollers do not stop on the hot new asphalt surface .
Defer rolling if excessive displacement of the asphalt occurs but only until the asphalt has cooled sufficiently to permit rolling to continue .
9.11.2 Compaction Temperatures - Witness Point Compaction must be completed prior to cooling of the asphalt material below temperatures at which point the material may be damaged by rolling or at the point at which densification ceases .
Witness Point - The Contractor must advise the Superintendent of temperature limits relating to compaction .
9.11.3 Initial Rolling Initial breakdown rolling must commence immediately following asphalt placement behind the spreader using a steel wheeled roller .
Initial rolling must not result in adverse displacement or cracking .
Steel wheeled rollers must be fitted with adjustable scrapers and the drums must be kept moist with water to prevent the mix from sticking to the drums .
9.11.4 Intermediate Rolling Self-propelled pneumatic tyred rollers with the same tyre pressure in all compacting tyres must be used for intermediate rolling .
Rollers must be fitted with water lubricant systems that stop the asphalt sticking to the rubber tyres .
Do not use detergents or other chemicals for lubrication .
Sand may be spread on the new asphalt to prevent the asphalt sticking to the tyres .
Rolling must be completed during applicable material temperatures .
9.11.5 Final Rolling A static steel wheeled roller must be used during final rolling .
This procedure must remove all roller marks from the surface to ensure a smooth even surface .
9.11.6 Joint Compaction All joints and free edges must be constructed and compacted to obtain acceptable surface texture .
Rolling of unsupported edges must not result in shape loss and/or excessive lateral displacement .
Finished joints must obtain a smooth even surface which does not exceed 5 mm deviation under a 3 m straight edge .
9.11.7 Hand Tampers Compact asphalt materials by vibratory plates or hand tampers in locations inaccessible to rollers .
Finish hand tamped surfaces to a smooth even surface conforming with machine finished areas .
All free edges not laterally supported are to be pushed up with a heavy hand rake and tamped , to form a firm and cohesive edge of not less that 60o slope prior to rolling the free edge or applying the adjacent paving run .
9.12 CONFORMANCE 9.12.1 Conformance Testing The Contractor must undertake internal process control testing .
The Superintendent will carry out all conformance testing of materials and completed pavement properties through the Conformance Testing Panel Period Contract .
Bitumen used in the Asphalt production shall be tested in accordance with SPRAY SEALING and CONFORMANCE TESTING .
The Contractor must formally request conformance testing using the “ Conformance Test Request ” form not less than 2 working days prior to sampling and/or testing taking place .
Surface roughness testing will be carried out at the discretion of the Superintendent .
When lots fail to satisfy the conformance criteria , payment adjustments or rejection of the lot shall be in accordance with Table 23.3 – Rate of Payment Adjustments in MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT , 23.9.4 Rate of Payment Adjustments .
9.12.2 Process Testing Provide test reports for all process testing performed on the works when requested by the Superintendent to provide the reports .
DENSE GRADED ASPHALT STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 75 9.12.3 Finished Pavement Properties The works must conform to the requirements listed in Error !
Reference source not found. , and Error !
Reference source not found ..
Refer to Clause 9.13 for Tables 9.12.4 Conformance on Asphalt Production Conform to the variation limits to the approved Job Mix Design shown in Table 9.9 - Variation Limits To The Approved Job Mix Design Refer to Clause 9.13 for Tables 9.12.5 Conformance Sampling and Testing Frequencies The Superintendent will undertake conformance sampling of asphalt materials taken from trucks at the mixing plant and finished asphalt pavement in accordance with the requirements of CONFORMANCE TESTING .
9.12.6 Asphalt Compaction The contractor must provide details of work lots to Superintendent , including : - map of lot location ( s ) relative to land marks including direction ; - lot numbers ; and - lot register .
Work lots must : - consist of no more than one shift ’ s production ; - be continuous ; and - consist of homogeneous material without distinct changes in characteristic properties .
Each lot will be subject to conformance testing including : - asphalt material testing ; - in-situ compaction ; - level compliance where appropriate : - roughness ; and - visual assessment .
When lots fail to satisfy the conformance criteria , payment adjustments or rejection of the lot will be in accordance with the Rate of Payment Adjustments clause in MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT .
Should the lot under consideration be subdivided then each sub-lot will be subjected to separate testing .
Non-conforming lots , which are subdivided must be retested individually following subdivision .
Core sample locations will be selected by the laboratory on a stratified random basis in accordance with NTCP 103.1 .
Supply copies of the completed stratified random selection with each compaction report .
Carry out density testing as soon as practicable after completion of works .
The work represented by a lot will be assessed as the characteristic value of in-situ air voids where the Characteristic Value of Air Voids is calculated in accordance with CONFORMANCE TESTING .
Conform to Table 9.10 - Characteristic Value of Air Voids .
The Conformance Of Compaction clause only applies for asphalt thickness greater than or equal to 30 mm .
DENSE GRADED ASPHALT STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 76 9.13 TABLES Table 9.2 – Mix type designation Mix Type 1 2 3 4 5 6 Aggregate size ( mm ) 7 10 14 20 14 ( A15E ) 10 ( Car Park ) Table 9.3 - Properties - Coarse Aggregates Item Acceptance Criteria Test Method Proportion of misshapen particles 15 % max .
at 2:1 calliper ratio AS 1141.14 Los Angeles Abrasion 35 % maximum loss AS 1141.23 PAFV 45 minimum AS 1141.41 & AS 1141.42 Wet Strength 150 kN minimum AS 1141.22 Wet/Dry Strength Variation 35 % maximum AS 1141.22 Dry Density Report AS 1141.6.1 SSD Density Report AS 1141.6.1 Water Absorption Maximum 2.5 % AS 1141.6.1 Table 9.4 - Properties - Fine Aggregates Item Acceptance Criteria Test Method Soundness ≤12 % weighted loss AS 1141.24 Dry Density Report AS 1141.5 SSD Density Report AS 1141.5 Water Absorption ( crushed materials ) 3.0 % maximum AS 1141.5 Water Absorption ( Quartz Sands ) 1.5 % maximum AS 1141.5 Table 9.1 – Mix Type and Binder Type for Traffic Categories Traffic Category Mix Type Application Binder Type Light 1 & 2 Cycle paths and pedestrian traffic Class 320 or S10E Medium 2 , 3 & 6 Car parking and low volume Traffic and Car Parks – ( less than 300 VLD ) Class 320 or S10E Heavy 5 All Urban Roads and Intersections and Industrial Estates A15E All 4 Structural Layers A15E DENSE GRADED ASPHALT STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 77 Table 9.5 – Polymer Modified Binders For Asphalt Applications Test Method Binder Property Class S10E A15E AGPT/T111 Viscosity at 165oC ( Pa.s ) max .
0.55 0.9 AGPT/T122 Torsional recovery at 25oC , 30 s ( % ) 22–50 55–80 AGPT/T131 Softening point ( oC ) 48–64 82–105 AGPT/T121 Consistency at 60oC ( Pa.s ) min .
250 5000 AGPT/T121 Stiffness at 25oC ( kPa ) max .
na 30 AGPT/T121 Stiffness at 15oC ( kPa ) max .
140 na AGPT/T112 Flash point ( oC ) min .
250 250 AGPT/T103 Loss on heating ( % mass ) max .
0.6 0.6 Table 9.6 – Acceptable Temperature Ranges by Materials Material Minimum Manufacturing Temperature ( °C ) Maximum Manufacturing Temperature ( °C ) Class 320 Bitumen 150 170 S10E PMB 150 175 A15E PMB 160 175 Asphalt at discharge from asphalt mixing plant 135 * 170 * Minimum of 130 °C when produced as warm mix asphalt Table 9.7 – Finished Pavement Properties Finish pavement surfaces smooth , dense , true to shape and to the following tolerances ; Thickness : Average not less than specified .
Surface levels : Maximum deviation from design level 0 to +10 mm Surface roughness ( NTCP 107.1 ) : 2 IRI – mean value of lot for new works 2.5 IRI – mean value of lot for resurfacing work .
Table 9.8 – Surface Shape Requirements Layer Deviation Below 3m Straight Edge ( mm ) Freeways and Highways with High Speed Traffic Heavy and Very Heavy Traffic Roads Medium and Light Traffic Roads Parallel to Centreline Transverse to Centreline Parallel to Centreline Transverse to Centreline Parallel to Centreline Transverse to Centreline Wearing Course 3 5 5 7 7 10 Intermediate and Base 6 10 8 12 12 16 DENSE GRADED ASPHALT STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 78 Table 9.8 - Characteristic Value of Air Voids Reduction Level Light Traffic Medium Traffic Heavy Traffic Conformance 3.0 – 8.0 3.0 – 8.0 3.0 – 7.0 Reduction Level 1 8.1 – 9.0 8.1 – 9.0 7.1 – 8.0 Reduction Level 2 9.1 – 10.0 9.1 – 10.0 8.1 – 9.0 Reduction Level 3 > 10.1 and < 3.0 > 10.1 and < 3.0 > 9.1 and < 3.0 9.14 OTHER REQUIREMENTS Refer to PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS in the RFT .
Table 9.9 - Variation Limits To The Approved Job Mix Design Grading : AS SIEVE ( mm ) % PASSING ( by mass ) 4.75 or larger + or - 7 2.36 + or - 5 1.18 to 0.30 + or - 4 0.15 + or - 3 0.075 + or - 2 Bitumen Content : Maximum variation 0.3 % by mass to the Approved Job Mix Design : Maximum Density : Maximum variation 5 % by mass to the Approved Job Mix Design SLURRY SURFACING STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 79 10 SLURRY SURFACING 10.1 GENERAL This section specifies the materials , equipment and procedures for slurry surfacing of existing sealed surfaces .
10.2 STANDARDS Conform to the following Standards and publications unless specified otherwise .
AS 1160 Bituminous emulsions for the construction and maintenance of pavements .
AS 1289.3.3.1 Methods for testing soils for engineering purposes – Calculation of the plasticity index of a soil .
AS 1289.3.7.1 Methods for testing soil for engineering purposes – Determination of the sand equivalent of a soil using a power operated shaker .
AUSTROADS AGPT/T272 Determination of Abrasion Loss of Bitumen Slurry ( Wet track abrasion test ) INTERNATIONAL SLURRY SURFACING ASSOCIATION ( ISSA ) TB 114 Test method for wet stripping of cured slurry surfacing mixtures .
10.3 COMMENCEMENT OF WORK – WITNESS POINT Witness point - Give the Superintendent at least 7 days notice of the date and time of the commencement of work .
10.4 TRAFFIC CONTROL Refer to PROVISION FOR TRAFFIC .
Take all necessary steps to ensure : - The safety of traffic during the progress of the work until completion of the final operation or curing , whichever is the latter .
- That traffic does not damage the work on newly treated sections of pavement .
10.5 MATERIALS 10.5.1 Binder – Hold Point Use bitumen emulsion binder complying with AS 1160 .
Hold point - Additives to improve the workability of the mix , or to accelerate or retard setting of the mix may be used with the approval of the Superintendent .
10.5.2 Aggregates Use mineral aggregate consisting of crushed stone , clean , sharp , angular sand and mineral filler combined to meet the grading as specified in 10.7 Mix Requirements and as set out in Table 10.1 - Standard Mixes .
Use clean aggregate free from vegetable matter , oversize stone and other deleterious substances .
Use combined aggregate and mineral filler having a sand equivalent value of not less than 45 when tested in accordance with AS 1289.3.7.1. and a plasticity index less than 5 when tested in accordance with AS 1289.3.3.1 .
10.5.3 Water Use only potable water and free from harmful soluble impurities .
10.5.4 Mineral Filler Use an approved mineral product having a minimum of 85 % passing a 0.075 mm sieve , thoroughly dry and free from lumps , organic matter and clay particles .
10.5.5 Samples Supply at any time when requested , sufficient quantities of sample material used or to be used in the work .
Allow the Superintendent to take such samples at any time and provide facilities and any assistance required for this purpose .
10.5.6 Stockpiles Provide a separate site for each aggregate size and allow 15 metres between adjacent sites .
Ensure sites are well drained and on hard ground .
Avoid contamination by dust .
Maintain access roads and stockpile sites .
Avoid sites under trees , telephone lines , overhead transmission lines or where overhead clearance is less than 6 metres .
Clear all vegetation to 5m beyond stockpile boundary .
Construct gravel foundation for stockpiles with 100 mm compacted thickness .
Trim and compact to 95 % relative compaction in accordance with PAVEMENTS AND SHOULDERS .
Construct stockpiles at least 1 metre high and batter sides 1 vertical to 1.5 horizontal and trim neatly to facilitate measurement .
Remove from site any non-conforming aggregate .
SLURRY SURFACING STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 80 10.6 PLANT & EQUIPMENT 10.6.1 Mixing Machine Use a self-propelled slurry mixing machine with a continuous flow pugmill able to accurately proportion and deliver mineral aggregate , filler , bitumen emulsion water and additive to the mixing chamber and discharge the thoroughly mixed product on a continuous basis .
DIP STICKS ; Use a dipstick on the emulsion and water tanks calibrated to in intervals of 50 litres and on the additive tank use a dipstick calibrated in intervals of 10 litres .
FINES FEEDER ; Equip the mixing machine with a suitable fines feeder which provides an accurate metering device to introduce a predetermined amount of mineral filler into the mixer at the same time and in the same location as the mineral aggregate .
Provide calibrated controls capable of accurately proportioning the materials .
WATER PRESSURE SYSTEM ; Equip the mixing machine with a water pressure system and a fog type spray bar capable of completely fogging the road surface preceding the spreading equipment to a maximum application of 0.3 litres per square metre .
MACHINE STORAGE ; For truck or semi-trailer mounted slurry surfacing machines provide sufficient machine storage capacity to allow the adequate mixing and application of a minimum of 7 cubic metres of slurry mixture .
This provision does not apply to continuous run slurry surfacing machines .
GUIDE ARM ; Fit the machine with a guide arm and chain to assist the driver in following the correct line .
Mount the guide arm on the driver ’ s side of the vehicle , forward of , and in full view of the driver .
10.6.2 Spreading Equipment Attach to the mixing machine a mechanical spreader box distributor , equipped with flexible material in contact with the pavement surface to prevent loss of the slurry surfacing mix from the spreader and capable of distributing the slurry surfacing mix across the width of the box without segregation or overflow while assuring by its design and adjustments that the required width and depth of spread are maintained on varying grades , crowns and superelevations .
SPREADER BOX ; Use a spreader box with an adjustable width , capable of spreading up to 4.0 metres in width and equipped with skis or other levelling device to enable it to fill traverse depressions up to 1.5 metres across .
STEERING ; Use a spreader box with an adjustable steering device and a flexible strike-off .
10.6.3 Ancillary Plant Provide all ancillary plant such as rotary road brooms , signs , lamps , barricades , hand squeegees , shovels , hand brooms and any other equipment necessary for the performance of the work .
10.7 MIX REQUIREMENTS 10.7.1 General Blend the bitumen emulsion with the mineral aggregate and filler in the proportions , by dry mass of aggregate , including filler , to give the required bitumen content of the slurry surfacing mix as specified in Table 10.1 - Standard Mixes .
Add sufficient water to provide a mix of workable consistency and this may be varied slightly to suit the surface texture of the pavement and the pavement temperature .
10.7.2 Sample Mixes – Hold Point Make trial batches to determine the final blend of water , additive and cement to be used for the best results .
Hold point - At least 14 days before commencing work , forward the details of the mix design , carried out in a NATA registered laboratory and performed by a NATA accredited Table 10.1 - Standard Mixes Sieve Size ( mm ) Percentage Of Mineral Aggregate Passing Sieve By Mass Nominal Mix Size 7 mm 5 mm 13.2 100 100 9.5 100 100 6.7 85-100 100 4.75 70-90 90-100 2.36 45-70 50-70 1.18 28-50 35-50 0.60 19-34 20-35 0.30 12-25 12-25 0.15 7-18 7-18 0.075 5-15 4-10 Residual binder content as % mass of aggregate 6.5-9 7-9.5 SLURRY SURFACING STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 81 technician , to the Superintendent for endorsement .
Once the mix design is endorsed by the Superintendent it becomes the specified job mix .
10.7.3 Departures from the Job Mix – Table The following table provides the maximum mean departures from the job mix for any day ’ s work .
If the mix gradings and binder content depart from the job mix by more than any of the maxima shown in the table , halt production until the mix is corrected .
10.8 PREPARATION AND SET OUT 10.8.1 Sweeping Pavement – Hold Point Immediately prior to any application of slurry surfacing mix , sweep the pavement as necessary to ensure that the surface is free of loose material , stones , dirt , dust and foreign matter by the use of a mechanically operated rotary road broom , unless otherwise authorised by the Superintendent .
Carry out additional sweeping necessary to obtain a satisfactory clean surface by hand using stiff brass or similar brooms .
PREVIOUSLY SEALED AREAS ; Prior to the application of slurry surfacing mix adjoining previously sealed areas , sweep the edges of the previously sealed areas to remove loose material for at least 150 mm from the edge .
FOREIGN MATERIAL ; Remove adherent patches of foreign material from the surface of the road by steel scraper or other suitable methods .
Do not remove any large deposits of foreign material that can not be removed by reasonable use of the mechanical broom , steel scrapers or other suitable methods .
Report the existence of any such deposits to the Superintendent prior to the commencement of spreading .
Hold point - Do not commence spreading of the slurry surfacing mix until the prepared pavement has been endorsed by the Superintendent .
SET OUT ; Unless following a satisfactory edge line or centre line place pavement marks on the surface at intervals of not more than 8 metres for the slurry surfacing machine to follow , while mixing and spreading .
10.9 APPLICATION Deposit the slurry surfacing mix at the optimum consistency into the spreading box and add nothing more to it .
Ensure that the mixing time is sufficient to produce a complete and uniform coating of the aggregate and direct the mixture into the moving spreader box at a sufficient rate to maintain an ample supply across the full width of the strike-off squeegee at all times .
SLURRY BUILD UP ; If required , squirt minor amounts of water into the corners of the spreader box to overcome temporary buildup of slurry surfacing mixture .
This has no detrimental effect on the performance of the slurry .
END OF RUN ; Square off the end of each run at the point where feathering commenced ( ie .
that point where there is insufficient material in the spreader box to maintain the full width of spread ) .
Alternatively , the successive run may be lapped , but by no more than 100mm , if it can be demonstrated that no loss of riding surface or fattiness will result .
INACCESSABLE AREAS ; Use suitable hand squeegees to spread the mix in areas inaccessible to the machine .
JOINTS ; Make longitudinal joints coincide with lane or centreline markings .
Provide suitable width spreading equipment to produce a minimum number of longitudinal joints throughout the work .
Half passes and odd width passes may be used where necessary for shape correction but must not be used as the last pass of any paved area .
Do not allow excessive build up or unsightly appearance on longitudinal or traverse joints .
KERBS AND SHOULDERS ; Take care to ensure straight lines along kerbs and shoulders and do not allow run off on those areas .
Table 10.2 - Maximum Mean Departures From The Job Mix Sieve Size In mm % By Mass Aggregate 6.7 7 4.75 7 2.36 5 1.18 5 0.60 4 0.30 4 0.15 3 0.075 2 Bitumen Content + 1.0 - 0.5 SLURRY SURFACING STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 82 TEMPERATURE ; If the pavement temperature exceeds 40 degrees C. , immediately prior to the application of the slurry surfacing mix thoroughly wet the surface of the pavement and all crack faces with water .
Ensure that all surfaces are uniformly damp and no free water is present on the surface or in the cracks when the slurry surfacing mix is applied .
DAMAGED WORK ; Replace slurry surfacing damaged by unexpected rain after spreading .
10.10 TESTING MATERIALS TESTING ; Sampling of the mixed material will be requested randomly by the Superintendent during each days production .
The sample material will be tested by the Principal ’ s NATA accredited testing laboratory contractor using accredited NATA technicians and test results will be provided to the Contractor .
EXCESS AGGREGATE LOSS ; Should the Superintendent identify excess aggregate loss from the surface after the slurry has fully cured , and the mix proportions are within the specified limits , suspend work until tests are taken and the problems rectified .
- Wet stripping test ; ISSA TB 114 ( minimum 90 % coating ) to assess the system ’ s coating compatibility with the aggregate source .
- Wet track abrasion test ; by AGPT/T272 , SST 04 ( maximum 800g/m2 loss ) .
If the wet track abrasion re-test value exceeds 800g/m2 , halt production until the mix design is corrected and endorsed by the Superintendent .
10.11 SURPLUS , WASTE AND DEFECTIVE MATERIALS Remove from the work prior to its application to the road any bitumen emulsion which has deteriorated or become contaminated in any way .
Bear the cost of replacing any such emulsion for use in the works .
SURPLUS MATERIALS ; Remove surplus materials in stockpiles and elsewhere from the job at the completion of the work .
WASTE ; Dispose of waste aggregate , bitumen emulsion , empty containers or other materials remaining after completion of the work in an acceptable manner and leave the work site in a neat and tidy condition .
10.12 MAINTENANCE Maintain the completed work in a satisfactory condition for a period of one month after completion of the whole of the work .
Maintenance is limited to work which results from failures attributable to the operations of the Contractor .
10.13 RECORDS – WITNESS POINT Record the particulars of the slurry surfacing work , as required by the Superintendent , on the Department ’ s standard “ Daily Record Sheet – Spray Surfacing ” .
Record the details of aggregate , added filler , emulsion and additive used together with the length and width of run immediately each run is completed .
Witness point - Forward the original copy of the slurry surfacing Daily Record Sheet to the Superintendent daily .
10.14 OTHER REQUIREMENTS Refer to PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS in the RFT .
MISCELLANEOUS CONCRETE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 83 11 MISCELLANEOUS CONCRETE 11.1 STANDARDS Conform to the following Standards and Publication unless specified otherwise : AS 1012 Methods of testing concrete AS 1141 Methods for sampling and testing aggregates AS 1289 Methods of testing soils for engineering purposes AS 1379 Specification and supply of concrete AS 1478.1 Chemical admixtures for concrete AS 2349 Method of sampling portland and blended cements AS 2350 ( set ) Methods of testing portland and blended cements AS 2758.1 Aggregates and rock for engineering purposes - Concrete aggregates AS 2876 Concrete kerbs and channels ( gutters ) - Manually or machine placed AS 3600 Concrete structures AS 3610 Formwork for concrete AS 3972 General purpose and blended cements AS/NZS 4671 Steel reinforcing materials NTMTM NT Materials Testing Manual NTTM NT Test Methods 11.2 GENERAL This section specifies miscellaneous minor concrete works and does not apply to buildings or bridges .
It is for incidental Concrete Works .
It should not be used for concrete pavements .
Concrete pavements require a specific `` one off '' specification developed as required .
CROSS REFERENCE Refer to CONFORMANCE TESTING for sampling frequencies for fresh concrete .
11.3 MATERIALS Provide manufacturer 's test certificates for quality of cement , aggregate and reinforcement .
11.3.1 Cement Type GP or GB to AS 3972 .
Store cement in watertight containers or shelters until used .
Do not mix or store special cement with normal Portland cement .
11.3.2 Fine Aggregate Clean , hard , tough , durable , uncoated grains , homogeneous in quality , free from clay , dirt and organic material .
11.3.3 Coarse Aggregate Clean , hard , durable , crushed stone or gravel , free from clay , dirt and organic material .
11.3.4 Water Clean and free from oil , alkali , organic or other deleterious substances .
11.3.5 Chemical Admixtures - Hold Point Hold Point - Do not use admixtures without obtaining prior written approval from the Superintendent .
Admixtures and their use must conform to AS 1478.1 .
Where two or more chemical admixtures are proposed for incorporation into a concrete mix , their compatibility must be certified by the manufacturers .
Store admixtures in accordance with the manufacturer ’ s recommendations .
11.3.6 Reinforcement – Hold Point Standard : To AS/NZS 4671 Supply , cut , bend and fix steel reinforcement as specified .
Secure reinforcement and bar supports to prevent displacement during construction and concrete placement .
Hold point - Do not place concrete until the reinforcement has been inspected by the Superintendent .
11.3.7 Recycled Crushed Glass ( RCG ) Clean , hard , durable RCG free from clay , dirt and organic material .
Source the material from glass food and beverage containers , drinking glasses , and window ( or flat ) glass and plain ceramic .
Do not use glass from hazardous waste containers , reinforced and laminated glass , light bulbs , fluorescent tubes and cathode ray tubes .
The source glass must be free of debris and contaminants such as paper and cardboard , plastic , fabrics , residues from original contents and toxins .
Use RCG conforming to Specifications for Recycled Crushed Glass as an Engineering Material Section 9 available at https : //infrastructure.nt.gov.au/specification- services/technical-specifications MISCELLANEOUS CONCRETE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 84 11.4 CONCRETE 11.4.1 Ready-mix Concrete Refer to PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS in the RFT for special requirements .
Supply concrete with the following properties unless specified otherwise : Compressive strength N25 Aggregate size , generally 20 mm Aggregate size , machine extruded kerbs and gutters 10 mm Slump 80 mm , + or - 15 mm Conduct slump testing on site for each and every truck .
11.4.2 Job-mixed Concrete Use Project Assessment in accordance with AS 3600 .
The Contractor will be responsible for sampling and testing .
Provide Project Assessment reports that encompass the period of concrete works .
Not required where insignificant structures and volumes and/or remote locations are involved .
Refer to PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS in the RFT for special requirements .
Provide concrete with properties as specified for ready-mix concrete .
Determine the quantities of materials to be used by mass or by equivalent dry loose volume .
Provide and maintain gauges for measurement of the materials .
11.4.3 Addition of Admixtures Refer to Clause 11.3.5 Chemical Admixtures - Hold Point Chemical admixtures may only be added subsequent to slump test compliance confirmation .
A further slump test post admixture addition may also be required .
Where Superintendent approval has been granted for the addition of superplasticisers at the plant prior to dispatch of concrete , a slump test of each batch must be performed and recorded by a NATA accredited testing laboratory prior to the addition of the superplasticiser .
The slump test report shall record the time of the addition of the superplasticiser , amount of superplasticiser added and product identification .
Do not add chemical admixtures unless the exact amount required is measured using a regularly maintained and calibrated device of the required accuracy .
Make allowance for the reversion time of superplasticisers .
Delay the addition of superplasticisers as long as practicable before the concrete is discharged from the mixer .
Agitate concrete for at least 5 minutes following the addition of superplasticiser before dispensing .
11.5 FOUNDATIONS Provide a foundation compacted to 90 % relative density within 150 mm of the base of concrete .
11.6 CONSTRUCTION 11.6.1 Kerbs and Gutters Construct kerbs and gutters as integral units .
11.6.2 Formwork – Witness Point Design and construct forms so that they are mortar tight and can be removed without damaging the concrete .
Build forms true to line and braced in a substantial and non-yielding manner .
Witness point - Do not place concrete until the formwork has been inspected by the Superintendent .
11.6.3 Placing of Concrete – Witness Point – Hold Point Witness point - Give the Superintendent sufficient notice so that inspection may be made before and during pouring concrete .
Hold point - Provide verification that all constituent materials , formwork , falsework , reinforcement , and environmental conditions comply with all requirements .
Do not cast any concrete without that verification .
Do not place concrete if the temperature of the concrete exceeds 35°C , or if the ambient air temperature exceeds 40°C .
Place and compact concrete within the following time after the addition of the mixing water to the mix : Place concrete in a continuous operation between construction joints so that the face of the concrete is in a plastic state when succeeding concrete is placed against it .
Table 11.1 - Maximum Time To Place Concrete After Mixing Concrete Temperature At Time Of Placing Maximum Time ( minutes ) 25 °C to 28 °C 75 28 °C to 32 °C 60 32 °C to 35 °C 45 MISCELLANEOUS CONCRETE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 85 Do not allow concrete to free-fall from a height greater than 1.5 metres .
Place all concrete in dry weather unless otherwise approved .
For each truck of premixed concrete provide an identification certificate on delivery listing the information required by AS 1379 and any other particular requirements for special class concrete .
11.6.4 Jointing CONSTRUCTION JOINTS Roughen and clean face of hardened concrete before placing fresh concrete against it .
Remove soft material , foreign matter and laitance .
Thoroughly moisten the joint surface .
EXPANSION/CONTRACTION JOINTS Joints to be 10 mm wide over full length and filled with a bitumen impregnated fibrous filler .
Provide vertical transverse expansion / contraction joints as follows : Footpaths : 6 m spacing maximum .
At junctions with other concrete structures Inverts : 15 m spacing maximum .
All other works : As shown on the drawings .
TOOLED JOINTS Provide tooled joints as follows : Transverse vertical grooves 20 mm depth minimum .
Joints at right angles to outer edge of concrete works .
Footpaths : 2 m spacing maximum .
Kerbs/Inverts : 3 m spacing maximum .
All other works : As shown on the drawings .
11.6.5 Surface Finishes Finish surfaces to a smooth and even colour .
Remove free surface water during final screeding of unformed surfaces .
Round off exposed edges and corners .
Protect exposed surfaces from rain until final set has occurred .
Smooth tumbled RCG used as an exposed aggregate surface finish .
Conform to Table 11.3 – Concrete Finishes .
11.6.6 Curing Protect and cure all exposed surfaces immediately after the concrete has taken its initial set .
Maintain all surfaces , including those within loosened formwork , in a moist condition by : - flooding ; - continuous spraying with water ; or - other methods approved by the Superintendent .
Prevent staining during the curing process of all concrete surfaces that will be visible in the completed works .
Continuously maintain the protection and curing of each element for the minimum time specified by AS 3600 to provide the concrete with durability corresponding to the specified exposure classification .
Do not use curing compounds in lieu of moist curing unless approved .
11.6.7 Backfilling Backfill areas around the concrete with Select Fill or as otherwise specified .
Refer to EARTHWORKS section .
Compact the backfilling in layers not exceeding 150 mm compacted thickness .
Reinstate damaged grassed areas with topsoil and grass seed .
11.7 RAIN DAMAGE Remove and replace rain damaged concrete .
11.8 EXISTING SERVICES – HOLD POINT Hold point - Obtain the Superintendent 's approval before altering the line or level of existing services .
Place an expansion joint between concrete works and service .
11.9 CONFORMANCE Refer to DRAINAGE WORKS for culvert structures and pits .
Conform to the following : Table 11.2 - Tolerances - Misc .
Concrete Aspect measured Tolerance Finished level + or -15 mm from the specified level Invert level + or -5 mm from the specified level Straight edge deviation of surface 3 mm max .
in 3 m - 6 mm max .
in 15 m Alignment + or -10 mm from the specified alignment Chainage at vehicle crossing + or -150 mm Width of vehicle crossing + or -25 mm 11.10 DEFECTIVE CONCRETE AND MATERIALS Concrete which is not placed , cured or finished as specified , does not have the specified strength or other specified properties , is not sound , dense , durable or crack-free will be considered defective .
MISCELLANEOUS CONCRETE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 86 Bear all cost and delays resulting from the rejection of concrete and subsequent rectification .
Remove the concrete to a point agreed with the Superintendent at which a visually and structurally acceptable construction joint can be made , and the defective element rebuilt .
Repair defective surface finishes if approved by the Superintendent .
Approval will not be given if the defective area is too extensive or the techniques proposed are not adequate to ensure a visually acceptable and durable repair .
11.11 OTHER REQUIREMENTS Refer to PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS in the RFT .
Table 11.3 – Concrete Finishes Type Description Application S1 Left rough to give key but not honeycombed or porous Surfaces to be rendered .
S2 Wood float As specified .
S3 Steel trowel without polish Internal surfaces subject to foot traffic .
Kerb and gutter .
S4 Wood float and broomed finish - broom finish - broom across direction of traffic Surfaces subject to vehicular traffic .
S6 Steel float followed by moist hair broom Surfaces subject to foot traffic .
F1 Remove mortar fins , etc. , repair minor blow holes by bagging where approved or rub down with Carborundum stone Formed surfaces exposed to view .
F2 Off forms - F3 Exposed RCG Application of RCG to be hand spread once application of the exposed mix has been bull floated .
RCG to be measured 1000 grams per square meter , or as otherwise specified by the Superintendent .
Colour and size of RCG to be specified by Superintendent .
DRAINAGE WORKS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 87 12 DRAINAGE WORKS 12.1 STANDARDS Conform to the following Standards and Publications unless specified otherwise : AS 1012 ( set ) Methods of testing concrete .
AS 1141 ( set ) Methods for sampling and testing aggregates .
AS 1289 ( set ) Methods of testing soil for engineering purposes .
AS 1379 Specification and supply of concrete .
AS 1478.1 Chemical admixtures for concrete .
AS 1597 ( set ) Precast reinforced concrete box culverts .
AS/NZS 2041 ( set ) Buried corrugated metal structures .
AS 2349 Method of sampling portland and blended cements .
AS 2350 Methods of testing portland and blended cements .
AS 2439 Perforated plastics drainage and effluent pipe and fittings .
AS 2758.1 Aggregates and rock for engineering purposes - Concrete aggregates .
AS 3600 Concrete structures .
AS 3610 Formwork for concrete .
AS 3706 ( set ) Geotextiles - Methods of test .
AS/NZS 3725 Design for installation of buried concrete pipes .
AS 3972 Portland and blended cements .
AS/NZS 4058 Precast concrete pipes ( pressure and non-pressure ) .
AS/NZS 4671 Steel reinforcing materials AS 5100.5 Bridge Design - Concrete NTMTM NT Materials Testing Manual .
NTTM NT Test Methods AUSTROADS AGBT Set Guide to Bridge Technology .
ARRB Specifications for Recycled Crushed Glass as an Engineering Material WorkSafe Australia Excavation Work Code of Practice 12.2 DEFINITIONS CULVERT : An underground pipe , box or arch constructed in an embankment or trench .
CULVERT SKEW ANGLE : The angle between a line drawn perpendicular or radial to the road centre line and the centre line of the culvert .
CULVERT CHAINAGE : The chainage measured along the road centre line at its intersection with the culvert centre line .
LARGE BOX CULVERTS : Precast box culverts and link slabs having spans greater than 1200 mm , heights greater than 1200 mm or fill heights exceeding 1600 mm .
RECYCLED CRUSHED GLASS ( RCG ) : RCG conforming to Specifications for Recycled Crushed Glass as an Engineering Material Section 9 .
A copy is available at https : //infrastructure.nt.gov.au/specification- services/technical-specifications .
TOM ( S ) Devices used to hold pipe culverts in place during backfilling of trenches .
Also ; Horizontal device ( s ) , such as timbers , metal struts , hydraulic spreaders , etc , spanning across an excavation for holding soldiers ( vertical timbers ) or walings ( horizontal timbers ) in place against the sides of trenches before and during trench backfilling .
UNSUITABLE MATERIAL Any material that does not conform to the properties specified for the replacement materials to be used .
If properties of the replacement materials to be used are not specified , then UNSUITABLE MATERIALS are materials which do not conform to the properties specified for standard fill .
12.3 GENERAL This section applies to the construction of precast concrete pipe culverts not exceeding 1950 mm nominal diameter , precast concrete box culverts and other drainage items .
12.4 CLEARING Clear the site as specified in the CLEARING , GRUBBING AND REHABILITATION Section .
12.5 MATERIALS Conformance testing will be the responsibility of the Contractor .
Ensure that all pipes and box culverts are indelibly marked with a Standards Australia conformance stamp .
Pipes and box culverts not stamped shall be removed from site at the Contractor 's expense .
DRAINAGE WORKS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 88 12.5.1 Precast Reinforced Concrete Pipes Pipes to be flush joint type with external rubber bands .
Pipes to be clearly marked as to their class .
12.5.2 Precast Reinforced Concrete Box Culverts – Hold Point – Witness Point Use box culverts of the inverted U type suitable for installation on a cast-in-situ concrete slab .
Design and supply box culverts which have a span not greater than 1200 mm , height not more than 1200 mm and a fill height not more than 1600 mm in accordance with AS 1597.1 .
Design all other box culverts in accordance with AS 1597.2 .
Use Standard Vehicle Loadings including NT Standard Road Train , with addition of the HLP 400 Abnormal Vehicle Loading on all National Highways , and HLP 320 on all other routes .
Provide culverts designed for the exposure classification of the site of the works , determined from AS 5100.5 Exposure Classifications Table .
Refer to NT CLIMATE ZONES TABLE .
Hold point - Provide drawings showing complete reinforcement and dimensions with tolerances and obtain the Superintendent ’ s approval prior to fabricating any units .
Provide manufacturer ’ s certification that the provided culverts comply with the applicable sections of AS 5100.5 and with AS 1597 .
Certify that the design is reflected accurately by the shop drawings and that the design is adequate to resist all specified loads and the soil loads pertaining to the site .
Provide a table of construction axle loads versus minimum required cover for each box culvert size .
Witness point - Give the Superintendent notice prior to casting concrete .
12.5.3 Corrugated Steel Pipes , Pipe Arches and Arches Supply in accordance with the details specified .
Assemble in accordance with the manufacturer 's instructions .
12.5.4 Bedding Bedding material to be one of the following : - A clean granular material free from sticks , stones and other deleterious material with a Table 12.1 – Material Size , or - RCG conforming to Specifications for Recycled Crushed Glass as an Engineering Material Section 9 , or - Mix blend of RCG conforming to Specifications for Recycled Crushed Glass as an Engineering Material Section 9 , and clean granular material free from sticks , stones and other deleterious material with a Plasticity Index less than 6 , conforming to Table 12.1 – Material Size .
12.5.5 Concrete Conform to the requirements of MISCELLANEOUS CONCRETE WORKS .
12.5.6 Mortar Use one part fresh cement and three parts clean sharp sand mixed with potable water to yield a stiff but workable mixture .
12.5.7 Select Fill Conform to the requirements of EARTHWORKS .
12.6 CONSTRUCTION OF CULVERTS AND STRUCTURES 12.6.1 Setting Out – Hold Point Measure culvert length along the invert to the outside face of headwalls .
Measure pits and/or manholes to the inside face of the wall .
Finished surface levels for kerbside structures are measured at the top of the kerb .
Set out the culvert and/or structure with pegs before construction .
Hold Point - Obtain the Superintendent 's approval for the setting out before construction .
12.6.2 Excavation – Witness point Excavate in whatever material is encountered .
Use of explosives shall be in accordance with MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS .
Pump , bail , sheet , shore and brace as necessary .
Divert water when necessary .
Table 12.1 – Material Size AS Sieve ( mm ) Percentage Passing By Dry Mass 19.0 100 2.36 50 – 100 0.60 20 – 90 0.30 10 – 60 0.15 0 – 25 0.075 0 – 10 DRAINAGE WORKS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 89 Rectify foundations which are affected by rain or surface water entering the excavation .
The total width of trench at and below the level of the top of the pipe shall be the width of culvert plus 300 mm minimum clearance each side .
Backfill with select fill up to the specified level if the trench is excavated too deep .
Any such backfilling shall be at the Contractor 's expense .
Witness point - Excavate unsuitable material below specified level if directed by the Superintendent .
Replace with select fill , compacted as specified .
12.6.3 Culverts in Fill under Construction Refer to EARTHWORKS Clause 4.4.5 Construction Methods , Compacted Layer Method .
Place and compact fill to Manufacturer ’ s instructions and design specifications .
Use select fill .
Refer to PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS in the RFT .
Conform to Compacted Layer Method in EARTHWORKS .
Excavate the fill in accordance with 12.6.2 Excavation – Witness point to permit the construction of the culvert .
12.6.4 Construction Loading on Culverts Provide the minimum compacted thickness of cover specified in Table 12.2 – Minimum Required Cover Thickness ( Metres ) before allowing traffic to cross a culvert .
Do not permit construction vehicles having axle loads greater than 10 tonnes to cross large box culverts under any depth of fill unless specific certification is provided by the culvert crown unit manufacturer that the culverts have been designed to cope with those loads .
12.6.5 Bedding Place bedding 75 mm compacted thickness for the full width of the trench or 0.6 m greater than the width of the culvert for non-trench conditions .
Compact bedding to 90 % relative compaction .
Shape the bedding to hold pipes in position during compaction of additional fill .
Place and compact a further ( haunching ) layer of bedding of 150 mm compacted thickness over the full width of the previous layer after the pipe is in position .
Consider increasing thickness of haunching for large pipe culverts under high fills , to upgrade maximum bedding factor given in Table 5 of AS/NZS 3725 .
12.6.6 Laying Generally Lay culverts commencing from the downstream end .
End caps , when used , shall provide a tight waterproof seal .
12.6.7 Laying Pipe Culverts Face rebates or sockets upstream .
Rest the full length of the pipe barrel on the bedding .
Position ‘ TOP ’ marking on pipes to within 5 degrees of the vertical axis .
Table 12.2 – Minimum Required Cover Thickness ( Metres ) Maximum Construction Vehicle Axle Load ( tonne ) Type , Size And Class Of Culvert Concrete Pipes , By Pipe Class Corrugated Metal Pipes Boxes Less than 1200 mm Nominal Diameter 1200 mm Nominal Diameter or more Internal Diameter or Span up to 3600 mm Less than 1200 mm Span , 1200 Height and 1600 Final Fill Height Concrete Pipe Class X ( 2 ) Y ( 3 ) Z ( 4 ) X ( 2 ) Y ( 3 ) Z ( 4 ) 9 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.6 0.1 20 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.5 0.4 0.4 1.2 0.6 35 1.3 0.8 0.6 1.3 0.4 0.4 1.5 0.9 50 1.0 0.8 - 1.0 0.4 - 1.8 1.2 DRAINAGE WORKS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 90 Fill all joints with stiff mortar firmly rammed into openings .
Remove excess mortar from barrel of culvert .
Apply external rubber bands .
Brace pipes of 1200 mm diameter and greater with toms until the completion of the embankment and pavement .
The toms shall bear against a sill along the invert and a cap against the crown of the pipe .
Provide toms opposite every pipe joint .
Cast collars and blocks in one operation .
Restrain the culvert prior to constructing the collars or blocks by partially backfilling with bedding around the barrel of the culvert to one-half of the pipe diameter .
12.6.8 Laying Box Culverts Lay precast box culverts on a cast-in-situ reinforced concrete base slab .
Ensure concrete base slab exceeds external width of box culverts as shown on the typical details .
Butt box culverts firmly together .
Cut away lifting hooks and seal over the affected area with an approved epoxy resin .
Fill all joints with a stiff mortar firmly rammed into the openings .
Remove excess mortar from the barrel of the culvert and apply external joint seals , Densopol HT60 or equivalent , 150 mm wide .
12.6.9 Connection to Existing Systems – Witness Point Repair all cut openings and make watertight .
Demolish existing headwalls to make way for the extension of the culvert .
Clean out new work and existing work affected by the new work .
Witness Point – Advise superintendent within two days when clean out is completed 12.6.10 Backfill – Witness Point – Hold Point Witness point - Notify the Superintendent before backfilling where holes or fissures occur in rock trenches .
Hold point - Do not place backfill against any in-situ concrete structure until the concrete has attained 80 % characteristic strength and approval has been given .
Place backfill in layers not exceeding 150 mm compacted thickness .
Ensure the maximum difference in height of backfill on each side of a culvert is 300 mm .
Backfill around the culvert for the full width of the trench , and for a minimum 300 mm above the top of the culvert , or to subgrade surface if less , with select fill .
Backfill the remainder of the trench with standard fill .
Stabilise all backfill with 2 % cement by mass and compact to 95 % relative compaction .
Produce a uniform mix .
Complete compaction within one hour of adding mixing water .
Use compaction equipment which will not damage the culvert and in-situ structures .
Carry out conformance testing using the Department ’ s Panel Period Contractors for Testing .
Stabilise top 150 mm of backfill , for a distance of 1 m adjacent to culvert headwalls and wing walls , so as to be erosion - resistant .
Remove surplus material from the site .
Reinstate to subgrade level trenches cut through pavements and other construction by backfilling the trench with stabilised select fill compacted to 95 % relative compaction .
Construct base/sub-base layers of the pavement in accordance with PAVEMENTS AND SHOULDERS .
Reinstate surface .
Reinstate trenches cut outside of pavements and other construction by backfilling with standard fill compacted to 90 % relative compaction .
12.7 INLET AND OUTLET STRUCTURES AND MAINTENANCE HOLES Construct in accordance with the specifications .
Compact foundations to 95 % relative compaction to a depth of 150 mm minimum .
Replace unsuitable material as specified in 12.6.2 Excavation 12.8 INLET AND OUTLET CHANNELS – WITNESS POINT Excavate the inlet and outlet of all culverts to facilitate the flow of water .
Conform to the following : Bed width : Minimum 150 mm greater than overall width of culvert .
Side batters : 45 degrees maximum to horizontal .
Bed grade : 0.5 % in the direction of flow for a minimum distance of 50 metres .
Clean out new work and existing work affected by the new work .
Witness point – Advise superintendent within two days when clean out is completed .
DRAINAGE WORKS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 91 12.9 OPEN UNLINED DRAINS Excavate and dispose of all excess material as specified in EARTHWORKS .
Trim drains to form neat levees .
Compact levees to 95 % relative compaction .
Allow natural surface runoff .
12.10 REMOVAL OF EXISTING CULVERTS AND DRAINAGE STRUCTURES Demolish and remove from the site , as specified , existing culverts and drainage structures .
12.11 SUBSOIL DRAINS 12.11.1 Excavation Excavate below the top of required depth of cover to drainage devices ( pipe or other ) to a minimum depth equal to the outside diameter of the pipe or height of other device , plus 75 mm .
Line the trench with geotextile fabric .
Refer to PROTECTION WORKS .
Place a bedding layer of 50 mm of filter material in the trench and compact with a vibrating plate or similar .
12.11.2 Filter Material Shall be a hard durable stone having a Los Angeles Abrasion Loss not greater than 35 % .
Conform to the grading specified by the manufacturer of the subsoil pipe .
If manufacturer 's grading not supplied , conform to Table 12.3 – Filter Material Grading .
12.11.3 Geotextile Fabric Conform to the requirements of 13.3 Geotextile Fabrics in PROTECTION WORKS .
12.11.4 Subsoil Drain Pipe Use 100 mm diameter Class 400 .
Use compatible couplings and fittings .
Connect solid wall pipe to the subsoil drain pipe for the disposal of collected water .
12.11.5 Laying and Backfilling – Hold Point Fit the upper end of pipelines with inspection openings and caps supported in a concrete collar .
Hold point - Obtain Superintendent 's approval of the pipe installation before backfilling .
Place filter material around the barrel of the pipe and to a height of 200 mm above the pipe .
Compact with a vibrating plate compactor or similar .
Place and compact remaining layers of the filter in layers not exceeding 300 mm .
Prevent contamination of the filter .
Place and compact basecourse gravel , as specified in PAVEMENTS AND SHOULDERS in the top 300 mm of trench .
Place the material in two equal layers compacted to 95 % relative compaction .
Where trench excavated through pavement compact upper layer of base course gravel to 100 % relative compaction and reinstate surface .
Backfill above solid wall pipes as specified in 12.6.10 Backfill – Witness Point – Hold Point 12.11.6 End Walls – Witness Point Construct end walls at the outlet of subsoil drains as specified .
Secure 19 mm galvanised wire mesh over the opening .
Mark end walls with guide posts .
Clean out new work and existing work affected by the new work .
Witness Point – Advise Superintendent within two days when clean out is completed .
12.12 CONFORMANCE Conform to Table 12.4 - Drainage Works Tolerances .
Table 12.4 - Drainage Works Tolerances Property/dimension Tolerance Invert level and grade line No ponding of water .
Open unlined drains + or - 50 mm .
Culverts or lined drains + or - 20 mm Plan position + or - 200 mm .
Culverts parallel to kerbs + or - 50 mm .
Concrete structure dimension + or - 5 mm .
Concrete thickness : Not less than specified .
Subsoil drain slope 25 mm maximum sag in 8 m. 12.13 OTHER REQUIREMENTS Refer to PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS in the RFT .
Table 12.3 – Filter Material Grading AS Sieve ( mm ) Percentage Passing 37.50 100 19.00 90 – 100 9.50 65 – 85 4.75 45 – 65 0.60 0 – 5 PROTECTION WORKS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 92 13 PROTECTION WORKS 13.1 STANDARDS Conform to the following Standards and Publication unless specified otherwise : AS 1012 Methods of testing concrete .
AS 1141 ( set ) Methods of sampling and testing aggregates .
AS 1141.25.1 Degradation factor – Source rock ( Washington Degradation Test ) .
AS 1141.26 Secondary minerals content in basic igneous rocks AS 1141.29 Accelerated soundness index by reflux .
Basic igneous rocks AS 1289 ( set ) Methods of testing soils for engineering purposes .
AS 1725 ( set ) Chain link fabric fencing .
AS 2001.2.3.2 Methods of test for textiles – Method 2.3.2 : Physical tests – Determination of maximum force using the grab method .
AS 2423 Coated steel wire fencing products for terrestrial , aquatic and general use .
AS 2758.1 Aggregates and rock for engineering purposes - Concrete aggregates .
AS 3706 ( set ) Geotextiles - Methods of test .
AS 3972 General purpose and blended cements .
AS 4133 ( set ) Methods of testing rocks for engineering purposes .
AS/NZS 4671 Steel reinforcing materials AS/NZS 4680 Hot dip galvanized ( zinc ) coatings on fabricated ferrous articles .
NTMTM NT Materials Testing Manual .
NTTM NT Test Methods 13.2 FOUNDATIONS Excavate , fill and trim the site to the required shape prior to commencing the protection works .
Compact the top 150 mm of earthworks , on which protection works are to be laid to 90 % maximum dry density ratio ( modified ) .
13.3 GEOTEXTILE FABRICS 13.3.1 General Supply and lay non-woven polypropylene or polyester geotextile fabric , consisting of long chain synthetic polymers composed of at least 95 % by mass of polyolefins or polyesters .
The geotextile filaments must be rot-proof , chemically stable and must have low water absorbency .
Filaments must resist delamination and maintain their dimensional stability in the geotextile .
Non-woven geotextiles must have filaments bonded by needle punching , heat or chemical bonding processes .
Woven geotextiles must have filaments interlaced in two sets , mutually at right angles .
One set must be parallel to the longitudinal direction of the geotextile .
Geotextiles must be free of any flaws which may have an adverse effect on the physical and mechanical properties of the geotextile .
Geotextiles must be stabilised against ultra- violet radiation such that , when tested in accordance with AS 3706.11 , must have a retained strength of at least 50 % after 500 hours of exposure .
13.3.2 Storage , Packaging and Handling Geotextiles must be stored under protective cover or wrapped with a waterproof , opaque UV protective sheeting to avoid damage prior to installation .
Geotextiles must not be stored directly on the ground or in any manner in which they may be affected adversely by heat , water or soil .
The method of storage must be in accordance with recommendations by the manufacturer .
The protected geotextile rolls must be clearly labelled showing manufacturer , type of geotextile , and batch identification number .
Handle rolls with forklifts or similar , using dedicated slings , free of sharp hooks or tongs .
Rolls that are dropped , dragged or pushed around on the ground will be rejected .
13.3.3 Delivery and Product Certification Geotextile must be delivered to site at least 5 days prior to commencement of installation .
Provide a Certificate of Compliance that the geotextile complies with all the requirements as specified , together with test results reported on NATA endorsed test documents .
The certificate must not be more than 12 months old .
The Certificate of Compliance to include : quality control documentation for the relevant batch/lots , physical properties sheet , and manufacturer ’ s letter of certification stating compliance .
13.3.4 Construction Prepare smooth surfaces for placement of the geotextile , free of sharp objects , large rocks and protruding vegetation .
Place geotextiles just ahead of the advancing face of construction work , with a maximum of 48 hours of placement prior to covering .
Repair punctures and tears .
Where used in trenches or other drainage configurations , place the geotextile to the shape of the prepared surface , folding and overlapping PROTECTION WORKS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 93 where required .
Fully envelope drainage materials in trenches .
Unless specified elsewhere in the contract , the overlap must be minimum 300 mm .
Overlap to be minimum 500 mm where large ground deformations are expected .
Sewing may be permitted provided the seam strength exceeds the parent material grab strength .
Direct travel of machinery over geotextile not permitted .
Where required , conform to the following initial layer of material thicknesses : Table 13.1 - Minimum Initial Layer Thickness ( mm ) Nominal Maximum Particle Size D85 of Initial Fill Layer ( mm ) Minimum Initial Layer Thickness ( mm ) < 150 300 150 - 300 400 300 - 500 500 Rock armour placed directly on geotextiles must be placed with a drop height of less than 1.5m , and placed in a such a manner so as not to damage , puncture or tear the geotextile .
Obtain Superintendent approval for use of vibratory compaction methods on the initial layer .
13.3.5 Geotextile Grades Unless specified elsewhere in the contract , use : non-woven , Strength Grade B .
All strength grades , where specified , based on a Characteristic Values ( Q ) , to conform to the table : Table 13.2 – Geotextile Strength Grade Properties Geo textile Strength Grade Elong- ation ( 1 ) Grade Strength ( 2 ) ( N ) Tear ( 2 ) ( N ) G Rating ( 2 ) A > 30 % < 30 % 500 800 180 300 900 1350 B > 30 % < 30 % 700 1100 250 400 1350 2000 C > 30 % < 30 % 900 1400 350 500 2000 3000 D > 30 % < 30 % 1200 1900 450 700 3000 4500 E > 30 % 1600 650 4500 Notes : ( 1 ) % Elongation corresponding to max CBR burst strength as per AS 3706.4 .
Generally < 30 % for wovens , > 30 % for non-wovens .
( 2 ) Property value is 80th percentile characteristic value ( mean strength – 0.83 x standard deviation ) , as per relevant AS test .
Filtration properties relevant to each grade to be certified as part of 13.3.3 Delivery and Product Certification requirements .
13.3.6 Conformance Testing Where project requirement is less than 15,000 m2 , sampling and testing is not required .
Provide samples to independent , NATA accredited testing laboratory when project exceeds 15,000 m2 , to the following test frequencies : Table 13.3 – Test Frequencies Description Units Test Method Test Frequency Tensile Strength kN/m AS 3706.2 1 per 15,000 m2 Tear Strength N AS 3706.3 1 per 15,000 m2 CBR Burst Strength N AS 3706.4 1 per 15,000 m2 Grade Tensile Strength N AS 2001.2 .3.2 1 per 15,000 m2 Flow Rate l/m2/s AS 3706.9 1 per 90,000 m2 Samples to be 15 m2 in size , cut across full width of the roll , not within 2 m of the end of a roll .
13.4 ROCK PROPERTIES The rock properties specified in this clause apply to the rock , stone , aggregate and boulders specified in the following clauses in this section ; − Stone Pitching − Dumped Rock − Quarter Tonne Dumped Rock − Rubble − Gabion Rock − Reno Mattresses REQUIREMENTS ; Clean , dry , durable crushed stone of uniform quality , free from declared weeds and their seeds , vegetable matter and other deleterious materials .
Particles must have at least 2 crushed faces and comply with the following standards ; AS 1141.25.1 Degradation factor – Source rock ( Washington Degradation PROTECTION WORKS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 94 Test ) .
Basic igneous rocks , eg .
Basalt aggregates , shall have a minimum value of 50 .
AS 1141.26 Secondary minerals content in basic igneous rocks , eg .
Basalt aggregates , shall not exceed 25 % .
AS 1141.29 Accelerated soundness index by reflux .
Basic igneous rocks , eg .
Basalt aggregates , shall have a minimum value of 94 .
13.5 STONE PITCHING 13.5.1 Stone Pitching The stone to be spalls of hard durable rock complying with 13.4 Rock Properties and with no dimension less than 200 mm .
Hand place the stones so that they are firmly bedded in layers .
The average plane of the exposed face to be within 100 mm of the specified plane and all exposed faces of stones to be within 50 mm of the average plane .
13.5.2 Grouted Stone Pitching – Hold Point Place stones as specified in 13.5.1 Stone Pitching .
Hold point - Obtain Superintendent 's approval before grouting .
Grout stone pitching with cement mortar .
Cement mortar to consist of one part cement to three parts of clean sand mixed with potable water to form a workable mixture .
Work the mortar into the interstices of the stone pitching to a depth of at least 100 mm from the surface .
Work from the base upwards .
Allow the mortar to cure for at least 48 hours .
Remove defective mortar and re-grout any loose stones .
Provide 75 mm diameter weep holes penetrating the full thickness of the grout at the rate of one every 5 square metres .
13.6 DUMPED ROCK PROTECTION Large spalls or boulders complying with 13.4 Rock Properties and having a least dimension of that specified in PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS in the RFT .
Dump into the specified area .
Protect adjacent areas from damage due to dumping .
The average plane of the exposed rock face to be within 100 mm of the specified position .
13.7 QUARTER TONNE CLASS DUMPED ROCK PROTECTION Use large spalls or boulders complying with 13.4 Rock Properties and having the following grading .
Table 13.4 – Rock – Size and Grading Rock Size Minimum % Larger Than 35kg 90 250kg 50 500kg 0 Dump into the specified area .
Protect adjacent areas from damage due to dumping .
The average plane of the exposed rock face to be within 100 mm of the specified position .
13.8 RUBBLE Broken rock complying with 13.4 Rock Properties .
Maximum size of rubble to be 200 mm .
At least 30 % by mass to have a nominal size of 100 mm or greater .
No more than 20 % by mass to pass the 2.36 mm sieve .
Dump rubble without segregation onto the prepared area .
Compact rubble to a tight finish .
The average plane of the exposed face to be within 100 mm of that specified .
The exposed face to be within 100 mm of the average plane .
13.9 GABIONS 13.9.1 General A flexible , hexagonal woven steel wire mesh box , filled with packed stone , complying with 13.4 Rock Properties and securely laced with steel wire .
13.9.2 Steel Wire Mesh Use galvanized steel wire , Grade W15Z380 to AS 2423 .
Zinc coating ; 250 g/sq.m Galvanization to be carried out prior to weaving of the mesh .
Minimum tensile strength of wire : 380 MPa Mesh openings to be 80 mm x 100 mm maximum , hexagonal in shape with flexible joints consisting of not less than two full turns .
All wire to be coated with average thickness of 0.55 mm extruded grey PVC firmly attached to the wire .
The minimum thickness of coating to be 0.40 mm in accordance with AS 2423 .
At the discretion of the Superintendent , the PVC coating may be omitted where abrasion of wire is not likely to be of concern or where deleterious effects on the wire of ground water , soil salinity , natural weather exposure and water emersion is not significant .
Check PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS in the RFT .
Conform to the following wire sizes and galvanizing weights : PROTECTION WORKS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 95 Table 13.5 – Wire Properties - Gabions Wire Type Minimum Diameter ( mm ) Body wire 2.7 Binding and lacing wire 2.2 Selvedge wire 3.4 Selvedge wire shall be woven integrally along all edges of the mesh , in accordance with the manufacturer 's instructions , and such that the mesh shall not unravel .
The steel wire mesh shall be sized so that it can be folded into regular boxes , complete with diaphragms , having dimensions specified .
Diaphragms to be at 1,000 mm spacings .
13.9.3 Construction Assemble and erect in accordance with the manufacturer 's instructions .
Pretension the wire framework against a firm anchor or adjacent units .
Retain the shape of the wire framework with spreaders .
Fill with hard durable stone , complying with 13.4 Rock Properties and placed in stages to achieve the tightest packing of stone .
Maximum stone dimension : 250 mm .
Minimum stone dimension : 100 mm .
Overfill the framework by 20 mm to 50 mm to allow for subsequent movement of the stone .
Perform lacing operations using specified lacing wire .
Wire to pass round the edges being joined using alternative single and double loops through each mesh in turn .
Tightness of the mesh and wiring is essential .
Ensure a tightly packed , neat and uniform construction .
13.10 RENO MATTRESSES 13.10.1 General A flexible , hexagonal woven steel wire mesh box , filled with packed stone , complying with 13.4 Rock Properties and securely laced with steel wire .
13.10.2 Steel Wire Mesh Use galvanized steel wire , Grade W15Z380 to AS 2423 .
Zinc coating ; 250 g/sq.m .
Galvanization to be carried out prior to the weaving of the mesh .
Minimum tensile strength of wire : 380 MPa .
Mesh openings to be 60 mm x 80 mm maximum , hexagonal in shape with flexible joints consisting of not less than two full turns .
All wire to be coated with average thickness of 0.55 mm extruded grey PVC firmly attached to the wire .
The minimum thickness of coating to be 0.40 mm in accordance with AS 2423 .
At the discretion of the Superintendent , the PVC coating may be omitted where abrasion of wire is not likely to be of concern or where deleterious effects on the wire of ground water , soil salinity , natural weather exposure and water emersion is not significant .
Check PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS in the RFT .
Conform with the following wire sizes and galvanizing weights : Table 13.6 – Wire Properties – Reno Mattresses Wire Type Minimum Diameter ( mm ) Body wire 2.0 Binding and lacing wire 2.2 Selvedge wire 2.4 Selvedge wire to be woven integrally along all edges of the mesh , in accordance with the manufacturer 's instructions .
Cut to shape where necessary .
MATTRESS PANELS Bottom panel : Includes both sides and both end panels .
Top panel : Shall have the same dimension as the bottom , without the sides and ends , and be supplied separately .
Diaphragms : Extend over the full width of the mattress from top to bottom at maximum intervals of 1 m. 13.10.3 Construction Assemble and erect in accordance with the manufacturer 's instructions .
Align diaphragms perpendicular to the direction of flow unless otherwise specified .
Pretension the wire framework against a firm anchor or adjacent units .
Retain the shape of the wire framework with spreaders .
Fill with hard durable stone complying with 13.4 Rock Properties and placed in stages to achieve the tightest packing of stone .
Maximum stone dimension : 120 mm when mattress depth 170 mm .
150 mm when mattress depth 230 mm .
200 mm when mattress depth 300 mm or greater .
Minimum least stone dimension : 80 mm .
Overfill the framework by 20 mm to 50 mm to allow for subsequent movement of the stone .
PROTECTION WORKS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 96 Perform lacing operations using specified lacing wire .
Wire to pass round the edges being joined using alternative single and double loops through each mesh in turn .
Tightness of the mesh and wiring is essential .
Last panel on downstream side , or at base of slope , shall be a whole unit ( i.e .
not cut ) .
Ensure a tightly packed , neat and uniform construction .
13.11 REVETMENT MATTRESSES 13.11.1 General A nylon fabric material filled with mortar with filter points for the relief of hydrostatic uplift pressure .
Conform to the manufacturer 's instructions .
13.11.2 Materials Mortar mix proportions : Table 13.7 – Mortar Mix Proportions – Revetment Mattresses Cement Type GP or GB Fine Sand Coarse Sand Water 1 ( 500kg ) 1.2 ( 600kg ) 2.2 ( 1,100kg ) 450 l/m3 Adjust fine sand/coarse sand proportions if required to provide workable mix .
13.11.3 Construction Toe-in to provide cut-off walls minimum 300 mm deep and width not less than maximum thickness of mattress .
Lay , cut and stitch mattress on prepared surface .
Make allowance for take up of fabric resulting from filling mattress with mortar .
All stitching and seams to be neat in appearance and strength to withstand filling pressure .
Ensure mattress is anchored prior to mortar pumping to prevent creep during placement of mortar .
Provide openings in fabric at a maximum of one every 50 sq.m for placement of mortar .
Opening to match size of pumping hose .
Make good openings on completion of mortar pumping .
All areas of mattress to be hard filled with mortar with smooth surface .
Do not permit any loading on the mattress until one hour after mortar pumping has been completed .
Remove spilt mortar from surface of mattress by hand only .
Do not use water to wash spilt mortar .
Make good any defective areas .
13.12 EMBANKMENT PROTECTION - CONCRETE Construct embankment protection from concrete reinforced with a single layer of centrally located SL62 mesh .
Overlap the mesh by 200 mm at joints .
Make construction joints in the vertical plane , at 2 m maximum spacing .
Continue reinforcement mesh across construction joints .
Where margins are required , construct the embankment protection and the margins as an integral unit .
Where there are adjacent protection works , construct the toe of the embankment protection and the adjacent protection work as an integral unit .
Drainage holes to be 75 mm diameter penetrating the full thickness of the protection works .
Install the drainage holes at 3 m intervals just above the toe .
Install additional rows of drainage holes parallel to the first , and at 3 m intervals and spacings , where the scope of work requires it .
The exposed surface to be within 50 mm of the specified position .
13.13 MARGINS Construct margins with reinforced concrete .
Conforming to the requirements of MISCELLANEOUS CONCRETE WORKS .
Make construction joints at 3 m maximum spacing .
Form the top 75 mm of the vertical face nearer the pavement , and any exposed outer face , true to line and level .
Wood float and broom finish the upper surface of the margin .
Finish flush with the top of the pavement .
Where adjacent pavement is sealed , overlap the bituminous seal on the margins by not less than 100 mm .
TOLERANCES Width : Not less than specified .
Level : + or – 10 mm of top of adjacent pavement .
13.14 OTHER REQUIREMENTS Refer to PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS in the RFT .
ROAD FURNITURE AND TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 97 14 ROAD FURNITURE AND TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES 14.1 STANDARDS Conform to the following Standards and Publication unless specified otherwise : AS 1012 ( set ) Methods of testing concrete AS 1074 Steel tubes and tubulars for ordinary services AS/NZS 1111 ( set ) ISO metric hexagon commercial bolts and screws Set AS/NZS 1112 ( set ) ISO metric hexagon nuts , Including thin nuts , slotted nuts and castle nuts Set AS 1273 Unplasticised PVC ( UPVC ) downpipe and fittings for rainwater AS 1397 Steel sheet and strip hot dipped zinc coated or aluminium/zinc coated AS/NZS 1554 ( set ) Structural steel welding ( Set ) AS/NZS 1594 Hot rolled steel flat products AS 1604.1 Specification for preservative treatment – Sawn and round timber AS 1722 Pipe threads of whitworth form AS 1725 ( set ) Chain link fabric fencing AS/NZS 1734 Aluminium and aluminium alloys - Flat sheet , coiled sheet and plate AS 1742 ( set ) Manual of uniform traffic control devices AS 1743 Road signs – Specifications AS 1744 Standard alphabet for road signs AS/NZS 1906.1 Retroreflective materials and devices for road traffic control purposes – Retroreflective sheeting AS 2423 Coated steel wire fencing products for terrestrial , aquatic and general use AS/NZS 3750.9 Paints for steel structures - Organic zinc-rich primer AS/NZS 3845.1 Road safety barrier systems and devices - Road safety barrier systems AS/NZS 4680 Hot dip galvanized ( zinc ) coatings on fabricated ferrous articles APAS 1441/1 Permanent graffiti barrier , clear , exterior APAS 1442/1 Temporary graffiti barrier , clear , exterior APAS 1443 Graffiti Remover 14.2 DEFINITIONS CS and C ( S ) : Civil Standard drawing .
Use the latest version unless specified otherwise .
GRAFFITI : The name for images or lettering scratched , scrawled , painted or marked in any manner on property .
LONGITUDINAL LINES : Any line which runs parallel to the road centre line , e.g .
broken line , edge line , separation line , barrier line .
OTHER MARKINGS : All diagonal lines , chevron markings and messages on the pavement , including symbols , words , numerals , arrows and kerb markings .
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICE : Any sign , signal , pavement marking or other installation placed or erected for the purpose of regulating , warning , guiding or providing for the safety of road users .
It does not include temporary warning devices and control measures erected only for the construction period .
TRANSVERSE MARKINGS : Any line which is at right angles to the centre line of the road , e.g .
stop line , hold line , pedestrian cross walk 14.3 FENCING 14.3.1 General Clearing fence lines includes the removal of trees , shrubs , vegetable matter and debris .
Grub out all roots that interfere with the placement of posts .
Erect fences so that the line of the tops of the posts is uniform .
Adjust the position of posts to compensate for the irregularities of the ground .
Provide gates where specified and across existing access tracks or roads .
14.3.2 Existing Fences Install a post at the intersection of new fence with existing fence and fix the wiring of both fences to that post .
Complete the necessary sections of new fencing before removing or opening a boundary or internal fence .
Obtain the owners agreement to the proposed fence removal and advise the owner or occupier in writing of the date the fence will be removed .
Erect gates or grids at fence openings as specified .
14.3.3 Materials Barbed wire : 1.57 mm diameter minimum , high tensile .
Plain wire : 2.50 mm diameter minimum , high tensile .
Wire mesh : Galvanized 3.15 mm diameter x 50 mm chain mesh .
ROAD FURNITURE AND TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 98 14.3.4 Stock Fence Stock fencing to consist of tubular steel strainer assemblies with star pickets and galvanized wire .
Construct as specified on standard drawing CS 1306 .
Include the crossing of gullies , watercourses and hollows on the ground .
14.3.5 Security Fence Security fencing to consist of tubular steel posts complete with post caps , cable straining wires , chainwire mesh and three barbed wires .
Construct as specified on standard drawing CS 1303 .
14.3.6 Safety Fence Safety fence to consist of '' HUMEARC '' type SWP HRI x 3 m panels or similar .
Erect the fence in accordance with manufacturer 's specifications .
14.3.7 Log Barrier Fence Provide log barrier fencing consisting of close spaced vertical bollards .
Use recycled plastic bollards or Stringybark , Woollybutt or Pine timber , pressure impregnated with ACQ preservative formulation , copper oxide ( CuO ) and quaternary ammonium compound ( DDAC ) to Category H4 of AS 1604 .
Do not use preservative treatments that contain arsenic or chromium .
14.3.8 Vehicle Movement Barriers/Fences As per Standard Drawing CS 1316 .
Supply stock & half stock length pipe barriers .
Erect fences as ordered , so that the line of the tops of the posts is uniform .
Make allowance for excavation and concreting of anchor/footings .
Adjust the position of posts to compensate for the irregularities of the ground .
Minor clearing fence lines may include the removal of trees , shrubs , vegetable matter and debris .
Grub out all roots that interfere with the placement of posts .
14.3.9 Cyclist Holding Rails Supply and erect new cycle grab rails and delineators as per drawing number CS 1204 Or Remove damaged rail and replace with new rail as per drawing .
Make allowance for excavation and concreting of anchor/footings .
Make allowance for minor clearing of fence lines 14.3.10 Recycled Plastic Bollards Supply round pre-moulded recycled plastic bollards , 1.5 m length x 150 mm dia with built in colours and UV stabilised , resistant to termites , microorganisms and moisture .
Install and ensure security of recycled plastic bollards as per manufacturer ’ s recommendations .
Make allowance for excavation and concreting of anchor/footings .
Make allowance for minor clearing of fence lines .
14.3.11 Culvert Crossing Guard Rail Supply and erect Culvert Crossing Guard Rail rails and delineators as per drawing .
Make allowance for Hot Dip galvanising and masonry chemical anchorage to headwalls .
Make allowance for excavation and concreting of anchor/footings .
Refer to drawing CS 0016 .
Make allowance for minor clearing of fence lines .
Or Remove damaged Culvert Crossing Guard Rail and replace with new rail as per drawing .
Make allowance for excavation , removal and rehabilitation of anchor/footings .
14.4 GUIDE POSTS 14.4.1 Posts Use Thermoplastic guide posts manufactured from plastic alloy ASA/PC or similar .
Refer to standard drawing CS 1300 .
REQUIREMENTS Posts to conform to the following : Colour : Opaque white .
Finish : Smooth , glossy .
Length : 1380 mm .
Installation tolerance - height to be 1100mm to 900mm above finished surface .
Width : 95 mm minimum , 105 mm maximum , width to be constant to within 1 mm .
Web thickness : 3 mm minimum , 5 mm maximum .
14.4.2 Certification of Guide Posts – Hold Point Hold point - Provide certification that guide posts conform to the following : − Where installed in normal working conditions , guide posts are capable of self- erecting after 10 impacts head on , from an average sedan travelling at 60 km/h .
ROAD FURNITURE AND TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 99 − After 2,000 hours of exposure in an Atlas Weatherometer the guide posts do not change colour by more than 10 points on a Delta E colour chart .
− The guide post material has a minimum Vicat softening point of 120ºC .
− Physical testing as specified .
− Resistant to termites .
14.4.3 Guide Post Characteristics – Hold Point Provide guide posts which have the following : − An anti-withdrawal device which will prevent the guide post from being withdrawn without dislodgement of the compacted backfill .
Anti-withdrawal devices must be engaged on each and every guide post prior to installation of guide posts .
− Legible and indelible markings similar to those used to mark or uPVC sewer and water pipes , in letters no less than 5 mm high , showing month and year of manufacture and located approximately 400 mm from the top of the post .
Stick-on labels are not permitted .
− Legible and indelible marking 380 mm from the bottom of the guide post , to indicate depth for installation .
Stick-on labels are not permitted .
Hold point - Provide a sample guide post from each batch purchased for this contract for approval before installing any guide posts .
14.4.4 Delineators RECTANGULAR RETROREFLECTORS To be of Class 1A retroreflective material .
Size to be 200 mm x 50 mm for red delineators ; and for white delineators .
Area minimum 100 cm2 ( 10,000 mm2 ) .
DISCRETE DEVICE TYPE RETROREFLECTORS Maximum projected face area for red delineator devices and white delineator devices to be 100 cm2 ( 10,000 mm2 ) .
Minimum length of shortest projected dimension to be 60 mm .
14.4.5 Installation Attach one red and one white delineator to each guide post , 50 mm from the top of the post .
The red delineator to be attached to the convex side of curved guide posts where applicable .
Attach any discrete device type retroreflectors required as specified .
Red delineators to be on the left and white delineators to be on the right when viewed in the direction of travel .
14.5 ROAD SIGNS 14.5.1 General This subsection specifies the manufacture , supply , delivery and erection of road signs .
14.5.2 Materials – Hold Point NON-REFLECTIVE MATERIALS In accordance with AS 1743 .
REFLECTIVE MATERIAL Use high intensity Class 1 standard in accordance with AS/NZS 1906.1 for all signs , including temporary signs , and hazard markers with the exception that all black legends are to be non-reflective .
BLANKS Use aluminium marine grade alloy designation 5052 - H38 .
Thickness 1.6 mm .
Steel sheets may only be used for temporary signs .
MANUFACTURE Chemically clean aluminium blanks before painting or bonding of reflective material .
Stamp the month and year of manufacture and the symbol DIPL on the backs of all signs .
POSTS Post sizes to conform to Table 14.3 – Roadside Signs – Mounting Selection – Part 1 of 2 at 14.9 - Tables unless specified otherwise .
See PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS in the RFT .
Posts to be medium grade galvanized pipe with plain ends and constructed from a single length of pipe .
Cap each post with a galvanized cap .
Do not use “ Ingal ” posts .
Standard ; to AS 1074 .
ANTI-GRAFFITI COATING Hold Point – Obtain Superintendent ’ s approval for the use of anti-graffiti film or coating products .
Apply anti-graffiti products only to the new road signs specified by the Superintendent .
14.5.3 Supply and Delivery Supply all brackets , bolts , nuts and bracings .
Fix bracings to the signs prior to delivery .
14.5.4 Location Signs to be located clear of vegetation and be clearly visible under headlight illumination .
LATERAL PLACEMENT Lateral placement to be measured to the edge of the sign nearest the road .
Lateral placement to be as follows : Unkerbed roads : 2 to 4 m clear from the edge of the traffic lane , and 600 mm minimum clear from the outer edge of the road shoulder .
ROAD FURNITURE AND TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 100 Kerbed roads : 500 mm to 1000 mm from the front face of the kerb .
HEIGHT Height to be measured as the clearance to the lowest edge of the lowest sign in an assembly .
Heights for signs to be as follows : Table 14.1 – Heights for signs Unkerbed Roads Fingerboard ( G3 ) and street name signs ( G5 ) : 2 m above the near edge of the pavement .
Other signs : 1 m to 1.5 m above the near edge of the pavement .
Kerbed Roads : Signs overhanging a footway : 2.5 m minimum above footway .
Signs not overhanging a footway : 1 m to 1.5 m clearance except for those specific signs on medians and islands given below .
Table 14.2 – Height of specific signs on medians and islands The following signs , when used on medians and islands , to have a clearance 150 mm above the kerb : D4-1-2 Hazard Marker D4-2-2 Hazard Marker D4-3 Hazard Marker R2-3 ( Keep Left ) ( Keep Right ) R2-5 ( No U Turn ) R2-6 ( No Right Turn ) ( No Left Turn ) R2-15 ( U Turn Permitted ) .
14.5.5 Installation Conform to Table 14.3 – Roadside Signs – Mounting Selection – Part 1 of 2 Tables .
Install posts vertically .
Provide and install galvanised steel sleeves when installing sign posts in concreted or paved locations .
Sleeves , when specified , to be 50 mm longer than the specified ground anchor depth and extend 50 mm above the finished surface level .
Attach the post to the sleeve with a galvanized M10 bolt , 25 mm from the top of the sleeve .
Encase the post , or sleeve when used , in a footing of 20 MPa concrete .
Orientation of sign face : Vertical , and turned 3 degrees to 5 degrees horizontally from oncoming traffic on straight sections .
On curves , at right angles to centre line of road .
Exception : Parking signs to be oriented 5 degrees from parallel to the kerb to face oncoming traffic .
14.5.6 Reinstatement and Relocation of Existing Signs Dismantle existing post and signs carefully .
Store in a manner to prevent damage .
Backfill the hole left by the post and its footing and compact the fill to the same density as the surrounding area .
Erect signs in new locations as shown on the drawings .
14.5.7 General Requirements - Spacing between posts : - 2 post signs - 0.6 times sign width .
- 3 post signs - 0.4 times sign width .
- 4 post signs - 0.3 times sign width .
- Brace spacing to be 380 mm maximum .
- Adopt the nearest size in the list for intermediate sizes .
- Post sizes for galvanized pipe posts are for sign clearance of less than 2 m above the pavement .
For sign clearances greater than 2 m , increase the nominal diameter of the pipe size by a percentage equal to the percentage increase in height above 2 m. - Where signs are erected in groups treat the overall dimensions of the group as one sign size to determine the post requirement from Table 14.3 – Roadside Signs – Mounting Selection – Part 1 of 2 Tables .
14.6 FLOOD GAUGE POSTS 14.6.1 Posts and Gauges Use a standard flood gauge in accordance with Standard Drawing CS 1301 .
Use galvanized posts , single length 150 mm x 50 mm x 3 mm RHS with a 3 mm end cap welded to the top .
Paint welds with zinc rich organic paint to APAS specification 2916 .
14.6.2 Installation Erect the post vertically at the outer edge of the road shoulder or margin , on the left hand side when viewed in the direction of travel .
ROAD FURNITURE AND TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 101 Install a concrete anchor , of 20 MPa concrete , with a depth of 650 mm and a diameter of 300 mm .
Cast a suitable galvanized sleeve , 650 mm in length , in the anchor so that the sleeve extends 50 mm above the finished surface level .
Attach post to sleeve with a galvanized M10 bolt 25 mm from the top of the sleeve .
Secure gauge to post with No 10 galvanized Tek screws or 4 mm blind pop rivets at 300 mm centres staggered alternately each side .
Position gauge zero to comply with lowest spot on floodway along the centre line .
14.7 CATTLE GRIDS Construct grids to the details shown on the drawings .
Refer to standard drawings CS 1306 , CS 1313 , CS 1314 & CS 1315 .
Place the grid centre line on the centre line of the road pavement .
The grid grade and levels to conform to the grade and levels of the adjacent road pavement .
Place and compact select fill behind the abutments of the grid , up to the base of the pavement .
Reinstate pavement layers with base material .
Reinstate surface .
Tighten all hold down bolts as specified .
Paint the portion of guardrails above ground with one coat zinc phosphate primer and two coats of white alkyd paint .
Fix width markers with epoxy adhesive to each guardrail .
Construct strainer post assemblies as specified .
Fix the stock fence to the strainer assembly .
Supply and install a gate in the fencing adjacent to the grid as specified .
Refer to standard drawings CS 1306 and CS 1317 .
14.8 STEEL BEAM GUARDRAIL 14.8.1 Materials Refer to CS 1310 .
Refer to CIVIL STANDARD DRAWINGS .
RAILS Use W-beam guardrail to AS/NZS 3845.1 of nominal 300 mm width formed from HA 350 steel to AS/NZS 1594 .
Rails to be capable of withstanding a cold bend of 180 deg .
around a diameter 2.5 times its own thickness without cracking .
Base metal thickness to be 2.7 mm minimum .
TERMINAL SECTIONS Form from HA 350 steel having the same properties and thickness as the rails .
POSTS Fabricate posts and block outs from steel channel section in accordance with standard drawings .
BOLTS AND NUTS Shape bolt shoulders and holes in rail elements to prevent the bolts from turning .
Length of bolts to be sufficient to extend 6 mm to 12 mm beyond the nuts .
GALVANIZING Galvanize all components by hot dip galvanizing , after fabrication , to AS/NZS 4680 .
Where the galvanising on guard rail or associated fittings has been damaged , the coating shall be repaired by regalvanising or by painting with a minimum of two coats of a zinc-rich inorganic paint in accordance with AS/NZS 3750.9 and one coat of aluminium paint .
COMPLIANCE Marking of materials - To : AS/NZS 1594 Each coil or shipping unit shall be clearly and durably marked or tagged to indicate the following : ( a ) Steel grade designation .
( b ) Dimensions .
( c ) Name or registered trade name or mark of the manufacturer .
( d ) Batch identification .
If the marked portion of the material is subsequently removed then these markings are to be transferred to each remaining portion of the material .
Traceability of components - To : AS/NZS 3845 Part 1 ( a ) All steel rails , posts and other critical components shall be permanently marked in lettering at least 10 mm high with the name of System Manufacturer , the date and month of manufacture the grade of steel and base metal thickness ( BMT ) to allow the product to be traced .
( b ) Where plastic components make up a key element of the system , they shall be permanently marked clearly indicating the month and year of manufacture in a location that can be easily inspected .
( c ) Bolts shall be marked in accordance with AS 1111.1 or AS/NZS 1252 .
Certificate ( s ) of compliance - To : AS/NZS 1594 Provide certificate ( s ) of compliance from the manufacturer that the steel used in the manufacture of the steel beam guardrails is of structural grade HA 350 .
ROAD FURNITURE AND TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 102 Certificate ( s ) of compliance - To : AS/NZS 4680 Provide certificate ( s ) of compliance from the galvanizer that the galvanizing complies with AS/NZS 4680 .
14.8.2 Installation Erect the rail in a manner that produces a smooth , continuous , taut rail closely conforming to the line and grade of the roadway .
Lap rails so that the ends of rails do not face oncoming traffic in the adjacent lane .
Attach reflective delineators to the guardrail in accordance with the manufacturer 's specification .
Delineator heights to match heights of delineators on guide posts .
Delineator dimensions shown in Guide Posts clause , Delineators sub-clause in this work section .
Refer to CIVIL STANDARD DRAWINGS .
14.9 TABLES Table 14.3 – Roadside Signs – Mounting Selection – Part 1 of 2 Sign Size W x D No .
and NB Gal .
Pipe Posts Sign Attachment Brackets ( Or M8 Bolts ) Per Post Bracing Anchor Depth ( mm ) Dia .
( mm ) 300 x 300 1 x 50 2 No 600 300 300 x 450 '' '' '' '' '' 450 x 450 '' '' '' '' '' 450 x 300 '' '' '' '' '' 450 x 600 '' '' '' '' '' 450 x 750 '' '' '' '' '' 450 x 900 '' '' '' '' '' 600 x 450 '' '' '' '' '' 600 x 600 '' '' '' '' '' 600 x 750 '' '' '' '' '' 600 x 900 '' 3 '' '' '' 600 x 1050 '' 3 '' '' '' 750 x 450 '' 2 '' '' '' 750 x 600 '' 2 '' '' '' 750 x 750 '' 2 '' '' '' 750 x 1200 '' 3 '' 1000 '' 900 x 300 '' 2 Yes 600 '' 900 x 600 '' 2 '' '' '' 900 x 900 '' 3 '' '' '' 900 x 1350 '' 4 '' 1000 '' 1050 x 600 '' 2 '' '' '' 1050 x 900 '' 3 '' '' '' ROAD FURNITURE AND TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 103 Table 14.4 – Roadside Signs – Mounting Selection – Part 2 of 2 Sign Size W x D No .
and NB Gal .
Pipe Posts Sign Attachment Brackets ( Or M8 Bolts ) Per Post Bracing Anchor Depth ( mm ) Dia .
( mm ) 1200 x 600 2 x 50 2 Yes 600 300 1800 x 600 2 x 50 2 '' 1000 '' 1800 x 1200 2 x 80 4 '' '' '' 2400 x 1200 2 x 80 4 '' 1200 450 2400 x 1800 2 x 100 5 '' '' '' 3000 x 600 2 x 50 2 '' 1000 300 3000 x 1200 2 x 80 4 '' 1200 450 3000 x 1800 2 x 100 5 '' 1500 '' 3700 x 600 2 x 80 2 '' 1000 300 3700 x 1200 3 x 80 4 '' 1200 450 3700 x 1800 3 x 100 5 '' 1500 '' 3700 x 2400 4 x 100 7 '' 1500 '' 4300 x 600 2 x 80 2 '' 1000 300 4300 x 1200 3 x 80 4 '' 1200 450 4300 x 1800 3 x 100 5 '' 1500 '' 4900 x 600 3 x 80 2 '' 1000 300 4900 x 1200 3 x 100 4 '' 1200 450 4900 x 1800 3 x 100 5 '' 1500 '' 5500 x 600 3 x 80 2 '' 1000 300 5500 x 1200 3 x 100 4 '' 1200 450 5500 x 1800 4 x 100 5 '' 1500 '' 6100 x 600 3 x 80 2 '' 1000 300 6100 x 1200 3 x 100 4 '' 1200 450 6100 x 1800 4 x 100 5 '' 1500 '' 14.10 OTHER REQUIREMENTS Refer to PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS in the RFT .
PAVEMENT MARKING STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 104 15 PAVEMENT MARKING 15.1 GENERAL This section specifies the materials , testing and standards of workmanship for marking of pavements with road marking paint and/or thermoplastic material , including glass beads .
15.2 STANDARDS Conform to the following Standards and Publication unless specified otherwise : AS/NZS 1580 ( set ) Paints and related materials - Methods of test AS/NZS 1580.205.4 - Application properties - Airless spraying AS 1742 ( set ) Manual of uniform traffic control devices AS 1744 Standard alphabets for road signs AS 1906 ( set ) Retroreflective materials and devices for road traffic control purposes AS/NZS 1906.1 Retroreflective sheeting AS/NZS 2009 Glass beads for road marking materials AS/NZS 2310 Glossary of paint and painting terms AS/NZS 2311 ( set ) Guide to the painting of buildings AS/NZS 2433 Plastics - Method for exposure to ultraviolet lamps AS 2700 Colour standards for general purposes AS 3730 ( set ) Guide to properties of paints for buildings AS/NZS 3750.22 Paints for steel structures – Full gloss enamel – Solvent- borne AS 4049.2 Paints and related materials -Thermoplastic pavement marking materials - For use with surface applied glass beads AS 4049.3 Paints and related materials - Pavement marking materials - Waterborne paint - For use with surface applied glass beads APAS 0041/4 Road marking paint , thermoplastic APAS 0041/5 Road marking paint , water borne APAS 0042 Glass beads for pavement marking paint NTMTM NT Materials Testing Manual NTTM NT Test Methods 15.3 DEFINITIONS ATLM Audio Tactile Line Marking APAS Australian Paint Approvals Scheme CS & C ( S ) Civil Standard drawings .
Use the most recent version .
LONGLIFE MATERIALS Generally thermoplastic , cold applied plastic or pliant polymer materials , with life spans between 2 to 5 times that of waterborne paint .
LONGITUDINAL LINES : Any line which runs parallel to the road centre line , e.g .
broken line , edge line , separation line , barrier line .
NTTM NT Test Methods , found in NT Materials Testing Manual .
OTHER MARKINGS : All diagonal lines , chevron markings and messages on the pavement , including symbols , words , numerals , arrows and kerb markings .
PCCP Painting Contractors Certification Program .
RETROREFLECTIVITY The reflectivity provided by glass beads expressed as minicandela per lux per square metre ( mcd/lux/m2 ) as measured by a reflectometer approved by the Superintendent .
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICE : Any sign , signal , pavement marking or other installation placed or erected for the purpose of regulating , warning , guiding or providing for the safety of road users .
It does not include temporary warning devices and control measures erected only for the construction period .
TRANSVERSE MARKINGS : Any line which is at right angles to the centre line of the road , e.g .
stop line , hold line , pedestrian cross walk .
15.4 CONTRACTOR ACCREDITATION All pavement marking work must be carried out by a contractor accredited to the Painting Contractor Certification Program ( PCCP ) in a class or category applicable to the work .
The PCCP is administered by the CSIRO .
Information regarding the PCCP can be obtained at http : //www.apas.gov.au/pccp/ .
PAVEMENT MARKING STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 105 15.5 ROAD MARKING PAINT – WITNESS POINT Road marking paint : Approved water based white road marking paint conforming to APAS 0041/5 and suitable for application by spray equipment in accordance with Test Method AS/NZS 1580.205.4 to asphalt and bituminous seal road surfaces and for use with Intermix drop-on spherical glass beads .
Australian Paint Approvals Scheme ( APAS ) Specifications : For paint types identified by an APAS specification code , conform to the specification represented by that code .
Witness Point - Submit a Certificate of Compliance in respect to the paint complying with the relevant Australian Standards or APAS specification .
15.6 THERMOPLASTIC MATERIALS Thermoplastic road marking material must consist of aggregate , pigment , binder , glass beads and extenders , capable of being softened by heating and hardened by cooling .
Thermoplastic road marking materials must comply with AS 4049.2 .
15.6.1 Audio Tactile Markings Thermoplastic used for audio tactile pavement markings must comply with AS 4049.2 but modified as follows : − Softening Point : When determined in accordance with AS 2341.18 the softening point shall be not less than 95 °C .
− Cold Flow : When determined in accordance with AS 4049.2 Appendix I – Determination of flow resistance - the cold flow shall be no more than 5 % at 40 °C .
− Skid Resistance : When tested in accordance with AS 4049.2 Appendix K – Field tests for thermoplastic pavement marking material – and Appendix L – Field determination of skid resistance ( wet pendulum method ) - at any time up to 3,000,000 vehicle passes , the skid resistance value of beaded unprofiled base material must be not less than 50 .
− Retro-reflectivity : Mix glass beads to AS/NZS 2009 Type C into the thermoplastic material at a rate of not less than 30 % by mass prior to application .
15.7 COLD APPLIED PLASTIC MATERIALS 15.7.1 Standards AS 4049.2 Paints and related materials— Pavement marking materials - Part 2 : Thermoplastic pavement marking materials— For use with surface applied glass beads AS 4049.4 Paints and related materials— Pavement marking materials – Part 4 : High performance pavement marking systems AP-S0041/3 Pavement marking materials – cold applied plastic AP-S0042 Glass beads for use in pavement marking paints 15.7.2 Materials – Witness Point Generally : A two part Poly Methyl Methacrylate resin based pavement marking material that complies with the requirements for colour , luminance and bead content of AS 4049.2 , and which complies with AS 4049.4 , sprayed or screeded onto the pavement , containing pre- mixed glass beads , with additional drop-on beads being added during application , conforming with the following requirements of AS 4049.2 : Clause 5.1 – Colour , Clause 5.2 - Luminance and Clause 7 - Field Testing .
The material shall have a maximum no-pick-up time of 60 minutes .
Witness Point - Provide evidence that all proprietary products such as epoxy or plastic products have demonstrated satisfactory field performance for a period of at least three years .
15.7.3 Application – Witness Point Application is to be in accordance with the Manufacturer ’ s Specification .
Witness Point - Provide evidence that it has been applied in accordance with the Manufacturer ’ s instructions .
The area to be marked is to be dry and free of dirt , gravel , oil and other loose or foreign material to ensure the best possible adhesion of new material .
Remove existing paint or other material which is flaking or chipped .
Cleaning may be carried out by brooming , blowing or washing .
Use a tack coat or primer material for surface or other conditions requiring it in accordance with the Manufacturer ’ s Specification .
Apply by spraying , screeding , trowelling or extrusion methods , including application of glass beads and anti-skid material , in a single uniform layer .
For longitudinal lines and transverse markings , apply material at a rate to achieve a minimum final thickness of 2.5 mm ± 0.5 mm for application by screeding , trowelling or extrusion methods .
Glass beads are to be Class C ( intermix 20 to 30 % by mass ) and Class D. As well as the “ mixed in ” glass beads additional Class D beads shall be uniformly applied to the surface of thermoplastic at the rate of 0.40 PAVEMENT MARKING STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 106 kg/m2 as part of the application process and before the material has commenced to set .
The marking produced shall be uniform in texture , width and thickness and the surface substantially free from blisters , streaks , lumps and other defects .
Remove any occurrence of overspray and gun dribble .
15.7.4 Setting out The location of all pavement markings on new surfaces , including reflective raised pavement markers , shall be set out by spotting with paint or other approved method prior to application of the markings .
The location of all pavement markings over existing markings shall match the existing except where directed otherwise .
For continuous thermoplastic pavement marking , 50 mm drainage gaps shall be provided , at a maximum spacing of 6m +1m , to allow adequate drainage of the pavement surface .
Nominate in the Contract Management Plan the method of identifying the location and spacing for these gaps .
15.8 GLASS BEADS – WITNESS POINT Use Type C ( Intermix ) glass beads conforming to AS/NZS 2009 and APAS specification 0042 with the exception of size , and conforming to the size distribution requirements in Table 15.1 – Glass Beads Size Distribution .
Witness Point - Submit a Certificate of Compliance in respect to the glass beads complying with the relevant Australian Standard and APAS specification .
Table 15.1 – Glass Beads Size Distribution Sieve Size ( Microns ) % Retained % Passing 1180 0 – 3 97 – 100 850 5 – 20 80 - 95 425 65 – 95 5 – 35 Pan 0 - 10 - 15.9 SETTING OUT New work : Set out line marking to the line pattern specified in accordance with the standard drawing for line marking , CS 1520 and in accordance with AS 1742 including the setting out of arrows , letters , numerals and chevrons .
Remarking : Remark along the line of the existing line marking and to the tolerances specified for new work .
15.10 APPLICATION – WITNESS POINT Equipment : Apply the marking materials using a self-propelled mobile sprayer , hand sprayer , hand painting or hand screeding as directed by the Superintendent .
Witness Point - Obtain approval from the Superintendent for the type of equipment to be used for applying pavement marking materials .
Witness Point - Produce documented evidence to show that the spraying equipment has been calibrated in accordance with NTTM 405.1 .
Maximum application speed for Intermix glass beads is 12 km/h .
Apply glass beads by low pressure or delivered by gravity dispenser .
The application rates specified for glass beads are the amounts that are retained in the painted surface after 3 weeks of trafficking .
Produce markings free from ghosting and raggedness on the sides and ends and parallel with the general alignment of the carriageway with the lines level , uniform and free from streaks .
Substrate : Ensure that the road surface is free from dirt , loose detritus , mud and other extraneous matter , and is dry before and after painting operations .
15.10.1 Longitudinal Application Apply paint evenly to the road surface at the specified film thicknesses ( Tolerance + 0.05 mm ) and not more than five seconds after spraying apply the intermix glass beads .
Ensure that the loss in glass beads after three weeks traffic does not exceed ten per cent of total applied .
On all work , apply one coat of paint and glass beads to the road in the direction of traffic flow , where possible .
For remarking , apply one coat of paint and glass beads to the surface in the direction of traffic flow , where possible .
PAVEMENT MARKING STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 107 Table 15.2 – Application Rates – Road Markings Material Longitudinal Markings Transverse and Other Markings Water borne Paint dry film thickness ( excluding surface applied beads ) > 0.250 mm > 0.250 mm Water borne Paint wet film thickness ( excluding surface applied beads ) > 0.400 mm > 0.400 mm Surface applied glass beads ( rate retained in the paint surface ) Intermix glass beads > 300g/m2 Intermix glass beads > 300g/m2 Thermoplastic cold film thickness > 1.5 mm 3.0 mm + 1.0 mm Surface applied glass beads ( rate retained in the painted surface ) Intermix glass beads > 300g/m2 Intermix glass beads > 300g/m2 15.10.2 Transverse and Other Marking Applications Apply paint evenly to the road surface to the specified film thickness and immediately after apply an even application of ‘ drop-on ’ glass beads at the specified rates .
15.11 TOLERANCE Ensure the distance between the centre line of the marking and the centre line of the set out mark is less than 30 mm .
The apparent line of the markings is a smooth continuous alignment when viewed in the direction of the line .
Permitted tolerance for the length , width and spacing of all pavement markings : +/- 10 mm .
15.12 WORKMANSHIP – HOLD POINT Set out markings so that they are straight , with smooth even curves where necessary .
Remove any marking material beyond the defined marking leaving a neat and smooth marking on the pavement .
Hold Point - Remove defective marking by sand blasting , or other approved methods , make good the surface in a manner approved by the Superintendent .
Protect all applications from traffic until the binder has hardened sufficiently to retain the glass beads .
Reinstate pavement markings that are damaged by traffic during paint drying time and remove all tyre pickup marks .
15.13 FIELD TESTING Wet film thickness : Check the thickness of the wet film applied to the road pavement by the method of procedure for Operation of Wet Film Thickness Comb ( NTTM 401.1 ) .
Glass bead application : Check the application rate of glass beads to the surface of the marked line by the method of Field Procedure for Measurement of the Rate of Application of Spherical Glass Beads ( NTTM 402.1 ) .
Wear assessment limits : The degree of wear is defined as the area of pavement marking remaining after a period of time , relative to the initial area of the pavement marking .
Degree of wear : At the Superintendent ’ s discretion determine the degree of wear using Image Analysis in accordance with AS 4049.3 Appendix K , Method A , Photographic Method .
Wear limits for pavement marking : 95 % intact area after six months .
Remark pavement marking that does not conform to the specified limits at the Contractor ’ s expense including the costs of all testing .
15.14 RESEALING CONTRACTS Conform to the requirements set out in this section and to the following requirements for resealing work including enrichments , spray sealing , rejuvenation and emulsion coats .
15.14.1 Panel Contractors The Principal has in place a Panel Contract with approved line marking companies .
The selection of the Panel Contractors for particular contracts is made on a rotating basis and the Superintendent will advise of the name and contact details of the Panel Contractor to be used on this contract .
The Principal will pay the Panel Contractor direct for the pavement marking work .
PAVEMENT MARKING STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 108 15.14.2 Co-ordination of Pavement Marking Work The Contractor is responsible for co-ordination of the pavement marking work .
Make all arrangements necessary with the pavement marking Panel Contractor to meet the following requirements : - For urban work , complete the pavement marking within two days of resealing work .
- For rural work , complete the pavement marking within four days of resealing work .
Retain all traffic control and warning devices necessary until pavement marking is completed .
Record all localities and extent of pavement marking to reinstate to existing arrangements .
Provide this information to the panel contract line marker and co-ordinate all pavement marking works .
15.15 AUDIO TACTILE LINE MARKING ( ATLM ) 15.15.1 Site Preparation Immediately prior to marking application , remove all extraneous or loose material from areas where the thermoplastic material is to be applied .
Prepare and prime areas as recommended by the manufacturer to ensure satisfactory adhesion of thermoplastic material .
15.15.2 Application Apply ATLM directly on to the road surface on existing painted edge lines or centre double barrier lines .
Apply markings within the tolerances specified in Table 15.3- Audio Tactile Line Marking Tolerances .
The height of the thermoplastic raised ribs is measured from the planed surface formed by the tops of the aggregate .
15.15.3 Retro-reflectivity Apply glass beads in accordance with AS 2009 Type B immediately to the surface of the molten thermoplastic material .
The minimum rate to be retained on the thermoplastic material is 200 g/m2 .
When tested in accordance with AS 4049.2 Appendix K - Field tests for thermoplastic pavement marking material – and Appendix M – Determination of retroreflectivity , marking must achieve a minimum level of reflectivity of 350 mcd/lux/m2 at time of application .
Table 15.3- Audio Tactile Line Marking Tolerances Aspect Dimension Tolerance ( mm ) Height of raised rib 8mm +2mm or -1mm Spacing of raised rib 250mm ± 10mm Length of raised rib 50mm ± 2mm Slope of raised rib 45 degrees ± 10 degrees Width of raised rib ( edge line ) .
As shown on project drawings .
Otherwise 100mm ± 2mm Width of raised rib ( centre barrier line ) 80mm ± 2mm 15.16 RAISED RETROREFLECTIVE PAVEMENT MARKERS ( RRPMS ) 15.16.1 Materials Use STIMSONITE 953 markers fixed to the road surface as recommended by the manufacturer of the marker .
Use adhesives as recommended by the manufacturer .
Use adhesives within the time recommended by the adhesive manufacturer .
15.16.2 Pavement Preparation Ensure each RRPM site is free of dirt , oil , grease , paint and any other material which would affect the bond of adhesive to the pavement .
Abrasive blast , chip , or burn pavements that can not be cleaned by sweeping .
Check the moisture content of the surface immediately before application by the polyethylene film moisture test .
Do not place markers if the film moisture test indicates the presence of moisture .
15.16.3 Placing Markers Place markers in accordance with the manufacturer 's directions .
Use marker types as follows : - Centre line : White , two way reflectors .
PAVEMENT MARKING STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 109 - Lane line : White , one way reflectors .
- Left edge line : Red , one way reflectors .
- Right edge line adjacent to medians on dual carriageway : Red , one way reflectors .
- Chevron areas : .
Yellow , one way reflectors or yellow , two way reflectors .
- Roads : Yellow , one way reflectors .
Place the reflectors to face the oncoming traffic .
Do not obscure the reflective faces by adhesive .
Ensure that the surface finish is smooth .
Discard markers which are not positioned correctly within the time recommended by the manufacturer for use of the adhesive .
Remove adhesive from the road surface .
Do not place markers over joints in concrete pavement .
For reseal works where the existing seal has excess binder , or where Gilsabind is used : - Clean the road surface to expose the aggregate prior to installation of RRPMs .
- Protect the RRPMs from traffic until the adhesive is fully set .
- Locate the RRPMs to the outside of edge lines .
15.17 REMOVAL OF EXISTING MARKINGS – HOLD POINT Hold Point – Obtain approval from the Superintendent on the method used for line marking removal .
Removal of pavement marking must not adversely affect the integrity of the road surface .
When arrows , letters or figures are to be removed or temporarily blacked out , the removal pattern must be in the shape of a rectangle or square to minimise confusion to the motorist , particularly in wet weather or poor lighting conditions .
Remove all materials and debris from removal operations and dispose at an authorised disposal site .
Repair any surface defect caused by the removal process at no additional cost to the Principal ..
The following methods may be considered and will be dependent on the type of surface , extent and application .
15.17.1 Machine Grinding This method may be considered for use on smaller removal jobs where surface finish is not a concern .
Can be used on most asphalt and concrete surfaces .
15.17.2 Sandblasting Sandblasting is the preferred method for marking removal on asphalt and concrete surfaces .
Use a skirt or guard around the blaster to minimise the spraying of material away from the immediate work area .
Remove waste material before it can be transported by rain , wind or traffic .
This will generally require the use of a vacuum attachment operating concurrently with the blasting operation or alternative method approved by the Superintendent .
15.17.3 Sealing Spray sealing is the preferred method for sprayed seal surfaces .
Conform to specification requirements covered under SPRAY SEALING FOR MAINTENANCE in the Standard Specification for Road Maintenance .
15.17.4 Paint Blackout Paint blackout may be considered as a temporary measure only as markings retain a high reflection and possess low skid resistance .
15.17.5 Other Methods Other methods such as water blasting , heat lance or paint stripping may also be considered by the Superintendent .
15.17.6 Raised Reflective Pavement Marker Removal Where required , remove raised pavement markers by breaking the bond between the adhesive , the road surface and the base of the raised pavement marker .
Repair all divots caused by the removal of raised pavement markers with hot melt adhesive or epoxy adhesive to the level of the surrounding pavement .
15.18 OTHER REQUIREMENTS Refer to PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS in the RFT .
LANDSCAPE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 110 16 LANDSCAPE 16.1 STANDARDS Conform to the following Publications unless specified otherwise : AS/NZS 3500 Plumbing and drainage AS 4373 Pruning of amenity trees AS 4419 Soils for landscaping and garden use .
AS 4454 Composts , soil conditioners and mulches Specification Reference Refer to the Northern Territory Government Standard Specification for Environmental Management and to the RFT .
Defects liability period for landscape works is to be a minimum of 13 weeks from practical completion of the entirety of the works under the contract , or the same as the defects liability period for the entirety of the works if that period of time is longer or finishes later .
Refer to PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS in the RFT .
16.2 DEFINITIONS CERTIFIED SEED : Seed by record of origin , purity , and strain and conforming in character to the parent stock .
EXOTIC PLANTS : Any plants not native to Australia .
FINE TILTH : The friable soil resulting from cultivation .
GERMINATION PERCENTAGE : The proportion of pure seed germinating in a fixed time under standard laboratory conditions .
MULCH : Stable material spread as a surface treatment to reduce soil erosion , water loss , and weed invasion .
NATIVE PLANTS : Plants that are natural to Australia .
NPK RATIO : The ratio of Nitrogen ( N ) , Phosphorus ( P ) , and Potassium ( K ) in a fertiliser compound .
ROOT BALL : The finely bound fibrous root and soil removed intact from the container with the plant .
SHALL : The term ‘ shall ’ is indicative of a mandatory requirement unless the context clearly indicates otherwise .
SOIL BINDING AGENT : Material which stabilises and conditions soil and aids moisture retention .
16.3 MATERIALS 16.3.1 Trees , Shrubs and Ground Covers Provide trees , shrubs and ground covers which have the following characteristics : - Trunks/stems to be sturdy and well hardened .
- A well developed vigorous root system .
- A minimum of three months in their container .
- Be sound , healthy , vigorous , and free from insect pests , plant diseases , sun scalds , fresh abrasions of the bark , or other disfigurements .
16.3.2 Grass Seed shall be covered by an appropriately numbered seed analysis report or certificate cross referenced to the number on the seed sacks .
Seed shall be used only if its report or certificate has been issued within the previous six months .
Seed used shall be true to label .
Seed shall have minimum germination of 80 % .
Seed shall comply with the following purity characteristics : - Clean seed , minimum 94 % by weight .
- Weed seed , maximum 0.2 % by weight .
- Other crop seed , maximum 0.8 % by weight .
- Inert matter , maximum 5.0 % by weight .
- Shall not contain any Hyptis Sauveolens , Sida Acuta , Sida Cordifolia .
Seed mixes shall conform to Table 16.2 – Seed Mixes located in 16.9 Tables .
16.3.3 Fertiliser Fertilisers shall be stored in waterproof sealed bags under shelter away from water and direct sunlight .
Fertilisers shall conform to Table 16.3 - Fertilisers located in 16.9 Tables .. 16.3.4 Imported Soils - Hold Point - Witness Point Imported topsoil shall conform generally to AS 4419 and the following requirements : - Be free draining .
- Be red-brown or black sandy loam .
- Contain no grass or weed growth .
- Maximum stone size of 50 mm .
LANDSCAPE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 111 Hold Point - Advise the name of the proposed supplier .
Do not order soils without Superintendent ’ s approval of the supplier .
Witness Point - Provide a 5kg sample of topsoil proposed for the works .
Do not order soils without Superintendent ’ s approval of the sample .
Provide copies of delivery dockets for the topsoil delivered to site for the works .
16.3.5 Insecticide Use Fipronil for termite control .
Insecticide shall be used strictly in accordance with the manufacturer ’ s instructions .
16.3.6 Mulch - Hold Point - Witness Point ORGANIC - Shall be stable , free from impurity , and be sufficiently heavy to prevent dispersal by wind .
- Shall be shredded bark , wood chips , hay or similar .
- Wood chips shall be a maximum size of 50 mm , inert , and shall be free of resinous toxins and termites .
- Shall conform generally to AS 4454 .
Hold Point - Advise the name of the proposed supplier .
Do not order mulch without Superintendent ’ s approval of the supplier .
Witness Point - Provide a 5kg sample of mulch proposed for the works .
Do not order mulch without Superintendent ’ s approval of the sample .
Provide copies of delivery dockets for the mulch delivered to site for the works .
INORGANIC - Shall be washed and screened lateritic gravel or brick chips with particle sizes in the range 6 mm minimum to 25 mm maximum .
16.4 SITE PREPARATION 16.4.1 Setting Out The Contractor shall be responsible for accurately setting out the works in accordance with the drawings .
In particular , trees shall not be planted : - within 30 m of the end of a central median for trees , or 10 m for shrubs ; - within 5 m of a road light pole ; - within 1.5 m of a fire hydrant ; or - where their location will ultimately obscure traffic signs , signals , or other essential roadside features .
16.4.2 Protection of Existing Vegetation Ensure all trees , shrubs , and other vegetation to be retained within the limits of work are not damaged , and the conditions hereunder are conformed to .
Protect vegetation prior to commencing construction work in the vicinity of that vegetation .
Do not place or dump any chemical type materials including oil , paint , bituminous products , fuels , and cement/concrete near the vegetation - even for short periods .
Prevent windblown chemical type materials , such as cement , from affecting vegetation .
Do not stockpile bulk materials - such as spoil from excavation , boulders , cleared vegetation - under or near vegetation .
Ensure such spoil is never placed against trunks , even for short periods .
Do not remove topsoil from within the dripline ( i.e .
canopy area ) of vegetation unless essential to the works .
For any excavation within the dripline keep open as short a period as possible , and use excavation methods that preserve the root system intact and undamaged .
Cut roots only where it is absolutely necessary .
When cutting roots use a means which does not disturb the remaining root system .
Backfill excavation around tree roots with material of at least comparable quality to that excavated .
Consolidate backfill and do not backfill around trunks above the original level .
Thoroughly water backfilling .
Avoid damage to overhead limbs by machinery .
Only remove the minimum amount required if limbs must be removed to allow machinery to work .
Where branches are to be removed , cut them back to the branch collar .
Compensation for damage to existing vegetation shall be borne by the Contractor and determined as follows : Trees ( including palms and cycads ) - Valuation rate of $ 10 per centimetre of trunk circumference at a height of 1 metre above the ground level , within the following limits : Minimum valuation : $ 250 per tree .
Maximum valuation : $ 2,500 per tree .
Shrubs - Valuation rate of $ 8 per centimetre of trunk circumference at a height of 1 metre above the ground level .
16.4.3 Earthworks Remove from site all unwanted vegetation .
Backfill and regrade over areas where trees have been removed .
Regrade all areas of excavation to ensure all finished surface levels are free draining .
LANDSCAPE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 112 Excavate or fill to lines and levels shown on the drawings .
Fill placed on areas to be landscaped shall be free from inorganic , deleterious material and stones greater than 100 mm nominal size .
Compact fill sufficiently to ensure initial settlement and provide a firm base .
Clear all subgrade surfaces of stones exceeding 100 mm diameter and rubbish , weeds and roots .
No excavation shall be allowed within 1.5 m of the canopy area of an existing tree .
16.4.4 Topsoil Excavate and stockpile material which is suitable for reuse as topsoil .
Imported topsoil shall be as specified in 16.3.4 Imported Soils .
Stockpile topsoil in a free draining area in stockpiles not exceeding 2.0 m in height .
Ensure stockpiles are properly maintained .
16.5 PLANTING 16.5.1 Setting Out of Holes – Hold Point Accurately set out the locations for trees/shrubs to be planted in accordance with the drawings .
Hold point - Obtain approval of the set out from the Superintendent before commencing any planting .
16.5.2 Preparation and Treatment of Holes Identify all cable and services locations prior to excavating any holes .
Prepare holes initially in accordance with Table 16.4 – Initial Hole Preparation Chart located in 16.9 Tables .
Remove excess excavated material , rubbish and cut vegetation from site .
Excavate planting holes by mechanical/manual means .
Size of planting holes shall be twice the diameter and twice the depth of the plant container , unless shown otherwise on the drawings .
Break up glazed sides of holes .
Treat planting holes in hard , dense material prior to planting by - placing 1 kg Gypsum or Claybreaker around the sides and bottom of the hole ; and - filling hole with water and allowing to drain .
Treat holes with Fipronil in accordance with manufacturer 's instructions prior to planting .
16.5.3 Supply of Plants Place an order with an approved nursery for the supply of all plants required to complete the works within seven days of acceptance of tender .
Ensure that a minimum of five or 5 % , whichever is the greater number , additional plants of each species nominated is available if necessary for replacement purposes .
Remove immediately from the site all dead , dying or diseased plants and replace with new plants of the same species .
16.5.4 Treatment of Plants Do not use chemicals on site .
Containerised plantings shall be well watered prior to despatch from the nursery and shall remain in the containers until required for planting .
Protect all plants during transportation , against excessive sunlight , wind and drought .
Trees and shrubs which are not immediately planted shall be stood upright on level ground , protected and maintained in good condition by the Contractor .
Replace immediately all plantings which have become damaged , missing or fallen below the specified standard .
Drive any tree stakes required into the ground before planting so as not to damage the root ball .
Check regularly for any termite/insect attack or fungal infestation .
Carry out eradication by use of sprayed insecticide or fungicide in accordance with the manufacturer 's instruction .
16.5.5 Planting of Trees , Shrubs and Ground Cover Planting shall take place only in conditions where temperature range is below 32 °C .
Maintain the integrity of the plant root zone and the surrounding earth mould .
Place fertiliser in the hole adjacent to , but not in contact with , the root zone of the plant .
Fertiliser shall be in accordance with Table 16.3 - Fertilisers located in 16.9 Tables .
Application rates in accordance with Table 16.5 - Fertiliser Application Rates located in 16.9 Tables .
16.5.6 Backfilling Backfill material shall be in accordance with Table 16.4 – Initial Hole Preparation Chart located in 16.9 Tables .
Backfill the hole so that the plant is contained firmly in the ground in a vertical position .
Backfill the hole to finish surface level and dish to retain water .
Work surface fertiliser into top 50 mm of backfill .
Fertiliser shall be in accordance with Table 16.3 - Fertilisers located in 16.9 Tables .
Application LANDSCAPE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 113 rates in accordance with Table 16.5 - Fertiliser Application Rates located in 16.9 Tables .
Water backfill material immediately after surface fertilisation to ensure no air voids or loose material surround the plant root zone .
16.5.7 Watering and Maintenance Maintain each planting area in a moist condition to promote healthy growth .
Weed and prune as required to maintain plants in a healthy condition .
16.5.8 Mulching Supply mulch as specified that is free from weeds , seeds , sticks , stones , insects , diseases and other deleterious matter .
Provide , where specified , organic mulch in a 100 mm thick compacted layer for a 500 mm radius from the main stem .
Ensure a gap of 50 mm is retained between the main stem and the mulch .
16.6 GRASSING 16.6.1 Ground Preparation Bring the area to a fine tilth .
Conform to the prescribed finished levels prior to the placement of grass seed .
Remove all stones over 50 mm diameter , debris and deleterious material .
Backfill with topsoil all voids created by the removal of obstructions and deleterious material .
Provide loose depth of topsoil to achieve a minimum topsoil thickness of 100 mm after natural settlement .
Compact the topsoil lightly to minimise subsidence .
Placement and spreading of topsoil shall not take place during periods of heavy rain .
Protect the area to prevent further compacting and trafficking once topsoiling is complete .
Take preventative measures to control erosion and siltation and restore/replace any portion which erodes , silts up or is otherwise damaged .
Apply fertiliser in accordance with Table 16.3 - Fertilisers located in 16.9 Tables with application rates in accordance with Table 16.5 - Fertiliser Application Rates located in 16.9 Tables. , as a minimum , to the finished topsoiled surface and lightly work into the soil .
The fertiliser may be applied simultaneously with the grass seed .
16.6.2 Supply Supply fresh seeds conforming to 16.3.2 Grass .
Seed mixes shall conform to Table 16.2 – Seed Mixes located in 16.9 Tables .
16.6.3 Application Refer to Table 16.5 - Fertiliser Application Rates .
Apply seed uniformly by mechanical means .
Hand distribution shall only be in areas inaccessible to machinery .
16.6.4 Reseeding Reseed areas that fail to germinate and propagate after 28 days .
Bring areas requiring reseeding to a fine tilth by hand raking only .
Grass seed application to be in accordance with Table 16.2 – Seed Mixes .
16.6.5 Irrigation Water seeded areas as often as is required to keep the ground moist .
16.6.6 Establishment Maintain grassed area free of all weeds and insects .
Ensure grass has and maintains complete uniform coverage with active growth .
16.6.7 Mowing Mow the grass as follows : - First cut when height reaches 150 mm .
- Further cuts to maintain grass height in range 50 - 100 mm .
16.7 IRRIGATION 16.7.1 Irrigation System - Hold Point General Standard : To AS/NZS 3500.1 Place a high priority on avoiding surface runoff when selecting system components .
Use low trajectory sprinklers where possible .
Select components to keep the sprinkler precipitation rate below the infiltration rate of the soil and/or use repeat cycles to allow water to soak into the root zones .
Where possible , separate station/zones for irrigation at the top and bottom of sloped areas .
Materials Pipework upstream of control valves : Use uPVC class 12 .
Pipework downstream of control valves : Use uPVC class 9 or high density polyethylene .
Performance Coverage ( mm of water over area to be watered ) : 50 mm per week during the establishment period and then progressively hardening off the local conditions .
Ensure that final water usage is such that plant health and vigour is maintained without wastage of water .
LANDSCAPE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 114 Backflow Fit a backflow prevention device ; To AS/NZS 3500.1 and as required to meet the approval of PowerWater .
Pressure regulating valves Provide a pressure regulating valve at the take- off point which is adjustable between 100 and 700 kPa .
Install an 800 mm filter sized to suit the flow immediately upstream from the pressure regulating valve , and provide gate valves upstream from the filter and downstream from the pressure regulating valve .
Mount the assembly in an accessible position in a valve box or access pit as required .
Table 16.1 – Irrigation Schedule Irrigation Schedule : Fittings and attachments include but are not limited to those scheduled below for specific locations or fixtures : Location Item Requirement At points shown on drawings External hose cocks Type To AS/NZS 3500 ( set ) Size 20 mm As on approved design plan Sprinkler Type Gear driven As on approved design plan Automatic valve Type Solenoid operated Size Maximum pressure loss 20 kPa As shown on drawings Quick coupling valve Type Polypropylene Size 25 mm As required to achieve uniform coverage Microsprays Type No moving parts At each plant Drippers Type Turbulent flow At each plant Bubblers Type Adjustable from 0 - 10 litres per minute .
Irrigation Controller Use electric solenoid valves wired to an irrigation controller .
In the Darwin Region , the irrigation controller is to be compatible with a “ Toro Irrinet ” irrigation telemetry system .
At the completion of the defects liability period , liaise with the Department ’ s landscape maintenance contractor to have the irrigation system handed over and included into the telemetry control system .
Mount the controller in a weatherproof lockable cabinet .
The controller installation is to include the following features : - Variable timer for each station with a range from 1 minute to not less than 30 minutes .
- Manual cycle and individual station operation .
- Manual on-off operation of irrigation without loss of program .
- 240 V input and 24 V output capable of operating 2 control valves simultaneously .
- 24 hour battery program backup .
- Power surge protection .
Electrical connection : Connect to a 240 V supply and provide an isolating switch at the controller .
Automatic control valves : 24 V solenoid actuated hydraulic valves with flow control and a maximum operating pressure rating of at least 1 MPa .
Provide valves able to be serviced without removal from the line .
Install a gate valve of the same size immediately upstream from each automatic control valve .
House both valves in a valve box with high impact plastic cover at finished ground level .
Control wires : Connect the automatic valves to the controller with building wire laid in sealed conduits , with the mainline where possible .
Lay intertwined for their full length without joints except within valve boxes .
Use waterproof connections .
Provide expansion loops at each solenoid lead or joint .
Hold Point - Backfill trenches only after inspection and approval of wiring .
Minimum size active 1.5 mm2 .
Minimum size common 2.5 mm2 laid in closed loop .
LANDSCAPE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 115 Sprinkler Heads Provide heads which maintain a preset arc of throw , adjustable for radius , during watering operations and which are vandal-resistant .
Pop-up type heads : Heads designed to rise out of their housings under supply pressure to a minimum `` pop-up '' height of 50 mm .
Risers Mount all in-ground heads on reticulated risers .
Mount above ground on fixed risers .
Micro irrigation system Polyethylene irrigation pipe : To AS 2698 Class IRRIG with barbed fittings of similar pressure rating fastened with ratchet type clamps .
Lay pipe on finished ground surface under planting bed mulch and anchor at minimum 1.5 m intervals with U-shaped stakes .
Connect micro-tube laterals with proprietary push in or screw in fittings .
Microsprays : Mount microsprays on stakes 300 mm above ground and connect to the pipework with microtubes .
Drippers : Use drippers which are turbulent flow types , easily dismantled for cleaning .
Connect directly into the pipework or with microtubes .
Micro irrigation valve box : Use micro irrigation valve boxes which are of high impact plastic with snap lock covers at finished ground level , each housing a stop cock , filter ( 200 mm for microsprays , 100 mm for drippers ) , pressure reducing valve ( 170 kPa outlet pressure ) and automatic control valve .
Refer to Table 16.1 – Irrigation Schedule 16.7.2 Design plans – Hold Point Hold Point - Submit drawings to Superintendent for approval indicating design proposals showing all pipework , sprinklers , valves and control systems .
16.7.3 Setting Out Mark out the positions of the irrigation lines prior to excavation and : - ensure completed surface levels are in accordance with the design plans ; and - obtain the location of existing services from the relevant authorities and identify on the ground prior to excavation .
16.7.4 Excavation Excavate in accordance with AS/NZS 3500.1 Excavate to the lines , levels and grades as required for irrigation trenches .
Trench depths and widths as required by AS/NZS 3500.1 Liaise with relevant authorities to locate existing services .
Excavate within one metre from existing underground services by hand only .
Damage to existing services and vegetation to be rectified at Contractor 's expense .
The Contractor shall be deemed to have allowed for the cost of performing the required excavations in whatever material may be encountered , and no extra payment shall be paid for excavation in rock .
Cut back roots encountered in trenches to not less than 600 mm clear of the pipework .
Remove such other obstructions including stumps , boulders and the like which may , in the opinion of the Superintendent , interfere with the pipework .
At road crossings , provide under road boring at right angles to the road centre line , by an approved specialist subcontractor .
Place all pipeline beneath roadways in heavy duty conduit casing .
Refer to DIRECTIONAL BORING .
Stockpile topsoil on site .
16.7.5 Installation Install pipework in straight lines and uniform grades .
Keep the number of joints to a minimum .
Install conduits and pipes having grade or class identification marking so that the marking is visible for inspection .
Lay all pipework under paths , paving or slabs in conduits .
Install according to irrigation design specifications .
Obtain approval from PowerWater before connecting to water supply system .
Install all pressurised pipework , fittings and other fixtures to existing water supply system as well as Class 12 UPVC and above pipework by a qualified plumber licensed in the Northern Territory .
Provide 50 mm thick compacted bedding of clean granular sand free from stones and other debris over the total width of all excavations .
Clean all surfaces of UPVC joints with an approved cleaning fluid prior to jointing .
Solvent weld all UPVC joints , unless otherwise specified .
Flush all pipework prior to the attachment of sprinklers , drip emitters and the capping of pipeline ends .
Install and connect all fixtures shown on the design plans in a neat , waterproof manner and in accordance with the manufacturer 's instructions .
LANDSCAPE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 116 Install all 240 volt electrical work by a qualified electrician licensed in the Northern Territory .
All wiring and jointing shall use PowerWater approved materials .
Join 240 V electrical wiring with a waterproof jointing kit .
Place all solenoid valve wiring beside the appropriate pipework in the conduit .
Size conduit to allow free movement of wiring and draw wire .
Run all electrical wire in continuous lengths between the controller and valve .
Ensure the wire is not kinked .
Ensure adequate length of wire is available at valves during installation to enable future replacement of valves .
16.7.6 Water Source Liaise with PowerWater as the Department ’ s service liaison consultant in relation to water supply requirements associated with this contract .
Carry out the excavation necessary to locate and expose the connection point .
On completion , reinstate surfaces and elements which have been disturbed such as kerbs , footpaths and nature strips .
Obtain approval from PowerWater before connecting to the water supply system .
16.7.7 Testing – Hold Point Check pipe joints , valve seats , tap washers , strainers and other elements for leaks .
Repair or replace if damaged , and retest .
Provide all equipment necessary for testing .
All joints and connections are to remain visible during the test .
Measure pressure at the lowest section of pipework being tested .
Pressure minimum of 800 kPa shall be maintained for a minimum period of two hours in all pressure pipework and fittings up to and including the solenoid valves , except in spray , drip , and micro sprinklers .
Repair and retest all leaks prior to acceptance .
Hold point - Obtain Superintendent 's approval to proceed with backfilling other than spot filling to prevent movement of pipework during pressure testing .
16.7.8 Backfilling Generally : Backfill trenches as soon as possible after approval of laid and bedded service .
Provide clean granular sand cover around the pipe and to a compacted thickness of 100 mm above the pipe .
Compact the sand with a vibrating plate or similar .
Place and compact select fill conforming to PAVEMENTS AND SHOULDERS to 100 mm below existing surface .
Compact to density of surrounding material .
Place 100 mm of topsoil over select fill and treat similar to existing surface .
Remove all surplus material from site .
Ensure the surface of all backfilling does not pond water .
Remedy any surface settlement due to backfilling during the maintenance period .
16.7.9 Telemetric Control Station Details Telemetric operated Irrigation control stations shall be constructed to comply with the following requirements .
Refer to drawing R09-3124 .
Refer to CIVIL STANDARD DRAWINGS FOR ROADWORKS .
MATERIALS : Mounting post - 3600 mm ( length ) x 75 mm square hollow section ( SHS ) of 3 mm gauge steel , sealed at both ends with welded steel plates .
- It shall have two horizontal metal brackets , 300 mm x 60 mm x 3 mm gauge , welded to it in the positions specified on the design drawings for mounting a control box .
When constructed it shall be hot dip galvanized .
Lockable stainless steel control cabinet - 600 mm ( height ) x 400 mm ( width ) x 200 mm ( depth ) - The lock shall be incorporated into the design and the box shall be of sturdy ‘ vandal- proof ’ construction .
Stainless steel whip aerial RF Industries model CD 28-41-70 .
Irrigation controller Must be compatible with Motorola IRRInet Radio Motorola Model GP328 Frequency - one of either of the following frequencies , depending on the location of the irrigation system within the Greater Darwin area ( details of which can be obtained from the Superintendent ) .
- Area A – 150.825 MHz - Area B – 155.425 MHz Solar panel Must have sufficient capacity to maintain the charge in the batteries of the control station equipment INSTALLATION : - Position the control station in the location specified in the design drawings .
LANDSCAPE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 117 - Position the post 600 mm into a concrete footing .
The footing shall have minimum dimensions of 350 mm diameter x 650 mm deep .
The post must be vertical .
- Affix the control box securely to the mounting brackets - The base of the box shall be 1350 mm above the ground - Use 4 x 316 stainless steel bolts with round heads to prevent theft - Bolt head must be on the outside of the box with the nuts inside - Control equipment will be affixed securely to the inside of the box and arranged neatly for ease of operation .
- Cabling - cabling shall be run internally through the mounting post - Flexible conduit shall be inserted in the entry and exit points to prevent chafing - Conduits will be joined with a weatherproof seal - Conduit shall be used between the post and the control box to provide weather proofing .
- Aerial shall be mounted vertically on top of the post .
- Solar panel - Mount on top of the post - Mount at an angle of 11 degrees to the horizontal with the cells facing north .
16.7.10 As Constructed Drawings - Hold Point All changes and variations to the design shall be recorded during construction , particularly items that are covered or become inaccessible .
Provide hardcopies of the amended information and drawings progressively as the work proceeds , with or before the variation which led to the need to amend the information and drawings to accurately reflect the as built condition .
Hold Point - Provide As Constructed drawings of the irrigation system in electronic CAD format ( AutoCad or Microstation ) to the Superintendent within two weeks of practical completion .
Drawings are to show as installed locations of all pipework , fittings , sprinklers , control valves , controllers , wiring , accessories etc .
16.8 ESTABLISHMENT PERIOD - Keep the site neat and tidy at all times .
- Ensure the irrigation system is maintained and performs in accordance with the design plans .
The operating schedule is to be adjusted to suit wet/dry season conditions .
Prevent excessive watering .
- Keep the root ball of all plants moist at all times .
- Keep all plants and grass in a healthy actively growing state .
- Keep the whole site weed free .
- Repair eroded areas and re-establish to maintain the design .
- Replace all damaged , dying or dead plants within 10 working days .
- Maintain all plantings free from insects , pests and diseases .
- Fertilise all plantings and grass in accordance with Table 16.3 - Fertilisers and Table 16.5 - Fertiliser Application Rates , ensuring to work any fertilizer into the soil around the base and dripline of the plant to prevent runoff .
- Ensure mulch is maintained at the specified levels .
- Ensure all stakes and ties remain secured with adjust ties to suit plant growth .
Replace broken stakes and ties immediately .
- Prune trees and shrubs as required , or as directed by the Superintendent , to encourage dense bushy growth ; use only qualified personnel .
- Prune established trees for a 3 m clearance where high profile machinery will be required to use the area regularly .
- Remove all branches sweeping the ground .
- Remove all pruning within 2 m of the ground to within 10 mm of the main stem .
- Keep ground cover plants free of dead vegetation .
- Mow grass when grass height exceeds 100 mm and in accordance with the clause titled Mowing .
- Remove grass cuttings from site .
- Trim neatly all edges of grassed areas at the same time as mowing .
- Keep all stormwater drains clean of debris and silt to allow unrestricted flow of stormwater run-off .
- Remove termite mounds and treat the specific site with Fipronil .
- Use all insecticides and fungicides for the control of termites/insects and other infestations in accordance with the manufacturer 's instruction .
16.8.1 Establishment Period Records - Maintain accurate current records of all maintenance work during the establishment period , including ; the number of employees on site and the work conducted .
- Unscheduled audits may be conducted by the Superintendent throughout the 13 week period .
Records shall be presented upon request .
LANDSCAPE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 118 16.9 TABLES Table 16.2 – Seed Mixes Water Regime General Latitude Seed Type Percentage By Weight Mixture Application Rate Irrigated areas All Cynadon dactylon ( Couch ) 30 Minimum 100 kg per hectare Paspalum notatum pensicola 35 Paspalum notatum argentina 35 Dry grassland areas North of Adelaide River Paspalum notatum pensicola 20 Minimum 100 kg per hectare Paspalum notatum argentina 80 Adelaide River to Katherine Paspalum notatum pensicola 20 Minimum 50 kg per hectare Bothriochloa petusa 10 Cynadon dactylon 20 Chloris Gayana 30 Urochloa mosambicensis ( Sabi Grass ) 20 Katherine to Mataranka Paspalum notatum pensicola 20 Minimum 50 kg per hectare Bothriochloa petusa 10 Chloris Gayana 30 Urochloa mosambicensis ( Sabi Grass ) 20 Urochloa mosambicensis 20 Cenchus Setiger ( Birdwood Grass ) 20 Table 16.3 - Fertilisers Use General Plant Category Where Used Component Requirements Planting Native Surface '' TROPIGRO Native Plant Feed Mix '' or similar Exotic Surface '' TROPIGRO Exotic Planting and Feeding Mix '' or similar Native and/or Exotic Hole Granular or Tablet Slow Release ( 6 month minimum ) 20:10:10 NPK ratio Feeding All existing plants Surface As for Planting - Surface Grassing All seeding , both new and existing Surface Fast Release 15:7:7 NPK ratio Trace Elements Do not use fertiliser with Grevillia and Banksia plant varieties .
LANDSCAPE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 119 Table 16.4 – Initial Hole Preparation Chart Land Categories And Soil Characteristics Marine Sediments Soil And Gravel ( depth greater than 600 mm ) Shallow Soils Surface Rock ( soil depth overlaying rock less than 600 mm ) Visual appearance Grey and brown muds , silts and clays : occasionally pale beach sands Usually red , yellow and brown sandy loams to sandy clay loams with varying amounts of ironstone gravel ; occasionally siltstone and quartz gravel Soil material similar to Category 2 , overlaying laterite on siltstone * Very little or no soil ; extensive areas out of cropping laterite on siltstone * Operational Steps Initial Rock Break - - - Rip and rock break .
Initial Excavation Hole size dependent upon species and area Excavate to 600 mm .
Excavate hole till machine rejection ( commonly bed rock layer ) .
Excavate hole to 600 mm minimum .
Secondary Rock Break - - Rock break bottom to a depth of 1200 mm .
Rock break bottom further 600 mm down .
Secondary - Excavate rocks .
Excavate rocks greater than 150 mm .
Excavate rocks greater than 150 mm .
Excavation Hole Backfilling In situ excavated material If excavated soil has less than 30 % gravel , then no additive is required .
Backfill with imported topsoil .
Backfill with imported topsoil .
If excavated soil hAS 30 to 70 % gravel , then a 50 % mixture with imported topsoil is required .
If excavated soil has greater than 70 % gravel , then backfill of imported topsoil is required .
NOTE If existing soil is free draining or humic , then it may be substituted for imported topsoil .
* Laterite - rough textured rock , reddish brown in colour , with orange and yellow mottles ( splotches of colour ) , contains ironstone gravels and pores .
* Siltstone - relatively smooth textured , white , reddish and yellowish layered rock , often with mottles .
No ironstone gravel and pores .
LANDSCAPE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 120 Table 16.5 - Fertiliser Application Rates Plant Type , Use , Planting Method Size of container or plant Application Rate per container or per plant Native , Planting Surface Tube stock 150 mm container 200 mm container 250 mm container 300 mm container 20 litre bag 10 g 30 g 80 g 100 g 150 g 300 g Exotic , Planting , Surface Plant height : 0.5 m 1.0 m 2.0 m 100 g 200 g 300 g Native and/or Exotic , Planting , Hole Ground covers and shrubs 10 cm tall Ground covers and shrubs 20 cm tall 10 g 20 g Plants to 1 m Plants to 2 m Plants to 3 - 4 m 40 g 80 g 120 g Advanced trees and palms 2 m - Advanced trees and palms 3 m - Advanced trees and palms 4 m - 200 g 300 g 400 g These rates apply to both granular compound and equivalent products .
Native , Feeding , Hole and/or surface Ground covers : up to 300 mm wide 300 - 600 mm wide 600 - 900 mm wide 900 - 1000 mm wide Thereafter 30 g 50 g 75 g 100 g 100 g per metre Shrubs : up to 300 mm high/wide 300 - 600 mm high/wide 600 - 900 mm high/wide 900 - 1000 mm high/wide Thereafter 50 g 75 g 100 g 150 g 200 g/metre of height or width Trees 200 g/metre of height Exotic , Feeding , Hole and/or surface Plants 250 g/metre of plant height 16.10 OTHER REQUIREMENTS Refer to PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS in the RFT .
DUCTING AND CONDUITS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 121 17 DUCTING AND CONDUITS 17.1 STANDARDS Conform to the following Standards and Publication unless specified otherwise , and with the requirements of the PowerWater Corporation , and Telstra Australia : AS 1345 Identification of the contents of pipes , conduits and ducts .
AS/NZS 2053 Conduits and fittings for electrical installations .
AS/NZS 3500 Plumbing and drainage NTMTM NT Materials Testing Manual .
NTTM NT Test Methods 17.2 SUPPLY AND INSTALLATION In kerbed areas terminate duct crossings 500 mm behind kerbs unless specified otherwise .
In areas of no kerbing , terminate duct crossings clear of the pavement as specified .
Excavate trench to a width appropriate for the ducting and which allows compaction of the backfill to be readily undertaken .
Provide the specified minimum cover required by the relevant authority but not less than 750 mm .
Locate ducts to avoid other services .
Lay at right angles to the road centre line and with straight lines and grades unless specified otherwise .
Minimum fall to be 1 % to the lower side of the road .
Lay ducting on 50 mm thick sand bedding .
Install 4 mm galvanised draw wires in all conduits .
One draw wire to remain in place in conduit .
Cap all conduits with standard UPVC caps .
Place marker tape from each end of the conduit to the surface .
Backfill the trench with select fill to subgrade level and compact to 95 % relative compaction .
Where trench excavated through pavement , backfill above subgrade level with base gravel , as specified in PAVEMENTS AND SHOULDERS , compacted to 100 % relative compaction .
Reinstate the surface .
17.3 MARKINGS In kerbed areas , mark kerbs with a letter to identify the type of ducts which pass under them as follows : Electrical : ‘ E ’ .
Telstra : ‘ T ’ .
Water : ‘ W ’ .
Height of letter : 50 mm .
Width of letter : 30 mm .
Stamp the letter into new kerb after the concrete has taken its initial set and before final set .
In existing kerbed areas , mark existing kerb with an aluminium plate containing the identification letters as specified .
Place a star picket 1300 mm long , painted white and set 300 mm into the ground directly over each end of the conduit .
Attach an identification letter in red paint on a 50 mm x 30 mm aluminium plate fastened securely to the picket .
17.4 CONDUIT MARKERS Erect 600 mm x 600 mm signs at locations specified to highlight the existence of conduits .
Sign legend to be : '' Service Conduits Laid .
Opening of Road Surface Prohibited . ''
17.5 ELECTRICAL DUCTING ( ‘ E ’ ) Ducting conduit shall be heavy duty uPVC coloured light orange and solvent cement jointed .
Lay a copper earth strap ( 3 mm x 25 mm ) in a continuous strip along the bottom of each trench .
Supply and install orange PVC cable marker tape over the ducts as specified .
Liaise with PowerWater regarding the installation of the ducts .
17.6 WATER DUCTING ( ‘ W ’ ) Ducting conduit to be heavy duty PVC , 100 mm diameter , coloured white and solvent cement jointed .
Lay conduits two to a trench opposite each alternate lot boundary .
Service each lot by a separate conduit .
Liaise with PowerWater regarding the installation of the ducts .
17.7 TELSTRA DUCTING ( ‘ T ’ ) Telstra Australia will excavate for , supply , install and backfill over all Telstra ducting .
Liaise with Telstra and give minimum 14 days notice prior to the need for ducting to be installed .
The locations of Telstra ducts are shown on the drawings or will be indicated by Telstra personnel .
17.8 OTHER REQUIREMENTS Refer to PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS in the RFT .
TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNALS AND INTELLIGENT TRANSPORT SYSTEMS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 122 18 TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNALS AND INTELLIGENT TRANSPORT SYSTEMS 18.1 STANDARDS Conform to the following Standards and Publication unless specified otherwise : Cited standards : AS/NZS 2276 Cables for traffic signal installations ( set ) AS/NZS 2276.1 - Multicore power cables AS/NZS 2276.2 - Feeder cable for vehicle detectors AS/NZS 2276.3 - Loop cables for vehicle detectors AS 2353 Pedestrian push button assemblies BS 381C-637 Medium sea grey CS 1501 Standard drawing signal details pole foundation CS 1502 Standard drawing signal details mast arm foundation CS 1503 Standard drawing signal details controller foundation Other relevant standards : AS/NZS 1163 Structural steel hollow sections AS 1231 Aluminium and aluminium alloys - Anodized coatings for architectural applications AS/NZS 1477 PVC pipes and fittings for pressure applications AS/NZS 1554 Structural steel welding Set AS/NZS 1594 Hot rolled steel flat products AS 1742 ( set ) Manual of uniform traffic control devices AS 1743 Road signs – Specifications AS/NZS 2053 Conduits and fittings for electrical installations ( set ) AS 2144 Traffic signal lanterns AS 2339 Traffic signal posts and attachments AS 2700 Colour standards for general purposes ( Set ) AS 2703 Vehicle loop detector sensors AS 2979 Traffic signal mast arms AS/NZS 3000 Electrical installations ( known as the Australian/New Zealand Wiring Rules ) AS/NZS 3100 Approval and test specification - General requirements for electrical equipment AS/NZS 3191 Electric flexible cords AS/NZS 3678 Structural steel - Hot-rolled plates , floorplates and slabs AS/NZS 3679.1 Structural steel - Hot rolled bars and sections AS/NZS 4680 Hot dip galvanized ( zinc ) coatings on fabricated ferrous articles AS/NZS 5000.1 Electrical cables – Polymeric insulated – For working voltage up to and including 0.6/1 ( 1.2 ) kV AS/NZS 61558 Safety of power transformers , power supplies , reactors and similar products – General requirements and test ( set ) 18.2 CONCRETE Refer to MISCELLANEOUS CONCRETE for concrete footings and the reinstatement of concrete footways .
18.3 GENERAL EQUIPMENT AND INSTALLATION 18.3.1 Safety Provide for the safety of vehicle and pedestrian traffic as specified in PROVISION FOR TRAFFIC .
Enforce safety precautions with regard to power cables .
18.3.2 Lightning Strikes and Power Surges Supply and install a 25A surge reduction filter .
Connect in a series configuration with the primary 240 V AC power supply prior to the main circuit breaker , as recommended by manufacturer .
18.3.3 Pedestals and Supports Use galvanized posts and fittings .
Provide posts in one continuous length without joints .
All welds to be continuous and carried out prior to galvanizing .
Construct footings as specified .
Refer to standard drawings CS 1501 and CS 1502 .
Reinstate footways once footing concrete has cured and pedestals and/or mast arms are installed .
Provide 450 x 450 x 50 lean mix concrete support collar around pedestals .
Box out where pedestals are in concrete islands or footways .
18.3.4 Vehicle Signal Lanterns Position lantern assemblies ( including cowls , louvres and target boards ) so that : - no part is within 300 mm of the line of the kerb face ; - the top of the assembly is 4.0 metres above the pavement level ; - any arrow aspects are located to the left or right side ( as appropriate ) of the associated round aspects ; and - they are as specified .
Provide a rectangular target board for all lantern assemblies .
TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNALS AND INTELLIGENT TRANSPORT SYSTEMS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 123 Blank out the unused aspect positions of target boards with a material of similar colour and finish to the target board .
Signal lantern doors to be capable of opening through 90 degrees without having to alter the adjustment of any signal lantern .
Signal Lanterns to be NT Standard LED Type by Aldridge Traffic Systems Pty .
Ltd. , or a similar product approved by Superintendent before installation .
Maintain the vehicle signal lanterns with a cover of suitable heavy duty material immediately after erection of the signal lantern and prior to commissioning .
Attach the temporary covers neatly so that they remain in place during all weather conditions .
Provide an inspection hole in the cover , to allow for testing of lantern wiring with covers in place .
18.3.5 Pedestrian Signal Lanterns Use lanterns with 200 mm diameter lens .
Use symbolic displays .
Position lantern so that - no part is within 300 mm of the line of the kerb face ; - centre of green lens is 2.2 m above the footway ; and - the signal is clearly visible from the opposite side of the carriageway .
Signal lantern doors to be capable of opening through 90 degrees without having to alter the adjustment of any signal lantern .
Pedestrian Signal Lanterns to be NT Standard LED Type by Aldridge Traffic Systems Pty .
Ltd. , or a similar product approved by Superintendent before installation .
18.3.6 Traffic Signal Controller Locate the controller as specified .
Mount the controller on a concrete foundation block as specified .
Refer to standard drawing CS 1503 .
Arrange and connect power to the controller , and supply and provide additional plant , equipment or work required by the PowerWater Corporation .
Transport and install the controller in accordance with the manufacturer 's specifications .
Supply and install an earth stake .
Test and commission the completed installation .
18.3.7 Painting Finish colours for : - lantern assemblies including backing plates to be matt black ; and - terminal assembly finial caps and controller housing to be medium sea grey ( BS 381C-637 ; Hex # 899194 ; CMYK 7:2:0:42 ) .
18.4 TRAFFIC SIGNAL CABLING - HOLD POINT Hold Point - Submit documentation of proposed cable layout for approval prior to commencing installation of cabling .
18.4.1 Multicore Connecting Cable Cable used shall be 51 core multicore as per AS/NZS 2276.1 and shall have a polyamide jacket termite sheath installed Terminate the cabling of signal lanterns and multicore cable in each associated terminal assembly .
18.4.2 Loop Detector Feeder Cables Cable used shall be as per AS/NZS 2276.2 and shall have a polyamide jacket termite sheath installed .
Install and connect feeder cables from detector loops to detector sensors units located in the controller housing .
Feeder cables to be Telcon - type B3102 CS/NJ/PVC or equivalent .
Feeder cables to be indelibly marked with the loop detector number at each end .
18.4.3 Loop Cable for Vehicle Detectors Cable used shall be as per AS/NZS 2276.3 Cable will be V90 HT , 30/0.25 .
Supply and install the cable for the loop in a saw cut in the pavement surface .
Clean the saw cut of debris and sharp edges before installing the cable .
Twist loop feeder cable one turn every 200 mm between each loop and junction in the detector pit .
Backfill around the loop cables with polymer modified bituminous emulsion filler .
House cables in conduits where they pass under kerbs .
Refer to standard drawing CS 1507 .
18.4.4 Power Supply Cable Supply and Install 2x 1C 25 mm2 Cu XLP/Nj/PVC cable or PowerWater approved equivalent .
PowerWater to approve cable type and connection details Provide connection of the PowerWater cable to controller .
Provide Notice of Intent to PowerWater for un- metered connection 18.4.5 Cable Conduit Terminate the ends of conduits at pits 25 mm - 75 mm inside the pit .
TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNALS AND INTELLIGENT TRANSPORT SYSTEMS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 124 Provide a draw wire in each conduit at completing of wiring .
Provide a residual length of at least one metre of draw wire in junction pits .
Install conduits in accordance with the DUCTING AND CONDUITS Section , with the exception that the copper earth strap to be deleted .
18.4.6 Conduit Junction Pit Provide conduit junction pits and covers to house conduit ends , and 1.5 metres of residual cable for each cable in the pit .
Place conduit junction pits on 100 mm thick coarse gravel bed .
Conduits shall have minimum 100 mm clearance from coarse gravel bed .
Drill neat holes for the entry of cable conduits not greater than 10 mm larger than the outside diameter of the conduit .
Install pits so that lids are level with the adjacent finished surface and backfill in accordance with the DUCTING AND CONDUITS Section .
18.4.7 Detector Pits Provide detector pits to house joints in loop detector feeder cable .
Pits to be HR Products Model No .
1420 or similar .
Bed the pits on 75 mm thickness of compacted sand .
Backfill in accordance with the DUCTING AND CONDUITS Section .
18.4.8 Inspections – Witness Point Witness point - Give 24 hours notice to the Superintendent for inspection of excavations for pedestals , bases and conduits .
18.5 PEDESTRIAN PUSH BUTTON ASSEMBLIES Pedestrian push button assemblies to be NT Standard LED Type by Aldridge Traffic Systems Pty .
Ltd. , or a similar product with prior approval by Superintendent .
Refer to standard drawing CS 1505 and CS 1506 .
Install pedestrian push buttons onto pedestal and mast arms as specified .
18.6 AUDIO-TACTILE TRAFFIC SIGNAL EQUIPMENT 18.6.1 General Provide equipment additional to the provisions of AS 2353 to generate audio and tactile signals at stations .
Audio-tactile driver to be NT Standard LED Type by Aldridge Traffic Systems Pty .
Ltd. , or a similar product with prior approval by Superintendent .
18.7 SCATS FACILITIES 18.7.1 Communications Isolation Pillar Supply and install pillar including foundation and mounting facilities as specified .
Refer to standard drawing CS 1504 .
18.7.2 Connections Between Controller and Communications Isolation Pillar Supply and install Class 12 white PVC conduit with 300 mm radius bends and draw wire .
Supply and install Telcon type P3102 CS/NJ/PVC cable or equivalent .
Complete all connections between intersection controller and communications isolation pillar .
18.7.3 Connection to Telstra Pit from Communications Isolation Pillar – Hold Point Supply and install Class 12 white PVC conduit with 300 mm radius bends and draw wires .
Connection into Telstra point of entry shall be undertaken under Telstra supervision and as per Telstra requirements .
Provision and connection of Telstra cable from Telstra pit to the isolation pillar is the responsibility of Telstra .
Hold Point - Provide documentary evidence that the installation is approved by Telstra .
18.8 DOCUMENTS AND PLANS – HOLD POINT Hold Point - Submit to the Superintendent one complete set of CAD as Constructed Drawings and completed Cable Layout and Connection Chart before the issue of the Certificate of Practical Completion .
18.9 CHECKING AND TESTING – WITNESS POINT Witness Point - Give 24 hours notice for checking and testing signal controller , cabling and lanterns .
18.10 OTHER REQUIREMENTS Refer to PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS in the RFT .
TRAFFIC COUNTING STATIONS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 125 19 TRAFFIC COUNTING STATIONS 19.1 STANDARDS Conform to the following Standards and Publication unless specified otherwise : Cited standard drawings : CS 1501 Standard drawing signal details pole foundation CS 1502 Standard drawing signal details mast arm foundation CS 1503 Standard drawing signal details controller foundation CS 1550 Standard traffic counting station post mounted detector loop and pit details CS 1551 Standard traffic counting station post mounted detector loop layout CS 1552 Standard traffic counting station post mounted piezo tube layout CS 1554 Standard traffic counting station post mounted cabinet wiring diagram CS 1555 Standard traffic counting station post mounted post assembly Relevant Australian Standards : AS 1012 Methods of testing concrete .
AS 1160 Bitumen emulsions for the construction and maintenance of pavements .
AS/NZS 1252 High strength steel bolts with associated nuts and washers for structural engineering .
AS 1397 Steel sheet and strip - Hot dipped zinc coated or aluminium/zinc coated .
AS/NZS 2053 Conduits and fittings for electrical installations .
AS/NZS 2276 Cables for traffic signal installations .
AS 2700 Colour standards for general purposes .
AS 2703 Vehicle loop detector sensors .
AS/NZS 3000 Electrical installations ( known as the Australian/New Zealand Wiring Rules ) .
AS/NZS 3191 Electric flexible cords .
AS 3600 Concrete structures .
AS/NZS 4671 Steel reinforcing materials AS/NZS 5000.1 Electric cables – Polymetric insulated – For working voltages up to and including 0.6/1 ( 1.2 ) kV NTMTM NT Materials Testing Manual .
NTTM NT Test Methods 19.2 CABINETS Cabinets will be provided by the Principal .
Install as specified .
Refer to standard drawing CS 1554 .
Cabinets to open away from and aligned square to the road .
19.2.1 Terminal Blocks Provide two terminal blocks for the termination of loop detector feeder cables similar to Clipsal 543 .
Mount the terminal blocks on the front edge of the cabinet lower shelf .
Supply two copies of drawing showing labelled loop layout and terminal blocks .
19.2.2 Switchboard for Solar Power Site Provide and connect a 10 amp on-off switch with the up position as off and clear marks for on and off .
Provide a four terminal strip similar to Clipsal 543 .
Mount and connect voltage regulator as specified .
Refer to standard drawing CS 1554 .
Clearly label terminal strip '+ ' and '- ' .
Wire solar panel to terminal strip via switch and regulator .
Mount the switch regulator and terminal strip on a non-hygroscopic , non-inflammable base 6 mm Bramite or similar .
Separate the switch and strip a minimum of 100 mm .
19.3 CABLING Provide detector loop cable of 30/025 V105 type or similar .
Twist loop feeder cable one turn every 20 cm between each loop and junction in the detector pit .
Provide loop detector feeder cable of Telcon B3102 CS/NJ/PVC type or similar .
Provide Piezo detector feeder cable of 75 ohm co-axial cable type RG59 .
Provide solar power feed cable of 30/025 V105 type or similar , red and black .
Join cables by soldering .
Insulate and seal against ingress of water by using mastic filled heatshrink Sigmaform SST 12-04 or similar .
Ensure heatshrink covers at least 25 mm of insulation beyond the join .
19.4 CONDUIT Provide and lay 50 mm HD PVC conduit and one P20 white PVC conduit as specified .
Allow 25 mm clearance between adjacent conduits .
Provide sand cover minimum 100 mm above conduit .
Provide electrical marker tape 150 mm below natural surface in conduit trenches .
TRAFFIC COUNTING STATIONS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 126 Terminate the conduits 25 mm inside detector pit , and 100 mm above natural surface within pole assembly as specified .
Refer to standard drawing CS 1550 and CS 1553 Ensure minimum cover of 450 mm over conduits .
19.5 POLE ASSEMBLY The pole assembly including solar panel will be provided by the Principal .
Provide opening in solar panel backing plate to allow passage of wires inside the post as specified .
Refer to standard drawing CS 1555 .
19.6 INSTALLATION - GENERAL Installation shall include the following civil works : - Excavation .
- Backfilling .
- Reinstatement .
- Thrust boring .
Provide for the safety of traffic in accordance with PROVISION FOR TRAFFIC .
19.6.1 Excavation Excavate roadways to a maximum of 100 mm wide .
Saw cut excavations through paved footways .
Cut excavation vertically .
Provide bridging of excavations to maintain vehicular access at all times .
19.6.2 Backfilling Backfill all excavations .
Remove all rubbish and foreign material from the excavation prior to backfilling .
Backfill with select fill and compact to 95 % relative compaction , in accordance with EARTHWORKS .
19.6.3 Concrete Foundation for Pole Assembly Compact the bottom of excavation prior to pouring foundation .
Align rag bolts to ensure cabinet is square to the road .
Use Class N20 concrete for the foundation .
Reinstate by compacting surrounding soil to match existing .
19.6.4 Detector Pits Provide pits for detector terminations as specified .
Refer to standard drawing CS 1551 and CS 1550 .
19.7 INSTALLATION – VEHICLE DETECTION 19.7.1 Detector Loop - Witness Point Install cable for loop in saw cut in pavement surface .
Minimum depth of cut to be 30 mm , except in zone where axle sensors are to be fitted when minimum depth of cut to be 80 mm as specified .
Width of cut to be 6 mm ( + or - 2 mm ) .
Provide diagonal cut across each right angled corner as specified .
Provide additional cut from one side of loop to detector pit .
Clean the cuts with compressed air .
Install one loop comprising four turns per cut as specified .
Press the cable to the bottom of the cut using a piece of softwood or similar material .
Ensure the insulation of the cable is not damaged .
Backfill around the cable to the pavement surface with polymer modified bituminous emulsion .
Backfilling to be undertaken immediately after laying the cable and prior to allowing vehicular traffic .
Remove all loose material from the opening immediately prior to backfilling .
Ensure minimum cover of backfill of 20 mm over top of cable , except where axle sensors are to be fitted where minimum cover of filling compound to be 70 mm over top of cable .
Remove excess compound from road surface .
House loop wires in conduit between road and detector pit .
Install and connect loop detector feeder cable between each loop and terminal block in the cabinet .
Ensure one metre of cable is available in the cabinet .
Terminate each loop detector feeder cable to a terminating block .
Witness Point - Provide 24 hours notice to the Superintendent prior to installation of vehicle detector loops .
Refer to standard drawings CS 1551 and CS 1552 .
19.7.2 Piezo Axle Sensors Axle sensors and guides will be supplied by the Principal .
AXLE SENSOR GUIDE INSTALLATION Refer to standard drawing CS 1552 .
Cut two slots across the carriageway 60 mm wide ( + or - 2 mm ) 50 mm deep ( + 5 mm ) with centres of each slot 1.0 m ( + or - 5 mm ) apart .
Cut feeder cable slots from the centre line of each slot to the carriageway edge 6 mm wide ( + or - 2 mm ) and 25 mm ( + 5 mm ) deep .
Prevent ingress of adhesive during installation by covering guide ends , securing screw holes and area between the guide and feeder cable slots with plasticine or similar material .
Cover upper surface of the guides with masking tape or other material to prevent ingress of adhesive .
Insert ten 65 mm square by 10 mm thick foam polystyrene packing pieces into each slot .
TRAFFIC COUNTING STATIONS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 127 Place guides temporarily into slots pressing down until top of guide is flush with road surface .
Remove the guides after polystyrene has deformed leaving the compressed polystyrene in the slots .
Fill the slot to a depth of 20 mm with `` Hermetite '' epoxy resin or `` Epirez 214 '' or similar .
If the carriageway surface is not level , this may be performed in stages .
Fit the guide into the slot with securing screws downstream of the traffic flow .
Push the guide down to allow the epoxy to flow up the sides of the slot .
Remove excess epoxy from the guide or road surface before it hardens .
Fill any gaps with epoxy .
Place weights on guide to hold it in proper position during curing process .
Install countersunk 'dynabolt ' fixings in base of guide after curing is complete .
Space the fixing 0.25 m from each end and 0.5 m spacing along the guide .
Drill 10 mm hole through base of guide and 100 mm into road pavement for each fixing .
Countersink and clear each hole .
Pour epoxy into holes and insert 100 x 10 mm 'dynabolt ' fixings .
Retighten the dynabolts after the epoxy has hardened .
Tighten the batten fixing after epoxy has hardened .
AXLE SENSOR INSTALLATION Do not flex the Piezo detectors about the x axis shown on drawing CS 1552 .
Do not remove Piezo detector after installation .
Remove plasticine or similar from guide ends and securing screw holes .
Undo securing screws sufficient to clear the inside of the guide slot .
Clean the guide slot of all foreign material .
Wipe each sensor with liquid soap to ease the sensor into the slot .
Insert sensor tapered side down .
Tap sensor into slot with large faced rubber mallet starting from both ends working to the middle .
Tighten securing screws after sensor has been firmly inserted into slot .
House sensor `` tails '' in conduit between carriageway and detector pit .
Install and connect Piezo detector feeder cable between each sensor tail and terminal block in the cabinet .
Ensure one metre of cable is available in cabinet .
Fill all cable slots flush with carriageway surface using a polymer modified bituminous emulsion filler .
Remove excess compound from carriageway surface .
19.8 SOLAR POWER SUPPLY Provide stand off sleeves 16 mm LD electrical conduit or similar .
Mount the solar panel on the sleeves in the tray .
Provide 50 mm clearance from the back of the solar panel to the mounting plate .
Use stainless steel metal thread screws to secure solar panel to mounting plate .
Provide electrical wiring from the solar panel to the cabinet consisting of two wires , one red and one black .
Wires to be protected using 16 mm flexible conduit and adaptors between solar panel junction box and solar panel tray .
Wires to be supported to minimise loading on terminals .
Run the wires internal of the post and enter the cabinet through the access hole provided .
Seal the access hole with silicon sealant .
Erect solar panel facing north .
19.9 TESTING AND INSPECTION 19.9.1 General – Witness Point Witness Point - Test the installation in the presence of the Superintendent .
19.9.2 Detector Loops Ensure detector loops and loop feeder cables have a minimum insulation resistance of 200 Mohm between the conductors and earth .
19.9.3 Inspection – Witness Point Witness point - Provide 24 hours notice to the Superintendent for inspection of excavations for foundations and conduits .
19.10 OTHER REQUIREMENTS Refer to PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS in the RFT .
STREET LIGHTING STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 128 20 STREET LIGHTING 20.1 OUTLINE DESCRIPTION Supply , install , test and commission new street lighting as specified herein and as shown on the drawings .
Modify and replace existing street lighting as specified herein and as shown on the drawings .
20.2 CROSS REFERENCES Refer to the following sections : - EARTHWORKS for excavation and trenching .
- MISCELLANEOUS CONCRETE WORKS for pole footings .
20.3 STANDARDS Conform to the following Standards and Publications unless specified otherwise : AS/NZS 1158.1.1 Lighting for roads and public places ( Category V ) lighting – Performance and design requirements .
AS/NZS 1158.1.3 Road lighting – Vehicular traffic ( Category V ) Lighting – Guide to design , installation , operation and maintenance .
AS 1742.3 Manual of uniform traffic control devices – Traffic control devices for use on roads .
AS/NZS 3000 Electrical Installations - Australian/New Zealand Wiring Rules .
PowerWater Corporation Power Networks Design and Construction Guidelines .
PowerWater Corporation Power Supply Volumes , Volume 3 , Street Lighting Manual .
20.4 MATERIALS Columns Requirement : Provide columns in accordance with PowerWater Corporation Street Lighting Manual Volume 3 , standard drawings , to suit the individual street lighting design requirements .
Erection : Upon erection ensure columns stand vertically , in all directions , under final loading conditions Foundations and Ragbolt Assemblies Construct column concrete footings and ragbolt assemblies in accordance with the Power Water Corporation Street Lighting Manual – Volume 3 .
Terrain Category : Columns footings and ragbolt assemblies shall be suitable for the terrain category cyclonic conditions of the area in which they are to be installed .
Luminaires Provide street light luminaires of the types specified on the drawings .
Install lamps in all luminaires to the sizes and types specified on the drawings .
Control Equipment Control Panels : Control luminaires via time switch controllers located in nominated substations in underground areas or in distribution pillars or pole mounted control panels in overhead areas .
Control Packs : Provide control switch pack in the base of each pole In each control pack provide a terminal strip for terminating the active , neutral and earthing conductors , and an automatic circuit breaker .
Size each termination on the terminal strip to readily accommodate three street lighting conductors without undue bunching .
Protect the street lighting cables with a 10 Amp single pole miniature DIN type automatic circuit breaker with a rated interrupting capacity of 9 kA at 240V AC symmetrical .
20.5 EXCAVATION – WITNESS POINT General Excavate for footings and trenches as shown on the drawings .
Column footings Vertically excavate all column footing holes .
Excavate footing holes 150 mm greater than the maximum dimension of the footing .
Avoid larger than necessary excavations .
Where necessary carry out pumping to remove ground , storm and /or surface water .
If for any reason , the final hole is larger than required backfill with concrete to the undisturbed soil .
In areas where unrippable rock is encountered , and the use of explosives becomes necessary , the depth of excavation may be reduced , subject to acceptance by the Superintendent .
Advise the Superintendent immediately rock is encountered .
Trenches Nominal trench width : 300 mm .
Nominal trench depth : 1000 mm .
Witness point – Notify the Superintendent when trench excavation is complete and before backfilling has commenced .
STREET LIGHTING STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 129 Existing Services Excavate with care when crossing existing underground services .
Increase the trench depth to provide a minimum of 150 mm clearance between the lowest part of the service and the first layer of marking tape .
Ramp the trench back from the obstruction .
20.6 FOOTINGS Concrete Supply and place concrete in accordance with MISCELLANEOUS CONCRETE WORKS .
20.7 BACKFILLING Material Backfill with select fill as specified in EARTHWORKS .
Bedding sand : Clean washed river sand .
Provide samples of bedding sand and select fill if requested by the Superintendent .
Cable Installation Carry out backfilling of the trenches in accordance with the following : - All underground power cables to be enclosed in suitably sized heavy duty orange uPVC underground conduit - Cover the bottom of the trench with a 50 mm tamped sand bed .
- Lay conduits and earth conductor on the sand bed .
- Top up with sand to form a layer 150 mm minimum over cables .
- Lay the first marker tape .
- Complete the backfilling of the trench with a second marker tape at a depth of 300 mm below finished ground level .
Cable Marker Tapes Lay two cable marker tape strips as follows : Strip 1 : Directly on top of the 150 mm sand layer covering the conduit .
Strip 2 : 300 mm below the finished ground level .
Lay marker tapes with a 600 mm minimum overlap at joins .
Placing Backfill Place backfill in 150 mm maximum layers and compact to 95 % MMDD ( Maximum Modified Dry Density ) .
20.8 INSTALLATION OF LIGHT COLUMNS Install light columns , outreaches , lanterns and fittings in accordance with the PowerWater Corporation standard drawings .
20.9 CONNECTION Connect service cables between new street lighting poles in accordance with the design drawings .
Arrange with PowerWater to connect the new street lighting installation to the existing PowerWater Corporation network and pay all associated costs .
20.10 EXISTING STREET LIGHTING 20.10.1 Disconnection and Removal Make safe , disconnect and remove existing wiring .
Dismantle existing street lighting installations , taking care to avoid damage to items during dismantling operations and transport .
Deliver the salvaged materials to a storage shed to be nominated by the Superintendent Excavate and remove from the site all traces of abandoned concrete footings , hold down bolts and cabling .
20.10.2 Temporary Lighting – Hold Point Provide temporary lighting in accordance with PowerWater Corporation standards at intersections during periods of construction if existing street lighting is removed before new street lighting is installed .
Provide temporary lighting to Category V3 of AS/NZS 1158.1.1 and AS/NZS 1158.1.3 .
Hold point – Submit plans of the proposed temporary street lighting to the Superintendent for approval prior to removal of existing street lights .
20.11 TESTING AND COMMISSIONING TESTING : Measure and record in Megohms the insulation resistance between each conductor and earth .
Check continuity of each cable installed .
Check correct phasings of all active cables of the low voltage distribution system .
Check polarity at each street lighting column to ensure that neutral and active cables are not inadvertently interchanged .
Incorrect polarity at a street lighting column would result in a live column .
COMMISSIONING : After all the above test results are found satisfactory , arrange for Power Water Corporation to carry out the commissioning work to live up the newly installed low voltage distribution system .
20.12 REINSTATEMENT Reinstate any damage to roads , footpaths , verges , drainage structures and vehicle driveways to their original condition .
STREET LIGHTING STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 130 20.13 OTHER REQUIREMENTS Refer to PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS in the RFT .
DIRECTIONAL BORING STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 131 21 DIRECTIONAL BORING 21.1 GENERAL This section specifies the installation of piping beneath trafficked surfaces , buildings or other nominated areas without trenching , disruption to traffic or subsidence .
21.2 STANDARDS Conform to the following Standard unless specified otherwise : AS 1579 Arc welded steel pipes and fittings for water and waste water .
21.3 PROPOSED METHOD – HOLD POINT Hold point – Submit details of the proposed method of thrust boring not less than 14 days prior to commencement of construction using that method .
Include details of proposed filling of cavities .
No disruption or excavation of the surface is to take place over the length nominated .
21.3.1 Directional Boring With Pipe Casing Keep dimensions of jacking pits to the minimum necessary .
Use pipe jacking equipment inspected and approved by the WorkSafe .
Use a welded mild steel pipe casing manufactured in accordance with AS 1579 and of sufficient strength to withstand the forces generated irrespective of the nature of sub- surface material encountered .
Ensure the inside diameter of the casing is 50 mm greater than the maximum outside diameter of the pipe joints , skids , cradle runners or other protrusions related to pipe insertion .
21.3.2 Directional Boring Without Pipe Casing Thrust bore the hole cleanly without projections to a diameter at least 50 mm greater than the maximum outside diameter of the pipe joints , skids or other protrusions related to pipe insertion .
Use plastic skids extending the whole length of the pipe apart from joints to ensure the pipe is at least 10 mm clear of the hole perimeter .
Insert the pipe so that the joints are neither stressed nor pulled apart .
21.3.3 Testing Reference : Refer to the appropriate clause in the Hydraulics Section of the specification for pressure testing of pipes .
21.3.4 Filling of Cavities Pressure Pipes Carry out grouting of the pipe/casing cavity with pumped cementitious grout ( Class 10 MPa ) containing an appropriate plasticising agent .
Pipe to be full of water under a pressure equal to normal expected operating pressure .
Non-pressure Pipes Fill cavities with Type 1 bedding material thoroughly watered in .
Type 1 bedding : Granular material free of clay , dust , fines , salt or organic matter complying with either of the following gradings : Table 21.1 - Granular Bedding Material Gradings Sieve Size Percentage Passing By Weight Type 1a Type 1b 9.5 mm 100 - 6.75 mm 100 90 – 100 2.36 mm 100 75 – 100 1.18 mm 95 – 100 45 – 95 600 um 80 – 100 20 – 80 300 um 40 – 80 5 – 40 150 um 0 – 6 0 – 6 75 um 0 – 6 0 - 6 Linear shrinkage of materials passing a 425 um sieve to be less than 2.5 % .
21.4 OTHER REQUIREMENTS Refer to PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS in the RFT .
PROTECTIVE COATINGS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 132 22 PROTECTIVE COATINGS Refer to PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS ( PSRs ) in the RFT/RFQ .
22.1 Codes , Standards and Legislation All materials and work shall comply with the latest issue of the relevant codes and standards .
When conflict arises between the requirements in the manufacturer ’ s data sheets or recommendations and the specification , the highest standard shall be adopted as directed by the Superintendent .
22.2 Protective Coatings - Hold Point Hold Point : Surface Preparation : To AS 1627 .
Remove loose millscale , rust , oil , grease , dirt , globules of weld metal , weld slag and other foreign matter .
Priming : Apply the primer coat to the structural steel before delivery to the site and protect from damage during handling and transport .
Hold Point : Complete and submit Site testing of protective coatings : To AS 3894.10 and AS 3894.11 and AS 3894.12 Refer to PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS section of Request for Tender document .
Single pack zinc phosphate Thoroughly wire brush steelwork to AS 1627.2 and prime with one coat of single pack zinc phosphate to APAS specification 0162/1 with a dry film thickness of 40 microns .
Epoxy zinc phosphate Blast clean to the recommendations of AS 1627.4 to grade Sa of AS 1627.9 and prime with one coat of epoxy zinc phosphate to APAS specification 2971with a dry film thickness of 45 microns .
Inorganic zinc silicate Blast clean to recommendations of AS 1627.4 to grade Sa of AS 1627.9 and prime with one coat of inorganic zinc silicate to APAS specification 2908 with a dry film thickness of 75 microns .
Site work : After erection , repair any damage to the shop coating and apply the coating , if any , omitted at site connections .
Time delay : Prime the steel surface as soon as possible after surface preparation and prior to any deterioration of the surface .
If the surface is contaminated or rust bloomed , repeat the surface preparation before applying the primer .
22.3 Protective Coating Specifications – Systems and Approved Products Refer to : 15.8 TABLES - PROTECTIVE COATING SPECIFICATIONS - SYSTEMS AND APPROVED PRODUCTS .
If inorganic zinc silicates are required , they will be specified in the PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS .
22.4 Contractor ’ s Responsibilities - Witness Point Applicators must be PCCP accredited in the category appropriate to the works .
Witness point : Provide documentary evidence of PCCP accreditation before commencing protective coatings work .
Provide all protective coating materials , abrasives , labour , supervision , equipment and materials required to complete all work as specified .
Submit : - written details of plant and equipment to be used for the work , - written details of experience in similar projects , - ITPs ( Inspection & Test Plans ) detailing all procedures and test plans to be undertaken to complete the project .
- Details of Environmental Policy .
Contractor must present details of procedures to protect the environment .
- Details of warranties outlining the responsibilities of the Coating Manufacturer and the Contractors period of warranty .
22.5 Pre-job Meeting Attend a pre job meeting with the Superintendent and the coating applicator , to review this specification and the coating contractors ITPs .
Any variation proposed shall be discussed at this meeting .
No variation shall be allowed unless agreed at this meeting and formally signed off .
22.6 Standard of Workmanship Follow the protective coating manufacturer ’ s instructions pertaining to mixing , application , drying time etc .
Produce a satisfactory end result acceptable to the superintendent .
Compliance with the protective coating manufacturer ’ s instructions shall not absolve the Contractor of responsibility to rectify unacceptable work .
Perform all work in a safe and workmanlike manner .
All phases of the work shall be available for observation by a representative of the coatings manufacturer as well as by the Superintendent or their appointed Inspector .
Use personnel experienced in their particular field to carry out all work on surface preparation , protective coatings application and inspection .
The Superintendent may require the Contractor to produce proof of the tradesmen ’ s qualifications .
22.7 Abbreviations ACA Australasian Corrosion Association DFT Dry Film Thickness EPA Environment Protection Authority EPG Emergency Procedure Guide to AS 1678 PROTECTIVE COATINGS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 133 ICorr Institute of Corrosion , UK ITPs Inspection and Testing Plans JSA Job Safety Analysis NACE National Association of Corrosion Engineers , USA NCR Non-Conformance Report PCCP Painting Contractors Certification Program ppm Parts per million QA Quality Assurance SDS Safety Data Sheets – formerly known as Material Safety Data Sheets SWMS Safe Work Method Statement TDS Total Dissolved Solids 22.8 Safety Comply with Work Health and Safety Legislation , Regulations , Codes of Practices , Policies and Procedures applicable to the works at all times during the execution of the works .
Abrasive blasting and protective coatings application must include safety precautions necessitated by the presence of air-hydrocarbon mixtures or other flammable materials .
Thinners , Solvents And Coating Material Safety All thinners , solvents , primers and coating materials shall be regarded as hazardous materials and their use and storage shall comply with AS 1940 , the coating manufacturer ’ s recommendations and Dangerous Goods Regulations .
All caution notices on the product containers and material labels shall be strictly observed .
The SDS for all chemicals , including paints and solvents , used and stored on site must be registered with the site manager prior to the product arriving on site .
A copy of the SDS and the applicable Emergency Procedure Guide ( EPG ) as per AS 1678 must accompany all chemicals during transport .
Keep SDS for all paints as reference .
22.9 Traffic Management Comply with the Traffic Management requirements in the Provision for Traffic section of the NTG ’ s Standard Specification for Road Maintenance .
Obtain a Permit to Work in a Road Reserve and comply with any conditions imposed in the Permit .
Provide a Traffic Management Plan that caters for vehicular traffic .
Include provisions in the Traffic Management Plan for pedestrians , cyclists and water transport if pedestrians , cyclists or water craft might be affected by the works .
22.10 Barriers Install barriers and warning signs for fire hazards , dust , abrasive blasting operations , dangerous fumes and the like , during blasting and coating activities .
Protect adjacent areas and equipment from abrasive blasting grit , water , and detritus and overspray by the erection of screens , hoardings , or drop sheets .
Remove all materials used to mask areas requiring protection during blasting and painting operations upon completion .
22.11 Equipment Use equipment including , but not necessarily limited to , ladders , scaffold , compressors and electrical and pneumatic equipment conforming to the requirements in force by the appropriate statutory Acts , regulations and by-laws .
Maintain and use this equipment in strict accordance with any safety regulations or requirements pertaining to them .
Do not use ladders as work platforms .
All equipment including dust collectors , air compressors , lifting devices etc .
shall conform to the relevant Standards for safety and performance .
Use air supply hoses and couplings of the anti-static type which are safety wired .
Note : Compliance to site safety instructions will be in addition to regulatory requirements .
22.12 Personal Air Supply Where personal breathing equipment is used , the operator ’ s hood or headgear shall be ventilated by clean , cool , oil free air served through a regulator filter .
Air supply must be of respiratory quality .
22.13 Equipment – Witness Point Use compressors used for blasting , cleaning and spray painting which have oil and moisture separators with properly maintained filters in the airlines .
Perform oil carry-over tests prior to the start of blasting and coating application and on a weekly basis thereafter .
Record the results .
Witness Point – Give notice so that this test may be witnessed by the Superintendent or their nominated representative .
22.14 Environmental Conditions Comply with coating manufacturers ’ specifications , particularly with reference to ambient environmental conditions , such as temperature , relative humidity and substrate temperature , prevailing at the location where surface preparation and coating system application is to take place .
Provide copies of Environmental Test Reports to AS 3894 , Parts 10 , 11 , and 12 .
Provide Reports to Parts 13 and 14 for structural steel .
Consider the movements of the tide or work to be conducted on components located in tidal waters .
22.15 Surface Preparation Remove all substrate surface defects including weld spatter , slag , burrs , fins , sharp edges and corrosion product .
Remove all surface contaminants such as oil , grease and dirt in accordance with AS 1627.1 using PROTECTIVE COATINGS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 134 a suitable solvent , oil emulsifier , alkaline degreaser or other approved product .
Assess compatibility and substrate and inter-coat adhesion between the original and new coating systems during maintenance activities by coating a test patch and assessing compatibility and adhesion by ASTM D5064 .
Plan and execute all works so as to minimize the possibility of pollution of the Site and adjoining areas from chemicals , dangerous goods and potential contaminants such as dust from abrasive blasting .
22.16 Preparation of Surfaces Prior to Blast Cleaning Permanent welds shall be smooth and shall merge evenly with joining surfaces .
All edges , including drilled or punched holes shall be de-burred and rounded where practical to a minimum of 2 mm radius .
22.17 Abrasive Blasting - Hold Point Abrasives shall conform to AS 1627.4 and shall be free from oil , grease , and moisture .
The abrasive shall contain no more than 50 ppm soluble salts ( TDS ) and free from greater than 100 ppm lead .
Do not use silica sand and other potentially silica containing materials .
Do not use zinc or copper slag .
Abrasive shall be capable of providing the specified profile .
Do not carry out abrasive blasting if : - The relative humidity is above 85 % .
- The metal temperature is less than 3ºC above the dew point .
Blow down blasted surfaces with clean , dry compressed air , or vacuumed , or wiped free of dust and spent abrasive media , before any coatings are applied .
Hold Point - At the completion of the final blast and prior to coating application , the surface profile of each item shall be measured according to Method A , Profile Replicating Tape , of AS 3894.5 .
Provide documentary confirmation that the surface is suitable for the application of the specified coatings .
This shall be identified as a Hold Point in the contractor ’ s ITP .
22.18 Spot and Whip Abrasive Blasting Use spot blasting of localised corrosion or coating breakdown to provide a profile suitable for the coating system being applied during maintenance coating activities .
Feather the perimeter of the spot blasted area over a 50 mm width from where the original coating system is sound .
Whip blast the generally sound coating surface after spot blasting to provide an adequate key for the coating system being applied .
Where whip blasting is not possible , gloss on sound coating may be removed by power tool or hand sanding .
22.19 Alternate Surface Protection – Hold Point Hold Point - Do not use forms of surface preparation other than abrasive blasting , such as bristle blaster , needle guns , power tool cleaning and hand tool cleaning , without written permission from the Superintendent .
Alternate methods of surface preparation must be included in the Contractor ’ s ITP .
High Pressure Water Jetting and Washing - Low pressure water washing operates at pressures up to 35 MPa ( up to 5000 psi ) .Used to remove loose millscale , rust , paint chalking and soluble salts .
For effective high pressure water washing 35 MPa to 70 MPa ( 5000 to 10 000 psi ) .
Used to remove light to moderate rust scale , concrete splashes , severe marine fouling and loose coatings .
High pressure water jetting operates at 70 MPa to 210 MPa ( 10 000 to 30 000 psi ) .
Used to remove some rust , intact paints and contaminants .
Ultra high pressure water jetting , equipment needs to operate above 210 MPa ( 30 000 psi ) .
Used to remove rust and coatings and to prepare steel to a cleanliness level close to near white metal .
Alternate methods of surface preparation must be included in the Contractor ’ s ITP .
To avoid flash rusting final rinse should employ the use of demineralised water .
22.20 Application of Protective Coatings Atmospheric Conditions The atmospheric conditions which prevail during the application of coatings shall be such that the surface being coated is completely free of moisture .
DO NOT APPLY COATINGS IF : - The ambient temperature is below 5ºC , unless otherwise permitted by the material supplier ’ s data sheet or - The relative humidity is above 85 % or - The metal temperature is less than 3ºC above the dew point or - The ambient temperature is above 35ºC , unless otherwise permitted by the material supplier ’ s data sheet or - Any combination of the above .
Record the ambient conditions both before and at the completion of each day 's coating and at three hourly intervals during coating .
Submit this information with other daily records specified .
Refer to Contractor Records in INSPECTION AND TESTING .
PROTECTIVE COATINGS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 135 22.21 Coating – Witness Point – Hold Point Witness Point – Provide copies of specifications for application of protective coatings from the manufacturers of the products used .
Provide copies of manufacturers ’ product technical data sheets for all products used .
Have all coating materials delivered to the factory , workshop or site in the manufacturers ’ original containers with the labels intact and seals unbroken .
All materials which have been stored for longer than the specified shelf life or exposed to conditions outside the permissible storage conditions shall be discarded and replaced .
Stored , mix , thin , apply and use all paints strictly in accordance with the coating manufacturers ’ recommendations .
Hold Point - Provide coating manufacturers ’ written approval for use before using any other additives ( eg promoters , accelerators etc ) .
Do not mix or use coating materials which have livered , gelled or otherwise deteriorated .
Do not exceed the pot life of catalysed materials corresponding to the working temperature .
When the pot life limit is reached , the spray pot shall be emptied , remaining material discarded , the equipment cleaned , material line shall be emptied and flushed out with nominated solvent/cleaner , and new material mixed and catalysed .
22.22 Thinners Use only thinners and dilutents from the same manufacturer as the specified coating for that coating .
Use these only at the rate recommended by the coating manufacturer for the specific application .
22.23 Stripe Coating Stripe coat all metal with edges ( 100 mm either side of the weld or edge ) , where practical , prior to applying the remainder of the protective coating .
Apply the stripe coating by brush or spray .
Use the specified coating materials .
Ensure the correct DFT for each coat is achieved .
22.24 Multiple Coats Where multiple coats of paint of the same type are specified , each successive coat of paint shall show , where possible , a distinguishable difference in colour to the one over which it is applied .
Comply with coating manufacturer 's recommended recoating times for the ambient conditions and temperatures prevailing at the time of coating .
If this can not be achieved and the recoat period is exceeded submit a Non Conformance Report and Corrective Action Report .
22.25 Alternate Coating – Hold Point Hold Point - Do not use coating materials other than specified , without written permission from the Superintendent .
Alternate coating materials must be included in the Contractor ’ s ITP .
22.26 Coating Defects – Hold Point – Witness Point Adhesion of coatings shall be sound throughout .
All coatings shall be free of sagging , pinholes , dry overspray and other defects .
Hold Point - Any requirements for the repair of protective coatings shall be identified as a Hold Point in the contractor 's ITP .
Marking of defective areas shall be made using a marker compatible with the coating over which it is applied .
Crayons and paint pens shall not be used .
Witness Point - This compatibility between marker and coating is to be confirmed by the coating manufacturer .
Provide written evidence of this compatibility if requested by the Superintendent .
Sand , or whip blast , and recoat surfaces contaminated by embedded dust to the specified DFT using the full system selected .
If the defects can not be rectified through the above means , then the Contractor is required to submit a Non Conformance Report and a Corrective Action Report .
22.27 Transition and Erection Damage and Field Weld Margins Spot abrasive blast all coating damaged during transit and erection , including field weld margins , such that it is thoroughly cleaned .
Restore the area according to the coating manufacturer 's recommendations with a material compatible with , and providing at least the same performance as , the parent coating .
22.28 Surfaces Not to be Coated Do not blast or coat the following surfaces and materials unless specifically directed by the Superintendent : - Stainless Steel - Other surfaces nominated by the Superintendent .
22.29 Surfaces Not to be Coated All work performed may be subject to inspection by the Superintendent or a nominated representative .
Ensure all necessary inspections are carried out .
22.30 Quality Assurance and Traceability The Superintendent will give preference to Protective Coating System manufacturers and applicators certified to ISO 9000 Series or equivalent , or holding approval from the Paint Contractors ' Certification Program ( Class 4 ) .
22.31 Inspection Test Plans ( ITPs ) , Job Safety Analysis ( JSAs ) and Safe Work Method Statements ( SWMS ) – Hold Point Hold Point – Provide ITPs , JSAs , a SWMS and other quality control procedures and documents to be used during protective coating systems application .
These must be approved prior to commencement of work .
PROTECTIVE COATINGS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 136 22.32 Contractor Records – Witness Point - Hold Point Maintain written records of the work so that complete traceability of all work and materials provided under this Specification is maintained .
Use the relevant sections of AS 3894.10 , AS 3894.11 & AS 3894.12 QA report forms as a basis of this record keeping format for all protective coating work under this contract .
Use AS 3894.13 and AS 3894.14 , in addition to the preceding Australian Standards , for structural steel work coated under this contract .
Witness Point - Maintain these reports on a daily basis .
Submit them to the Superintendent when requested , or , if not specifically requested , at least weekly .
Hold Point - Provide copies of all NCRs ( Non Conformance Reports ) immediately they are completed or received .
The NCRs must detail the non-conformance and be accompanied by a Corrective Action Report ( CAR ) which is to detail the action proposed to be undertaken to rectify the non- conformance .
22.33 Film Thickness – Hold Point – Witness Point The film thickness is the minimum average dry film thickness , with an exception criteria as defined in AS 3894.3 , including primer coats specified in the painting system .
Hold Point - Final acceptance of each increment of work will not be made until the dry film thickness meets or exceeds the specified thickness .
Regardless of the number of coats specified , additional coats shall be applied as may be necessary to achieve the specified thickness , at the contractor 's expense .
Witness Point - Provide and operate wet film and dry film thickness gauges of approved types to ensure the correct thickness of each coat and the full system is achieved .
Provide details of the gauges proposed for use .
Use an electronic thickness gauge to determine the total dry film thickness on metallic substrates .
Calibrate the gauges in accordance with AS 3894.3 ( dry film thickness ) or AS/NZS 1580.108.1 ( wet film thickness ) .
22.34 Inspector – Hold Point Appoint an inspector of coatings , qualified or certified under ACA , NACE , or ICorr , for inspection and testing of substrate preparation and protective coating systems applied under this contract .
Hold Point – Provide the name and qualifications of the inspector prior to commencement of work .
All work may be subject to inspection by the Superintendent .
This shall not relieve the Contractor of his own Quality Assurance/Quality Control responsibilities .
22.35 Handling of Finish Coated Items Handle with care all metalwork that has been coated to preserve the coating in the best practicable condition .
Do not handle coated metalwork until the coating has dried hard .
Use web slings or slings covered with a rubber hose or similar soft material for the handling of finish coated items .
Protect finish coated items with soft material such as cloth , carpet or rubber sheeting on areas of contact ( eg .
wooden supports and holding down chains or slings ) during transport and storage .
Repair and make good any damage to finish coated items .
Items with any damage caused by insufficient care are to have the entire coating removed and be recoated in accordance with this specification at the Contractor ’ s expense .
22.36 Other requirements Refer to PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS section of the RFT .
NOTE : Coating systems are to be compatible with level of surface preparation available or proposed .
NTCZ Northern Territory Climate Zone – Refer to NT CLIMATE ZONES TABLE .
PROTECTIVE COATINGS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 137 22.37 Tables – Protective Coating Specifications – Systems and Approved Products ARID REGIONS : Corrosivity Category C2 Low Areas south of , and including , Tennant Creek .
( NTCZ01 ) INLAND REGIONS : Corrosivity Category C3 Medium Areas north of Tennant Creek and south of , and including , Katherine and areas more than 50 km from the coast or tidal estuaries .
( NTCZ02 ) COASTAL / TROPICAL : Corrosivity Category C5-M Very High and T ( Inland Tropical ) Areas north of Katherine and areas up to 50 km from the coast or tidal estuaries .
( NTCZ03 & NTCZ04 ) TABLE - PROTECTIVE COATING SPECIFICATION # PS1 General Coating Specification for Steel – Arid Regions Corrosivity Category C2 Low Areas Coating system for Steel where Abrasive Blasting can not be undertaken .
Typical Exposure : Atmospheric exposure for arid regions including areas of Alice Springs , Tennant Creek and all central Australian locations .
Areas south of , and including , Tennant Creek .
( NTCZ01 ) Surface Preparation Surfaces to be clean , free of oil and grease and all contaminants and salts .
All loose and flaking coating to be removed .
All edges to be feathered back to a sound tightly adhered surface .
All corrosion to be removed by power or hand tool cleaning to AS 1627.2 and AS 1627.9 class St 3 standard .
Protective Coating System as per AS/NZS 2312 1st Coat DFT in µm Int ’ l Paints Dulux Jotun PPG Industries Hempel Wattyl Epoxy Mastic 100- 150 Interplus 1180 Durebild STE Jotamastic 90 Amerlock 400 Hempadur Quattro 17634 Epinamel DTM 985 Optional 2nd Coat Finish Coat Polyurethane 75 Interthane 990 Weathermax HBR Hardtop Flexi Amershield Hempathane HS 55610 Poly U750 Total DFT in µm 175- 225 Notes : Apply all coatings in strict accordance with the manufacturers ’ technical data sheets .
Provide coatings manufacturers ’ recommendations prior to commencing work .
The coating systems in these tables form part of , and should be read in conjunction with , the other clauses in this work section .
PROTECTIVE COATINGS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 138 TABLE - PROTECTIVE COATING SPECIFICATION # PS2 General Coating Specification for Steel – Arid Regions Corrosivity Category C2 Low Areas Coating system for Steel where Abrasive Blasting can be undertaken .
Typical Exposure : Atmospheric exposure for arid regions including areas of Alice Springs , Tennant Creek and all central Australian locations .
Areas south of , and including , Tennant Creek .
( NTCZ01 ) Surface Preparation Surfaces to be clean , free of oil and grease and all contaminants and salts Abrasive blast to AS 1627.4 & AS 1627.9 Sa 2 1/2 , near white metal with angular surface profile 40 – 75 microns .
Protective Coating System as per AS/NZS 2312 1st Coat DFT in µm Int ’ l Paints Dulux Jotun PPG Industries Hempel Wattyl Zinc Rich Epoxy Primer 75 Interzinc 52 Zincanode 402 Barrier Plus Sigmazinc 471 Hempadur Zinc 17360 Galvit EP100 2nd Coat Finish Coat Polyurethane 75 Interthane 990 Weathermax HBR Hardtop Flexi Amershield Hempathane HS 55610 Poly U750 Total DFT in µm 150 Notes : Apply all coatings in strict accordance with the manufacturers ’ technical data sheets .
Provide coatings manufacturers ’ recommendations prior to commencing work .
The coating systems in these tables form part of , and should be read in conjunction with , the other clauses in this work section .
PROTECTIVE COATINGS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 139 TABLE - PROTECTIVE COATING SPECIFICATION # PS3 General Coating Specification for Steel – Inland Regions Corrosivity Category C3 Medium Areas Coating system for Steel where Abrasive Blasting can not be undertaken .
Typical Exposure : Atmospheric exposure for inland regions including Katherine and other inland regions .
Areas north of Tennant Creek and south of , and including , Katherine and areas more than 50 km from the coast or tidal estuaries .
( NTCZ02 ) Surface Preparation Surfaces to be clean , free of oil and grease and all contaminants and salts .
All loose and flaking coating to be removed .
All edges to be feathered back to a sound tightly adhered surface .
All corrosion to be removed by power or hand tool cleaning to AS 1627.2 and AS 1627.9 class St 3 standard .
Protective Coating System as per AS/NZS 2312 1st Coat DFT in µm Int ’ l Paints Dulux Jotun PPG Industries Hempel Wattyl Epoxy Mastic 75- 100 Interplus 356 Durebild STE Jotamastic 90 Amerlock 400 Hempadur Quattro 17364 Epinamel DTS 680 2nd Coat Intermediate Epoxy Mastic 75- 100 Interplus 356 Durebild STE Jotamastic 90 Amerlock 400 Hempadur Quattro 17364 Epinamel DTS 680 Optional Top Coat Finish Coat Polyurethane 75 Interthane 990 Weathermax HBR Hardtop Flexi Amershield Hempathane HS 55610 Poly U 750 Total DFT in µm 225- 275 Notes : Apply all coatings in strict accordance with the manufacturers ’ technical data sheets .
Provide coatings manufacturers ’ recommendations prior to commencing work .
The coating systems in these tables form part of , and should be read in conjunction with , the other clauses in this work section .
PROTECTIVE COATINGS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 140 TABLE - PROTECTIVE COATING SPECIFICATION # PS4 General Coating Specification for Steel – Inland Regions Corrosivity Category C3 Medium Areas Coating system for Steel where Abrasive Blasting can be undertaken .
Typical Exposure : Atmospheric exposure for inland regions including Katherine and other inland regions .
Areas north of Tennant Creek and south of , and including , Katherine and areas more than 50 km from the coast or tidal estuaries .
( NTCZ02 ) Surface Preparation Surfaces to be clean , free of oil and grease and all contaminants and salts .
Abrasive blast to AS 1627.4 & AS 1627.9 Sa 2 1/2 , near white metal with angular surface profile 40 – 75 microns .
Protective Coating System as per AS/NZS 2312 1st Coat DFT in µm Int ’ l Paints Dulux Jotun PPG Industries Hempel Wattyl PRIMER Zinc Rich Epoxy 50- 75 Interzinc 52 Zincanode 402 Barrier Plus Sigmazinc 471 Hempadur Zinc 17360 Epinamel PR360ZPS 2nd Coat Intermediate High Build Epoxy 100- 150 Interplus 1180 Duremax GPE Jotacote Universal Amerlock 400 Hempadur Quattro 17364 Epinamel DTM 985 Optional Top Coat Finish Coat Polyurethane 75 Interthane 990 Weathermax HBR Hardtop Flexi Amershield Hempathane HS 55610 Poly U750 Total DFT in µm 225- 300 Notes : Apply all coatings in strict accordance with the manufacturers ’ technical data sheets .
Provide coatings manufacturers ’ recommendations prior to commencing work .
The coating systems in these tables form part of , and should be read in conjunction with , the other clauses in this work section .
PROTECTIVE COATINGS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 141 TABLE - PROTECTIVE COATING SPECIFICATION # PS5 General Coating Specification for Steel – Coastal Regions Corrosivity Category C5M Very High and T ( Inland Tropical ) Areas Coating system for Steel where Abrasive Blasting can not be undertaken .
Typical Exposure : Atmospheric exposure for coastal regions including Darwin and other coastal establishments .
Areas north of Katherine and areas up to 50 km from the coast or tidal estuaries .
( NTCZ03 & NTCZ04 ) Surface Preparation Surfaces to be clean , free of oil and grease and all contaminants and salts .
All loose and flaking coating to be removed .
All edges to be feathered back to a sound tightly adhered surface .
All corrosion to be removed by power or hand tool cleaning to AS 1627.2 and AS 1627.9 class St 3 standard .
Protective Coating System as per AS/NZS 2312 1st Coat DFT in µm Int ’ l Paints Dulux Jotun PPG Industries Hempel Wattyl Epoxy Mastic MIO 125- 150 Interplus 356 Durebild STE MIO Jotacote 605 MIO Amerlock 400 MIO Hempadur Mastic 45881 Epinamel DTM 985 MIO 2nd Coat Intermediate High Build Epoxy 100- 150 Interplus 1180 Duremax GPE Jotacote Universal Amerlock 400 Hempadur Quattro 17364 Epinamel DTM 985 Optional Top Coat Finish Coat Polyurethane 75 Interthane 990 Weathermax HBR Hardtop Flexi Amershield Hempathane HS 55610 Poly U750 Total DFT in µm 325- 375 Notes : Apply all coatings in strict accordance with the manufacturers ’ technical data sheets .
Provide coatings manufacturers ’ recommendations prior to commencing work .
The coating systems in these tables form part of , and should be read in conjunction with , the other clauses in this work section .
PROTECTIVE COATINGS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 142 TABLE - PROTECTIVE COATING SPECIFICATION # PS6 General Coating Specification for Steel – Coastal Regions Corrosivity Category C5M Very High and T ( Inland Tropical ) Areas Coating system for Steel where Abrasive Blasting can be undertaken .
Typical Exposure : Atmospheric exposure for coastal regions including Darwin and other coastal establishments .
Areas north of Katherine and areas up to 50 km from the coast or tidal estuaries .
( NTCZ03 & NTCZ04 ) Surface Preparation Surfaces to be clean , free of oil and grease and all contaminants and salts .
Abrasive blast to AS 1627.4 & AS 1627.9 Sa 2 1/2 , near white metal with angular surface profile 40 – 75 microns .
Protective Coating System as per AS/NZS 2312 1st Coat DFT in µm Int ’ l Paints Dulux Jotun PPG Industries Hempel Wattyl PRIMER Zinc Rich Epoxy 50- 75 Interzinc 52 Zincanode 402 Barrier Plus Sigmazinc 471 Hempadur Zinc 17360 Galvit EP100 2nd Coat Intermediate High Build MIO Epoxy 150- 200 Interplus 1180 Duremax GPE MIO Penguard Express MIO Amerlock 400 MIO Hempadur Mastic 45881 Epinamel DTM 985 MIO Optional Top Coat Finish Coat Polyurethane 75 Interthane 990 Weathermax HBR Hardtop Flexi Amershield Hempathane HS 55610 Poly U 750 Total DFT in µm 275- 350 Notes : Apply all coatings in strict accordance with the manufacturers ’ technical data sheets .
Provide coatings manufacturers ’ recommendations prior to commencing work .
The coating systems in these tables form part of , and should be read in conjunction with , the other clauses in this work section .
PROTECTIVE COATINGS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 143 TABLE - PROTECTIVE COATING SPECIFICATION # PS7 General Existing Hot Dipped Galvanised Steel Subject to Severe - Atmospheric Exposure – New and Maintenance Areas Coating system for galvanized steel .
Surface Preparation Surfaces to be clean , free of oil and grease , salts and all other contaminants .
Abrasive Sweep ( brush ) blast to AS 1627.4 Appendix ‘ D ’ to achieve an angular surface profile using garnet to 25-40 microns .
Rust affected areas to be spot blasted to AS 167.4 & AS 1627.9 Sa 2 ½ with an angular surface profile of 40-75 microns .
Protective Coating System as per AS/NZS 2312 1st Coat DFT in µm Int ’ l Paints Dulux Jotun PPG Industries Hempel Wattyl Primer Zinc Phosphate Epoxy Primer 50 - 75 Intergard 251 Durepon P14 Pengard Special Grey Sigmacover 280LT Hempadur 15590 Epinamel PR 250 2nd Coat Finish Coat High Build Epoxy 300 - 350 Interzone 505GF Durebild STE GF Jotamasti c 87 GF Sigmashield 825 LT ( Amerlock 2K Glass Flake ) Hempadur Multi- Strength 45540 Epinamel DTM 985 Total DFT In µm 350 - 475 Allowance should be made for the galvanizing approximately 85 microns .
Notes : Apply all coatings in strict accordance with the manufacturers ’ technical data sheets .
Provide coatings manufacturers ’ recommendations prior to commencing work .
The coating systems in these tables form part of , and should be read in conjunction with , the other clauses in this work section .
PROTECTIVE COATINGS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 144 TABLE - PROTECTIVE COATING SPECIFICATION # PS8 General Repair specification for wharf structures , steel piling , ship loading facilities , oil spill clean up equipment and plant piping operating at < 40°C .
Areas Marine environment : onshore and offshore Surface Preparation Abrasive blast clean to remove all previous coatings and corrosion products .
Bevel all edges .
Surface shall be high pressure water blasted at a minimum pressure of 3,000 psi then tested to ensure free from soluble salts ( see Clause 6 ) .
Abrasive blast clean to AS 1627 Class 2.5 Surface profile 30-60µm Protective Coating System as per AS/NZS 2312 Protective Coating – PS8.1 Steel with light to minimal pitting 1st Coat DFT in µ Int ’ l Paints Dulux Jotun PPG Hempel Wattyl High build epoxy 200-250 Interzone 954 Durebild STE Glass Flake Marathon 500 Sigmashield 880 Hempadur Quattro 17634 Epinamel DTM 985 2nd Coat High build epoxy 200-250 Interzone 954 Durebild STE Glass Flake Marathon 500 Sigmashield 880 Hempadur Quattro 17634 Epinamel DTM 985 Total DFT 400-500 Protective Coating System as per AS/NZS 2312 Protective Coating – PS8.2 Heavily pitted steel 1st Coat DFT in µ Int ’ l Paints Dulux Jotun PPG Hempel Wattyl High build epoxy 450-500 Interzone 954 Durebild STE Glass Flake Marathon 500 Sigmashield 880 Hempadur Quattro 17634 Epinamel DTM 985 2nd Coat High build epoxy 450- 5000 Interzone 954 Durebild STE Glass Flake Marathon 500 Sigmashield 880 Hempadur Quattro 17634 Epinamel DTM 985 Total DFT 900- 1000 Notes : Apply all coatings in strict accordance with the manufacturers ’ technical data sheets .
Provide coatings manufacturers ’ recommendations prior to commencing work .
The coating systems in these tables form part of , and should be read in conjunction with , the other clauses in this work section .
PROTECTIVE COATINGS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 145 TABLE - PROTECTIVE COATING SPECIFICATION # PS9 General Ultra high build epoxy for coating new piles , and other surfaces in underwater or splash zone environment .
Areas Underwater & splash zone Surface Preparation Abrasive blast clean to remove all corrosion products and/or previous coatings .
Bevel all edges .
Surface shall be high pressure water blasted at a minimum pressure of 3,000 psi then tested to ensure free from soluble salts ( see Clause 6 ) .
Abrasive blast clean to AS 1627 Class 2.5 75-100µm ( angular profile ) Protective Coating System as per AS/NZS 2312 1st Coat DFT in µ Int ’ l Paints Dulux Jotun PPG Hempel Wattyl Primer Holding Primer ( if required ) 30-50 Interline 982 Luxepoxy 66 N/A Sigmacover 280LT Hempadur 15590 Epinamel PR 250 ( thinned ) 2nd Coat Ultra High Build Epoxy 1000-1500 Interzone 485 Luxepoxy UHB Jotacote UHB Sigmashield 880 Hempadur Multi Strength 45540 ( 2 coats of 500 um ) Epinamel UHB 1000 Total DFT 1030 - 1550 Notes : Apply all coatings in strict accordance with the manufacturers ’ technical data sheets .
Provide coatings manufacturers ’ recommendations prior to commencing work .
The coating systems in these tables form part of , and should be read in conjunction with , the other clauses in this work section .
PROTECTIVE COATINGS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 146 TABLE - PROTECTIVE COATING SPECIFICATION # PS10 General Repair coating for cylindrical piling using petrolatum tape system , for use in very exposed sites and harsh environments .
Areas Very exposed sites and harsh environments .
Surface Preparation Remove all loose rust , original coating , marine growth etc , by scraping , chipping , water blast cleaning or ship ’ s hull scrubber .
Close examination , after preparation , to ensure thoroughly clean surface without growth , sharp or protruding edges .
System Primer : Denso Seashield Primer ( or equal approved ) Tape : Denso Seashield Tape ( or equal approved ) Overlap of 55 % Outer Cover : Denso Seashield 2000 FD Outer Cover ( or equal approved ) fixing with 316 stainless bolts Note : Inspection points as per Denso Seashield published instructions .
Notes : Apply all coatings in strict accordance with the manufacturers ’ technical data sheets .
Provide coatings manufacturers ’ recommendations prior to commencing work .
The coating systems in these tables form part of , and should be read in conjunction with , the other clauses in this work section .
MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 147 23 MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT The following Measurement and Payment clauses refer to the specification sections of the same name , however , the clause numbers do not match the section numbers of the same title .
23.1 MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 23.1.1 Environmental Management Generally Not measured separately Include the cost of environmental management in the rates for the applicable items .
23.1.2 Environmental Management Plan Measured as an item .
23.1.3 Cleaning of Vehicles and Plant Measured by number cleaned .
Vehicles and plant items are priced separately .
23.1.4 Establishment The sum for establishment not to exceed 30 per cent of the Tender Sum .
Mobilisation : Measured as an item .
Not to exceed 10 per cent of the Tender Sum .
Payment when the Contractor established on site .
Demobilisation : Measured as an item .
Payment when demobilisation complete .
Ongoing costs : Measured as an item .
Payment progressively during the contract in proportion to the value of complying work .
23.1.5 Project Notice Boards Measured by number erected .
23.1.6 As Constructed Information Include the cost for providing as constructed information and drawings in the negotiated costs for the variation associated with the amendment to the design which led to the need to amend the information and drawings to accurately reflect the as built condition .
23.1.7 Level Checking Measured in kilometres for the layer under consideration .
23.1.8 Control Station Check Survey Measured as an item .
23.2 PROVISION FOR TRAFFIC 23.2.1 Traffic Management Plan Include in Provision for Traffic .
Include TCDs .
23.2.2 Provision for Traffic Measured as an item .
Includes TMP and TCDs .
Includes detours , temporary connections , access to adjacent properties , traffic guidance , traffic control devices , temporary bridging , warning devices , maintenance and restoration .
Includes variable message .
Payment will be made progressively in proportion to the value of work carried out .
23.2.3 Gravelling of Detours Measured in square metres for the specified gravel thickness and width .
Make allowance for supply , delivery , and compaction of material .
23.2.4 Sealing of Detours Measured in square metres for the specified width .
Make allowance for the removal and disposal of seal and restoration work .
23.3 CLEARING GRUBBING AND REHABILITATION Measured as an item .
Includes removing vegetation stripping and stockpiling , top soil respreading , removal of un- recoverable fencing , drainage structures , old road surfaces and other obstacles .
Make allowance for stripping , stockpiling and respreading of the top layer .
Make allowance for replacement of stripped layer .
23.3.1 Treatment of Existing Sealed Surface Not measured separately .
23.3.2 Scarifying of Existing Roads Measured in linear metres .
23.3.3 Mulching Measured as an item .
Make allowance for mulching demolished vegetation , burying stumps , roots and grasses , stockpiling mulched material , spreading mulch and removing excess mulched 23.4 EARTHWORKS Measurements are based on natural surface levels prior to stripping .
23.4.1 Earthworks in Cut Measured in in-situ cubic metres .
Volume includes Table Drains .
MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 148 23.4.2 Rock in Subgrade Measured in in-situ cubic metres .
Payment only for works directed by the Superintendent .
Payment for excavation will be at a rate to be agreed and payment for filling is at the rate for Select Fill .
23.4.3 Unsuitable Material Below Subgrade Surface other than Rock Measured in in-situ cubic metres .
Payment only for works directed by the Superintendent .
Payment for excavation is at the rate for Earthworks in Cut and payment for filling is at the rate for Earthworks in Fill .
23.4.4 Earthworks in Fill Measured in compacted cubic metres .
Make allowance for volumes affected by Clearing and Grubbing .
23.4.5 Unsuitable Material Beneath Fill Measured in in-situ cubic metres .
Payment only for works directed by the Superintendent .
Payment for excavation is at the rate for Earthworks in Cut and payment for filling is at the rate for Earthworks in Fill .
23.4.6 Select Fill Measured in compacted cubic metres .
Payment at a rate to be agreed .
23.4.7 Sand Clay Fill Measured in compacted cubic metres .
23.4.8 Preparation and Maintenance of Subgrade Surface Measured in square metres .
23.4.9 Stream Diversions Measured in in-situ cubic metres for cut and compacted cubic metres for fill .
Temporary work is not measured .
23.4.10 Levees Measured in compacted cubic metres .
Temporary work is not measured .
23.4.11 Table Drain Offlets Measured by number .
23.4.12 Table Drain Blocks Measured by number .
23.4.13 Catch Drains Measured in linear metres .
23.4.14 Widening of Existing Formation Measured in linear metres .
23.4.15 Trim and Compact Unpaved Areas Measured in square metres .
23.4.16 Surface Formation Measured in linear metres .
Allow for imported material .
23.4.17 Batter Protection by Grassing Measured in square metres .
23.4.18 Bridge Foundation Excavation Measured in in-situ cubic metres .
The quantity measured shall be determined by multiplying the dimensioned area of the structure footing by the distance from natural surface to foundation level .
Make allowance for coffer-dams , shoring and sheeting , pumping .
Make allowance for excavation beyond measured limits for formwork , shoring and sheeting , pumping , etc .
23.4.19 Bridge Foundation Blinding Measured in square metres .
23.4.20 Bridge Foundation Backfilling Measured in compacted cubic metres .
Make allowance for backfill beyond measured limits .
23.4.21 Fill Adjacent to Bridge Structures Measured in compacted cubic metres .
23.5 CONFORMANCE TESTING 23.5.1 Conformance Testing The Superintendent will pay for all conformance testing directly to the Panel Period Contractor selected to perform the conformance tests required under this contract and nominated as the Superintendent ’ s responsibility .
If the tests fail the cost of the failed tests will be a negative variation to the contract .
When testing has been ordered and the site is not ready for testing at the time specified by the Contractor , the Contractor will bear the cost of time and travel incurred by the Panel Period Contractor and the Superintendent , where applicable .
Where bituminous products are “ Non Conforming ” , Refer to the Superintendent for requirements if samples are non-conforming .
23.5.2 Process Testing The Contractor is responsible for the ordering up and payment for all process tests carried out .
This is not measured separately .
Include the cost of process testing under the relevant items in the Schedule of Rates .
MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 149 23.6 PAVEMENT AND SHOULDERS Measured in square metres for each specified thickness and material .
Make allowance for pavement or shoulder materials outside the carriageway width not included in measurement .
23.6.1 Reconstruction of Existing Pavements Measured in linear metres .
Make allowance for variation in pavement thickness and deformation of existing pavement .
23.6.2 Supply to Stockpile Measured in cubic metres in the stockpile .
23.7 STABILIZATION 23.7.1 Supply and Spread Stabilising Agent Measured in tonnes .
Determined by multiplying the application rate of cement indicated in the procedure by the area to be treated .
Make allowance for tolerances .
23.7.2 Supply Stabilising Agent Measured in tonnes .
Determined by multiplying the cement content indicated in the procedure by the dry mass of the plant-mix ordered for stabilisation .
The dry mass is determined by multiplying the plant-mix measured by 98 % of the maximum modified dry density .
Make allowance for tolerances .
23.7.3 Supply Materials to be Stabilised Measured in square metres for each specified thickness .
23.7.4 Mixing , Trimming and Curing Measured in square metres for each specified thickness .
23.7.5 Plant- Mix Measured in cubic metres .
Determined by multiplying the specified area by the specified compacted depth .
Make allowance for all materials to be stabilised .
Make allowance for curing .
23.8 SPRAY SEALING 23.8.1 Calculation Accuracy All calculations regarding payment to be to an accuracy of the nearest whole number .
23.8.2 Preparation of Pavement Measured in square metres of the prepared area .
23.8.3 Prime Coat Enrichment Coat , Emulsion Coat , Primer Seal and Seal Coats Measured in litres at 15 °C .
Adjust volumes using Table 23.2 – Bitumen Equivalent Volumes .
Payment calculated for each spray run .
Quantity sprayed is determined by dipping the sprayer tank for each spray run .
Allow for the temperature of the mixture in determining the actual application rate .
The designated volume is determined from the area sprayed and the rate of application indicated in the procedure for such area at 15 °C .
Multipliers for reducing the volume of hot bitumen to the equivalent volume at 15 °C are contained in Table 23.2 – Bitumen Equivalent Volumes .
For primers , enrichment coats , primer seals , polymer modified binder or emulsion seals the rate of application refers to the whole of the mixture .
Allow for adhesion agent in the rate for polymer modified binder .
Tapers are exempt from adjustment tables .
Adjustment to payment for the sprayed volume when the spray application rates equal or exceed 1.0 L/m2 : ( i ) Application 90 % to 95 % of the designated volume : Payment for the sprayed volume less one-half the difference between the sprayed volume and 95 % of the designated volume .
( Example : Application = 92 % of designated volume .
Pay for ( 92 % - 0.5 x ( 95 % - 92 % ) ) = 90.5 % of designated volume . )
( ii ) Application 95 % to 105 % of the designated volume : Payment for the sprayed volume .
( iii ) Application 105 % to 115 % of the designated volume : Payment for 105 % of the designated volume .
The Contractor must rectify bleeding or flushing seals during the defined defects period where binder application rates were applied at > than 105 % of the designated volume .
( iv ) Application less than 90 % or more than 115 % of the designated volume will be rejected .
Rectify by methods approved by the Superintendent , at the Contractor ’ s expense .
MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 150 Adjustment to payment for the sprayed volume when spray application rates below 1.0 L/m2 : ( v ) Application plus 0.1 L/m2 and minus 0.1 L/m2 of the designated spray rate : Payment for the sprayed volume .
( vi ) Application rates varying more than 0.1 L/m2 of the designated spray rate will result in work being rejected .
Rectification will be at the Contractor ’ s expense by respraying or by other methods approved by the Superintendent .
Payment will be made for the designated volume upon satisfactory rectification of the rejected area at no extra expense to the Principal .
Adjustment to payment for seal coat items ( binder , additive , precoat , aggregate ) is in accordance with Table 23.1 – Payment Adjustments .
Table 23.1 – Payment Adjustments Viscosity ( at 60 °C Pa.s ) of AS 2008 Class 320 Bitumen Component Of The Binder Reduction In Payment of Seal Coat Items Under 260 10 % reduction for ea .
10 Pa.s ( or part thereof ) below 260 .
260 – 380 Nil .
Over 380 10 % reduction for each 10 Pa.s ( or part thereof ) over 380 .
Where samples not are not collected 10 % reduction to rate per litre Polymer Modified Binders Reduction In Seal Coat Items Torsional Recovery 1 – 3 % less than specified 2 % reduction to rate per litre Torsional Recovery 4 – 6 % less than specified 10 % reduction to rate per litre Torsional Recovery over 6 % less than specified 20 % reduction to rate per litre Softening Point 0 – 2 deg .
C less than specified 5 % Reduction to rate per litre Softening Point 2.1 – 5 deg .
C less than specified 15 % Reduction to rate per litre Softening Point 5.1 – 10 deg .
C less than specified 20 % Reduction to rate per litre Softening Point < 10.1 deg .
C less than specified * Rejected ( see note below ) Note : * Rejected - Reseal with materials and methods approved by the Superintendent .
Costs incurred from reseal work will be at the Contractor ’ s expense .
Note : Adjustments are only applied to materials represented by the test sample .
Note : ( 1 ) Denotes level of adjustment .
23.8.4 Payment Adjustment Applied to Sub-Contractors Where : ( a ) a payment adjustment is applied against the Contractor under the Contract ; and ( b ) the Contractor then applies that adjustment to the sub-contractor that carried out the Works the subject of the payment adjustment , the Contractor will provide the sub-contractor with a copy of the document/s from the Principal that evidence the payment adjustment applied to the Contractor .
MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 151 23.8.5 Table - Bitumen Equivalent Volumes Equivalent Volumes of Bituminous Material Measured at Higher Temperature Converted to 15 °C ( 15 °C Converted Higher Temperature ) .
Interpolate to determine equivalent volumes at temperatures other than those specified .
23.8.6 Additives Measured in litres at 15 deg .
C. Polymer additives in polymer modified binders not measured separately .
Make allowance in the rates for seal coats .
23.8.7 Precoat Applied to Aggregate Measured in litres .
Make allowance for adhesion agent .
23.8.8 Stockpile Sites Make allowance for in the relevant rates for sealing aggregate .
23.8.9 Sealing Aggregate SUPPLY AND DELIVERY Measured in square metres APPLICATION OF AGGREGATE Measured in square metres of finished aggregate work for each size of aggregate .
23.9 DENSE GRADED ASPHALT 23.9.1 New Pavements Measured in square metres for each specified thickness .
Payments will be determined as per 23.9.4 Rate of Payment Adjustments .
23.9.2 Resurfacing Work Measured in tonne placed as evidenced by weigh bridge dockets .
Payments will be determined as per payment adjustments clause .
23.9.3 Correction Course Work Measured in tonnes placed as evidenced by weighbridge dockets .
Correction courses are exempt from adjustments for voids .
23.9.4 Rate of Payment Adjustments Rates will be adjusted as follows : Table 23.3 – Rate of Payment Adjustments Reduction Level Payment Reduction Level 1 5 % Level 2 10 % Level 3 20 % Level 4 40 % Note : Adjustments are for materials specified at 30 mm and greater thickness .
Table 23.2 – Bitumen Equivalent Volumes Temp .
( °C ) Factor Temp .
( °C ) Factor 15 1.0000 ( 1.0000 ) 120 0.9356 ( 1.0688 ) 40 0.9844 ( 1.0158 ) 130 0.9296 ( 1.0757 ) 50 0.9782 ( 1.0223 ) 140 0.9237 ( 1.0826 ) 60 0.9720 ( 1.0288 ) 150 0.9178 ( 1.0896 ) 70 0.9659 ( 1.0353 ) 160 0.9119 ( 1.0966 ) 80 0.9597 ( 1.0420 ) 170 0.9060 ( 1.1038 ) 90 0.9537 ( 1.0486 ) 180 0.9002 ( 1.1109 ) 100 0.9476 ( 1.0553 ) 190 0.8944 ( 1.1181 ) 110 0.9416 ( 1.0620 ) 200 0.8886 ( 1.1253 ) 210 0.8829 ( 1.1326 ) MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 152 Table 23.4 - Bitumen Conformance - Class 320 Bitumen Viscosity ( at 60 °C Pa.s ) of AS 2008 Class 320 Bitumen Component of the Binder Payment Reduction ( red ’ n ) Under 260 ( Pa.s ) 5 % red ’ n for each 10 Pa.s ( or part thereof ) less than 260 260 – 380 ( Pa.s ) Nil .
Over 380 ( Pa.s ) 5 % red ’ n for each 10 Pa.s ( or part thereof ) over 380 .
Table 23.5 - Bitumen Conformance - Polymer Modified Binder ( A15E ) Polymer Modified Binders A15E Payment Reduction * Consistency ( 60oC Pas ) 4500 - 4999 5 % reduction to m2 rate ( $ ) of lot Consistency ( 60oC Pas ) 4000 - 4449 10 % Reduction to m2 rate ( $ ) of lot Consistency ( 60oC Pas ) 4000 - 3000 20 % Reduction to m2 rate ( $ ) of lot Consistency ( 60oC Pas ) less than - 3000 Remove and Replace Torsional Recovery ( 25oC,30s , % ) 1 % – 5 % less than specified 5 % reduction to m2 rate ( $ ) of lot Torsional Recovery ( 25oC,30s , % ) 6 % – 10 % less than specified 10 % reduction to m2 rate ( $ ) of lot Torsional Recovery ( 25oC,30s , % ) over 10 % less than specified 20 % reduction to m2 rate ( $ ) of lot Softening Point 0 – 5 oC less than specified 5 % Reduction to m2 rate ( $ ) of lot Softening Point 5.1 – 10 oC less than specified 10 % Reduction to m2 rate ( $ ) of lot Softening Point 10.1 – 15 oC less than specified 20 % Reduction to m2 rate ( $ ) of lot Softening Point more than 15.1 – 20.0 oC less than specified 30 % Reduction to m2 rate ( $ ) of lot Softening Point more than 20.1 oC less than specified Remove and Replace * Payment reduction shall only apply to the test property providing highest level of non conformance 23.9.5 Rideability Table 23.6 – Payment adjustments related to IRI over specified IRI ( per lot ) Increase in specified max IRI ( per lot ) % Adjustment to the m2 rate of the lot 0.01 – 0.10 2 % 0.11 – 0.20 4 % 0.21 – 0.30 6 % 0.31 – 0.40 8 % 0.41 – 0.50 10 % 0.51 – 0.60 12 % 0.61 – 0.70 14 % 0.71 – 0.80 16 % > 0.80 Remove & Replace/Rectify 23.9.6 Progress Claims Contractor may claim up to three-quarters of the contract rate when works are physically completed on site with balance of payment following conformance test results .
23.9.7 Payment Adjustment Applied to Sub- Contractors Where : ( a ) a payment adjustment is applied against the Contractor under the Contract ; and ( b ) the Contractor then applies that adjustment to the sub-contractor that carried out the Works the subject of the payment adjustment , The Contractor will provide the sub- contractor with a copy of the document/s from the Principal as evidence that the payment adjustment applied to the Contractor .
MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 153 23.10 SLURRY SURFACING Payment will be made at the tendered rates for the actual quantity of accepted slurry surfacing mix spread .
Measurement ; - Slurry surfacing laid per m2 @ average 9 mm thickness , including surface preparation and supply and laying of slurry surfacing mix .
- Slurry correction volume per m2 .
23.11 MISCELLANEOUS CONCRETE Make allowance for excavation , bedding and backfilling in the following items .
23.11.1 Footpaths Measured in linear metres for each type .
23.11.2 Vehicle Crossings and Access Strips Measured in square metres for each type .
Make allowance for reinforcement .
23.11.3 Kerbs and Gutters Measured in linear metres for each type ( any drainage structures/crossings excluded from measured lengths . )
23.11.4 Inverts Measured in linear metres .
23.11.5 Wheelchair Crossings Measured by number .
23.11.6 Traffic Island and Median Infill Measured in square metres .
23.12 DRAINAGE WORKS 23.12.1 Excavation in Trenching Measured in in-situ cubic metres for the specified range of depths to invert .
The length of the trench shall be measured between the outside face of headwalls or between the centre of pits .
The width of the trench shall be the outside width of the culvert plus 300 mm on each side .
The depth of the trench is the average of the depths to invert measured at the structure at each end of the section .
The depth to invert is the lesser of the depth below natural surface and the depth below finished surface level .
In the case of kerbside structures , the finished surface level is measured at the top of kerb .
Make allowance for shoring , bedding , inlet and outlet structures and irregularities in the natural surface where applicable .
23.12.2 Supply , Load , Transport , Bed , Lay and Backfill Culverts Measured in linear metres along the invert of the culvert as the distance between the outside face of headwalls or other structures for the type and size scheduled .
Multiple barrel culverts are measured as the single distance between the outside face of headwalls or other structures .
Excavation is measured separately .
23.12.3 Excavate , Supply , Load , Transport , Bed , Lay and Backfill Culverts Measured in linear metres along the invert of the culvert between the outside face of headwalls/inside face of pits or other structures for the type and size scheduled .
Multiple barrel culverts are measured as the single distance between the outside face of headwalls or other structures .
Make allowance for RC floor slabs for precast box culverts .
23.12.4 Concrete Headwalls , Maintenance Holes and Other Structures Measured in cubic metres .
Measured by number .
23.12.5 Collar Joints , Bandage Joints , Anchor Blocks and End Caps Measured by number .
Make allowance for splay ends .
23.12.6 Inlet and Outlet Channels Measured in in-situ cubic metres .
Not measured separately for culvert waterways less than 2 square metres in cross-sectional area and channels less than 50 metres long .
23.12.7 Open Unlined Drains Measured in in situ cubic metres .
23.12.8 Subsoil Drains Measured in linear metres .
Make allowance for blocks , headwalls , filter material , geotextiles , and connection to existing drainage system .
23.12.9 Demolish and Remove Existing Drainage Structures Measured as an item .
Make allowance for backfilling .
23.13 PROTECTION WORKS 23.13.1 Geotextile Fabric Measured in square metres of completed area .
Make allowance for supply and placement .
Make allowance for laps and folds .
23.13.2 Stone Pitching Measured in square metres of the face area .
MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 154 23.13.3 Grouted Stone Pitching Measured in square metres of the face area .
Make allowance for weep holes .
23.13.4 Dumped Rock Protection Measured in cubic metres .
23.13.5 Rubble Measured in cubic metres .
23.13.6 Gabions Measured in cubic metres .
Includes the excavation , steel wire mesh box and the stone filling .
23.13.7 Reno Mattresses Measured in square metres .
Includes the excavation , steel wire mesh box and the stone filling .
23.13.8 Revetment Mattresses Measured in square metres .
23.13.9 Embankment Protection - Concrete Measured in square metres of the face area .
Make allowance for weep holes .
23.13.10 Margins Measured in linear metres .
Make allowance for reinforcement .
23.14 ROAD FURNITURE AND TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES 23.14.1 Fencing Measured in linear metres .
Make allowance for gates which are not measured separately .
Make allowance for clearing of fence lines which is not measured separately .
23.14.2 Guide Posts Measured by number .
Make allowance for delineators .
23.14.3 Road Signs , Supply and Install Measured by number of each sign type or classification .
23.14.4 Reinstate/Relocate Existing Road Signs Measured by number .
23.14.5 Flood Gauge Posts Measured by number .
Make allowance for gauge .
23.14.6 Cattle Grids Size 10 m or 12.4 m , with or without concrete approach .
Measured by number .
Make allowance for gate in adjacent fence .
23.14.7 Steel Beam Guardrail Measured from centre to centre of end posts in linear metres .
Make allowance for terminals , delineators and fittings .
23.15 PAVEMENT MARKING 23.15.1 Pavement Marking – New Work The following are measured in linear metres for type of painted line , inclusive of unpainted gaps : - Continuity line - ( single broken ) .
- Unbroken lane line - ( single continuous ) .
- Broken lane line or separation line - ( single ) .
- Barrier lines both directions - ( double continuous longitudinal lines ) .
- Barrier lines one direction - ( double longitudinal lines broken on one side , continuous on the other ) .
- Edge line - ( single continuous ) .
- No Standing Any Time - ( yellow single continuous ) .
All other markings measured as an item .
Make allowance for the specified spherical glass beads with all markings .
Removal of existing pavement markings measured as an item .
23.15.2 Pavement Marking – Resealing Contracts The Superintendent will pay for all pavement marking work directly to the Panel Contractor selected to perform the pavement marking work under this contract .
Measurement of completed pavement marking will be done jointly with the reseal contractor , the panel contract linemarker and the Superintendent .
Recording of localities and extent of pavement marking work , including set out prior to line marking activities are measured as an item .
Include all activities required to co-ordinate the pavement marking work .
23.15.3 Raised Retroreflective Pavement Markers Measured by number for each type .
23.16 LANDSCAPE 23.16.1 Site Preparation Measured as an item .
Make allowance for any filling and levelling required .
23.16.2 Topsoil Measured in square metres .
Make allowance for any supply required , and spreading .
MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 155 23.16.3 Trees , Shrubs and Ground Covers Measured by number of each type of genus and species .
Make allowance for supply of plants , mulch , fertilisers , excavation of planting holes , and planting .
23.16.4 Irrigation Measured as an item .
Make allowance for any design requirements , cost of approvals and connection to the water supply , cost of testing , and provision of as constructed drawings .
23.16.5 Grassing Measured in square metres .
Make allowance for reseeding .
23.16.6 Watering Measured as an item .
Note that cost of water will be borne by the Superintendent .
23.17 DUCTING AND CONDUITS 23.17.1 Electrical Ducting Measured in linear metres .
Make allowance for excavation and backfilling trenches , marker tapes , draw wires and kerb markers .
23.17.2 Water Ducting Measured in linear metres .
Make allowance for excavation and backfilling trenches , marker tapes , draw wires and kerb markers .
23.17.3 Conduit Markers Measured by number .
23.18 TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNALS 23.18.1 Supply and Install Pedestals and Footings Measured by number .
23.18.2 Supply and Install Highmast Pedestals and Footings Measured by number .
23.18.3 Supply and Install Non-standard Pedestals and Footings Measured by number .
23.18.4 Supply and Install Vehicle and Pedestrian Signal Lanterns Measured by number .
Make allowance for terminal assembly , target boards , cowls and louvres , and all ancillary items .
23.18.5 Install and Commission Controller Measured as an item .
Make allowance for all ancillary items such as surge reduction filter and earth stake .
23.18.6 Supply , Install and Test Multicore Connecting Cable Measured in linear metres .
23.18.7 Supply , Install and Test Detector Loop Feeder Cables Measured in linear metres .
23.18.8 Supply and Install Detector Loops Measured by number .
23.18.9 Provision of Power Connection Measured as an item .
23.18.10 Supply and Install Conduits Measured in linear metres .
Make allowance for draw wires , end caps , and ancillary items .
23.18.11 Supply and Install Conduit Junction Pits Measured by number .
23.18.12 Supply and Install Detector Pits Measured by number .
23.18.13 Supply and Install Pedestrian Push Button and Audio-tactile Assemblies Measured by number .
23.18.14 Supply and Install Communications Isolation Pillar Measured as an item .
23.18.15 Documents and Plans Measured as an item .
23.18.16 Provision of Communications Line Measured by number .
23.19 TRAFFIC COUNTING STATIONS 23.19.1 Install Cabinet Measured as an item .
Make allowance for supply and installation of terminal blocks and switchboard .
Make allowance for drawing of labelled loop layout and terminal blocks .
23.19.2 Construction of Pole Foundation Measured as an item .
Make allowance for excavation , reinforcement and rag bolts .
23.19.3 Supply and Install Vehicle Loop Detectors Measured by number .
Make allowance for cutting , install cable , junction boxes and detector feeder cables .
MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 156 23.19.4 Install Piezo Axle Sensors Measured by number .
Make allowance for supply and installation of feeder cables .
23.19.5 Install Pole Assembly Measured as an item .
Make allowance for installation of solar power supply .
23.19.6 Supply and Install Conduits Measured by length .
Make allowance for excavation , ducting , reinstatement and connections .
23.20 STREET LIGHTING 23.20.1 Install Light Columns Measured by number .
Make allowance for installation of street lighting columns including the following : - trenching and installation of cables including marker tape and backfilling ; - supply and installation of footings and hold down bolts ; - installation of distribution pillars ; - connections ; and - testing and commissioning .
23.20.2 Supply and Install Conduits Measured in metres .
Make allowance for draw wires , end caps and ancillary items .
Cable installation is paid for in the “ Install Light Columns ” item .
23.20.3 Removal of Existing Street Lighting Measured by number .
Make allowance for removal of existing footings and the delivery of the salvaged materials to the specified location .
23.20.4 Provision of Temporary Lighting Measured as an item .
Make allowance for temporary lighting and additional work required by PowerWater .
23.20.5 Connection of Power Measured as an item .
Make allowance for fees and charges and additional work required by PowerWater .
23.21 DIRECTIONAL ( THRUST ) BORING 23.21.1 Directional Boring With Pipe Casing Measured in linear metres .
Includes supply of pipe casing and filling of cavities .
23.21.2 Directional Boring Without Pipe Casing Measured in linear metres .
Includes filling of cavities 23.22 OTHER REQUIREMENTS Refer to PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS in the RFT. . REFERENCED DOCUMENTS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 157 24 REFERENCED AUSTRALIAN STANDARDS Referenced Australian Standards Use Standards , and their amendments , current 3 months before the date for the close of tenders except where different editions and/or amendments are required by statutory authorities , including , but not limited to , NATA and the National Construction Code including the Building Code of Australia .
Dates entered like this ( R2013 ) indicate that a Standard was reviewed and re-issued unaltered in the year cited in the parentheses .
Entries in Times New Roman italics indicate Standards not cited in this document but which may be useful references .
AS 1012 ( set ) - Methods of testing concrete AS 1012.3.1 2014 - Determination of properties related to the consistency of concrete - Slump Test AS 1012.8.1 2014 - Method for making and curing concrete - Compression and indirect tensile test specimens AS 1012.9 2014 - Compressive strength tests - Concrete , grout and mortar specimens AS 1074 1989 Steel tubes and tubulars for ordinary services AS 1100 ( set ) - Technical drawing AS 1111 ( set ) 2015 ISO metric hexagon commercial bolts and screws - Product Grade C AS 1112 ( set ) 2015 ISO metric hexagon nuts AS 1141 ( set ) - Methods for sampling and testing aggregates AS 1141.0 1999 - List of Methods AS 1141.1 2015 - Definitions AS 1141.2 2015 - Basic testing equipment AS 1141.3.1 2012 - Sampling - Aggregates AS 1141.11.1 2009 - Particle size distribution – Sieving method ( Includes Amdt 1:2011 , Amdt 2:2016 ) AS 1141.14 2007 - Particle shape , by proportional caliper AS 1141.15 1999 - Flakiness index AS 1141.18 1996 - Crushed particles in coarse aggregate derived from gravel AS 1141.20.1 2000 ( R2013 ) - Average least dimension - Direct measurement ( nominal size 10 mm and greater ) AS 1141.20.2 2000 ( R2013 ) - Average least dimension – Direct measurement ( nominal size 7 mm and 5mm ) AS 1141.20.3 2000 ( R2013 ) - Average least dimension – Calculation ( nomograph ) .
AS 1141.23 2009 - Los Angeles value AS 1141.24 2013 - Aggregate soundness – Evaluation by exposure to sodium sulphate solution AS 1141.25.1 2003 ( R2013 ) - Degradation factor – Source rock AS 1141.26 2008 - Secondary minerals content in igneous rocks AS 1141.29 2014 - Accelerated soundness index by reflux AS 1141.40 1999 - Polished aggregate friction value - Vertical road-wheel machine AS 1141.41 1999 - Polished aggregate friction value – Horizontal bed machine REFERENCED DOCUMENTS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 158 Referenced Australian Standards Use Standards , and their amendments , current 3 months before the date for the close of tenders except where different editions and/or amendments are required by statutory authorities , including , but not limited to , NATA and the National Construction Code including the Building Code of Australia .
Dates entered like this ( R2013 ) indicate that a Standard was reviewed and re-issued unaltered in the year cited in the parentheses .
Entries in Times New Roman italics indicate Standards not cited in this document but which may be useful references .
AS 1141.50 1998 ( R2016 ) - Resistance to stripping of cover aggregates from binders AS/NZS 1158 ( set ) - Lighting for roads and public spaces AS 1160 1996 Bitumen emulsions for construction and maintenance of pavements AS/NZS 1163 2016 Cold-formed structural steel hollow sections AS 1231 2000 Aluminium and aluminium alloys - Anodic oxidation coatings AS/NZS 1252 1996 High strength steel bolts with associated nuts and washers for structural engineering AS 1273 1991 Unplasticised PVC ( UPVC ) downpipe and fittings for rainwater AS 1289 ( set ) - Methods of testing soils for engineering purposes AS 1289.0 2014 - Definitions and general requirements AS 1289.1.1 2001 - Sampling and preparation of soils – Preparation of disturbed soil samples for testing ( Includes Amdt 1:2002 and Amdt 2 : 2008 ) AS 1289.2.1.1 2005 ( R2016 ) - Soil moisture content tests – Determination of the moisture content of a soil - Oven drying method ( standard method ) AS 1289.3.1.1 2009 - Soil classification tests - Determination of the liquid limit of a soil – Four point Casagrande method AS 1289.3.2.1 2009 - Soil classification tests - Determination of the plastic limit of a soil – Standard method AS 1289.3.3.1 2009 - Soil classification tests - Calculation of the plasticity index of a soil AS 1289.3.4.1 2008 - Soil classification tests - Determination of the linear shrinkage of a soil – Standard method AS 1289.3.6.1 2009 - Soil classification tests - Determination of the particle size distribution of a soil – Standard method of analysis by sieving AS 1289.3.7.1 2002 ( R2016 ) - Soil classification tests - Determination of the sand equivalent of a soil using a power-operated shaker AS 1289.5.1.1 2003 - Soil compaction and density tests - Determination of the dry density/moisture content relation of a soil using standard compactive effort AS 1289.5.2.1 2003 - Soil compaction and density tests - Determination of the dry density/moisture content relation of a soil using modified compactive effort AS 1289.5.4.1 2007 ( R2016 ) - Soil compaction and density tests – Compaction control test - Dry density ratio , moisture variation and moisture ratio AS 1289.5.8.1 2007 - Soil compaction and density tests – Determination of field density and field moisture content of a soil using a nuclear surface moisture-density gauge – Direct transmission mode AS 1289.6.1.1 2014 - Soil strength and consolidation tests - Determination of the California Bearing Ratio of a soil – Standard laboratory methods for a remoulded specimen REFERENCED DOCUMENTS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 159 Referenced Australian Standards Use Standards , and their amendments , current 3 months before the date for the close of tenders except where different editions and/or amendments are required by statutory authorities , including , but not limited to , NATA and the National Construction Code including the Building Code of Australia .
Dates entered like this ( R2013 ) indicate that a Standard was reviewed and re-issued unaltered in the year cited in the parentheses .
Entries in Times New Roman italics indicate Standards not cited in this document but which may be useful references .
AS 1289.7.1.1 2003 Methods of testing soils for engineering purposes - Soil reactivity tests - Determination of the shrinkage index of a soil AS 1289.7.1.2 1998 ( R2013 ) Methods of testing soils for engineering purposes - Soil reactivity tests - Determination of the shrinkage index of a soil - Loaded shrinkage index AS 1289.7.1.3 1998 ( R2013 ) Methods of testing soils for engineering purposes - Soil reactivity tests - Determination of the shrinkage index of a soil - Core shrinkage index AS 1345 1995 Identification of the contents of pipes , conduits and ducts AS 1348 2002 Road and traffic engineering - Glossary of terms ( available withdrawn ) AS 1379 2007 Specification and supply of concrete ( Includes Amdt 1 : 2009 , Amdt 2 : 2015 & Supp 1 : 2009 ) AS 1397 2011 Continuous hot-dip metallic coated steel sheet and strip - Coatings of zinc and zinc alloyed with aluminium and magnesium ( Includes Amdt 1:2012 ) AS/NZS 1477 2006 PVC pipes and fittings for pressure applications ( Includes Amdt 1:2009 ) AS 1478.1 2000 Chemical admixtures for concrete , mortar and grout – Admixtures for concrete AS/NZS 1554 ( set ) - Structural steel welding AS 1579 2001 Arc-welded steel pipes and fittings for water and waste-water AS 1580 ( set ) - Paints and related materials – Methods of test AS/NZS 1580.108.1 1994 - Determination of dry film thickness on metallic substrates – Non- destructive methods AS/NZS 1580.205.4 1998 ( R2013 ) - Application properties – Airless spraying AS/NZS 1594 2002 Hot rolled steel flat products AS 1597 ( set ) - Precast reinforced concrete box culverts AS 1597.1 2010 - Small culverts ( not exceeding 1200 mm span and 1200 mm height ) AS 1597.2 2013 - Large culverts ( exceeding 1200 mm span or 1200 mm height and up to and including 4200 mm span and 4200 mm height ) AS 1604.1 2012 Specification for preservative treatment – Sawn and round timber AS 1627 ( set ) - Metal finishing - Preparation and pretreatment of surfaces AS 1627.1 2003 - removal of oil , grease and related contamination AS 1627.2 2002 - Power tool cleaning AS 1627.4 2005 - Abrasive blast cleaning of steel AS 1627.9 2002 - Pictorial surface preparation standards for painting steel surfaces AS 1672.1 1997 ( R2016 ) Limes and limestones – Limes for building AS 1678 ( set ) - Emergency procedure guide – Transport REFERENCED DOCUMENTS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 160 Referenced Australian Standards Use Standards , and their amendments , current 3 months before the date for the close of tenders except where different editions and/or amendments are required by statutory authorities , including , but not limited to , NATA and the National Construction Code including the Building Code of Australia .
Dates entered like this ( R2013 ) indicate that a Standard was reviewed and re-issued unaltered in the year cited in the parentheses .
Entries in Times New Roman italics indicate Standards not cited in this document but which may be useful references .
AS 1678.3A1 2004 ( R2016 ) - Group text EPGs for Class 3 substances – Flammable liquids AS 1722 1992 Pipe threads of Whitworth form - Fastening pipe threads AS 1725 ( set ) 2010 Chain link fabric fencing AS/NZS 1734 1997 Aluminium and aluminium alloys - Flat sheet , coiled sheet and plate AS 1742 ( set ) - Manual of uniform traffic control devices AS 1742.3 2009 - Traffic control for works on roads AS 1742.6 2014 - Tourist and services signs AS 1742.9 2000 - Bicycle facilities AS 1742.10 2009 - Pedestrian control and protection AS 1743 2001 Road signs – Specifications AS 1744 2015 Standard alphabets for road signs AS 1906 ( set ) - Retroreflective materials and devices for road traffic control purposes AS/NZS 1906.1 2007 - Retroreflective sheeting ( Includes Amdt 1:2014 ) AS 1906.3 1992 - Raised pavement markers ( retroreflective and non-retroreflective ) AS 1940 2004 The storage and handling of flammable and combustible liquids ( Includes Amdt 1:2004 , Amdt 2:2006 ) AS 2001.2.3.2 2001 ( R2016 ) Methods of test for textiles - Physical tests - Determination of maximum force using the grab method ( ISO 13934-2:1999 , MOD ) AS 2008 2013 Bitumen for pavements AS/NZS 2009 2006 Glass beads for pavement-marking materials ( Includes Amdt 1:2007 ) AS/NZS 2041 ( set ) - Buried corrugated metal structures AS/NZS 2041.1 2011 - Design methods AS/NZS 2041.2 2011 - Installation AS/NZS 2041.4 2010 - Helically formed sinusoidal pipes AS/NZS 2053.1 2001 ( R2016 ) Conduits and fittings for electrical Installations – General requirements AS 2106.2 2005 ( R2016 ) Methods for the determination of the flash point of flammable liquids ( closed cup ) - Determination of flash point - Pensky-Martens closed cup method AS 2144 2014 Traffic signal lanterns AS 2150 2005 Hot mix asphalt – A guide to good practice AS 2157 1997 Cutback bitumen AS 2187.1 1998 Explosives - Storage , transport and use - Storage ( Includes Amdt 1:2000 ) AS 2187.2 2006 Explosives - Storage , transport and use - Use of explosives REFERENCED DOCUMENTS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 161 Referenced Australian Standards Use Standards , and their amendments , current 3 months before the date for the close of tenders except where different editions and/or amendments are required by statutory authorities , including , but not limited to , NATA and the National Construction Code including the Building Code of Australia .
Dates entered like this ( R2013 ) indicate that a Standard was reviewed and re-issued unaltered in the year cited in the parentheses .
Entries in Times New Roman italics indicate Standards not cited in this document but which may be useful references .
AS/NZS 2276 ( set ) - Cables for traffic signal installations AS/NZS 2276.1 2004 - Multicore power cables AS/NZS 2276.2 1998 - Feeder cable for vehicle detectors AS/NZS 2276.3 2002 - Loop cables for vehicle detectors AS/NZS 2299 ( set ) - Occupational diving operations AS/NZS 2299.1 2015 - Standard operational practice ( Includes Supp 1:2015 ) AS/NZS 2299.2 2002 - Scientific diving AS/NZS 2299.3 2003 - Recreational industry diving and snorkelling operations AS/NZS 2299.4 2005 - Film and photographic diving AS/NZS 2310 2002 Glossary of paint and painting terms AS/NZS 2311 2009 Guide to the painting of buildings AS/NZS 2312 ( set ) - Guide to the protection of structural steel against atmospheric corrosion by the use of protective coatings AS/NZS 2312.1 2014 - Paint coatings AS/NZS 2312.2 2014 - Hot dip galvannizing AS 2339 1997 Traffic signal posts and attachments ( See DR AS2339:2016 , includes mast arms ) AS 2341 ( set ) - Methods of testing bitumen and related roadmaking products AS/NZS 2341.2 2015 - Determination of dynamic viscosity by vacuum capillary viscometer AS 2341.3 1993 - Determination of kinematic viscosity by flow through a capillary tube AS/NZS 2341.4 2015 - Determination of dynamic viscosity by rotational viscometer AS 2341.6 1992 - Determination of density using a hydrometer AS 2341.9 1992 - Determination of water content ( Dean and Stark ) AS 2341.12 1993 - Determination of penetration ( available obsolescent - approximately equivalent to ASTM D5 ) AS/NZS 2341.13 1997 ( R2013 ) - Long-term exposure to heat and air AS 2341.18 1992 - Determination of softening point ( ring and ball method ) AS 2349 1991 Methods of sampling portland and blended cements ( Available superseded - superseded by AS/NZS 2350.1 ) AS/NZS 2350.0 1999 ( R2016 ) Methods of testing portland and blended cements - General introduction and list of methods AS/NZS 2350.1 2006 ( R2016 ) Methods of testing portland , blended and masonry cements – Sampling AS 2353 1999 Pedestrian push button assemblies REFERENCED DOCUMENTS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 162 Referenced Australian Standards Use Standards , and their amendments , current 3 months before the date for the close of tenders except where different editions and/or amendments are required by statutory authorities , including , but not limited to , NATA and the National Construction Code including the Building Code of Australia .
Dates entered like this ( R2013 ) indicate that a Standard was reviewed and re-issued unaltered in the year cited in the parentheses .
Entries in Times New Roman italics indicate Standards not cited in this document but which may be useful references .
AS 2423 2002 Coated steel wire fencing products for terrestrial , aquatic and general use AS/NZS 2433 1994 Plastics - Method for exposure to ultraviolet lamps AS 2439.1 2007 Perforated plastics drainage and effluent pipe and fittings - Perforated drainage pipe and associated fittings AS 2698 ( set ) - Plastics pipes and fittings for irrigation and rural applications AS 2698.2 2000 - Polyethylene rural pipe AS 2698.3 1990 - Mechanical joint fittings for use with polyethylene micro-irrigation pipes AS 2700 ( set ) 2011 Colour Standards for general purposes AS 2703 2008 Vehicle loop detector sensors AS 2758 ( set ) Aggregates and rock for engineering purposes AS 2758.1 2014 - Concrete aggregates AS 2758.2 2009 - Aggregate for sprayed bituminous surfacing AS 2758.5 2009 - Coarse asphalt aggregates AS 2809.5 2001 Road tank vehicles for dangerous goods - Tankers for bitumen based products AS 2815 ( set ) - Training and certification of occupational divers AS 2815.1 2008 - Occupational SCUBA diver - Standard AS/NZS 2815.2 2013 - Surface supplied diving to 30 m AS 2815.3 1992 - Air diving to 50 m AS 2815.4 1992 - Bell diving AS/NZS 2815.5 2013 - Dive supervisor AS 2865 2009 Confined Spaces AS 2870 2011 Residential slabs and footings AS 2876 2000 Concrete kerbs and channels ( gutters ) - Manually or machine placed ( Available withdrawn ) AS 2891 ( set ) - Methods of sampling and testing asphalt AS/NZS 2891.1.1 2013 - Sampling – Loose asphalt AS 2891.1.2 2008 - Sampling – Coring method AS 2891.1.3 2008 - Sampling – Asphalt from slabs AS/NZS 2891.3.1 2013 - Binder content and aggregate grading – Reflux method AS/NZS 2891.3.2 2013 - Binder content and aggregate grading – Centrifugal extraction method AS/NZS 2891.3.3 2013 - Binder content and aggregate grading – Pressure filter method REFERENCED DOCUMENTS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 163 Referenced Australian Standards Use Standards , and their amendments , current 3 months before the date for the close of tenders except where different editions and/or amendments are required by statutory authorities , including , but not limited to , NATA and the National Construction Code including the Building Code of Australia .
Dates entered like this ( R2013 ) indicate that a Standard was reviewed and re-issued unaltered in the year cited in the parentheses .
Entries in Times New Roman italics indicate Standards not cited in this document but which may be useful references .
AS/NZS 2891.5 2015 - Compaction of asphalt by Marshall method and determination of stability and flow – Marshall procedure AS/NZS 2891.7.1 2015 - Determination of maximum density of asphalt – Water displacement method AS/NZS 2891.7.3 2014 - Determination of maximum density of asphalt – Methylated spirits displacement AS/NZS 2891.8 2014 - Voids and volumetric properties of compacted asphalt mixes AS/NZS 2891.9.1 2014 - Determination of bulk density of compacted asphalt – Waxing procedure AS/NZS 2891.9.2 2014 - Determination of bulk density of compacted asphalt – Presaturation method AS/NZS 2891.9.3 2014 - Determination of bulk density of compacted asphalt – Mensuration method AS 2979 1998 Traffic signal mast arms AS/NZS 3000 2007 Electrical installations ( known as the Australian/New Zealand Wiring Rules ) ( Includes Amdt 1:2009 and Amdt 2:2012 ) AS/NZS 3100 2009 Approval and test specification - General requirements for electrical equipment ( Includes Amdt 1:2010 , Amdt 2:2012 , Amdt 3:2014 , Amdt 4:2015 ) AS/NZS 3191 2008 Electric flexible cords AS/NZS 3500 ( set ) - Plumbing and drainage AS/NZS 3500.1 2015 - Water services AS 3568 1999 Oils for reducing the viscosity of residual bitumen for pavements AS 3600 2009 Concrete structures ( Includes Amdt 1:2010 , Amdt 2:2013 , Supp 1:2014 ) AS 3610.1 2010 Formwork for concrete – Documentation and surface finish AS/NZS 3661.1 1993 Slip resistance of pedestrian surfaces - Requirements ( Available superseded .
Superseded by AS/NZS 4586:1999 and AS/NZS 4663 2002 ) AS/NZS 3661.2 1994 Slip resistance of pedestrian surfaces – Guide to the reduction of slip hazards AS/NZS 3678 2016 Structural steel - Hot rolled plates , floorplates and slabs AS/NZS 3679.1 2016 Structural steel - Hot rolled bars and sections AS 3706 ( set ) - Geotextiles – Methods of test AS 3706.1 2012 - General requirements , sampling , conditioning , basic physical properties and statistical analysis AS 3706.2 2012 - Determination of tensile properties – Wide strip and grab method AS 3706.3 2012 - Determination of tearing strength – Trapezoidal method AS 3706.4 2012 - Determination of bursting strength – California bearing ratio ( CBR ) – Plunger method REFERENCED DOCUMENTS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 164 Referenced Australian Standards Use Standards , and their amendments , current 3 months before the date for the close of tenders except where different editions and/or amendments are required by statutory authorities , including , but not limited to , NATA and the National Construction Code including the Building Code of Australia .
Dates entered like this ( R2013 ) indicate that a Standard was reviewed and re-issued unaltered in the year cited in the parentheses .
Entries in Times New Roman italics indicate Standards not cited in this document but which may be useful references .
AS 3706.9 2012 - Determination of permittivity , permeability and flow rate AS 3706.11 2012 - Determination of durability - Resistance to degradation by light , heat and moisture AS/NZS 3725 2007 Design for installation of buried concrete pipes ( includes Supp 1:2007 ) AS 3730 ( set ) - Guide to properties of paints for buildings AS 3730.14 2006 ( R2016 ) - Undercoat - Solvent borne - Interior/exterior AS/NZS 3750.9 2009 Paints for steel structure - Organic zinc-rich primer AS/NZS 3750.22 2008 Paints for steel structures – Full gloss enamel – Solvent-borne AS/NZS 3845.1 2015 Road safety barrier systems and devices - Road safety barrier systems AS 3894 ( set ) - Site testing of protective coatings AS 3894.3 2002 ( R2013 ) - Determination of dry film thickness AS 3894.5 2002 ( R2013 ) - Determination of surface profile AS 3894.10 2002 - Inspection report - Daily surface and ambient conditions AS 3894.11 2002 - Equipment report AS 3894.12 2002 - Inspection report - Coating AS 3894.13 2002 - Inspection report - Daily AS 3894.14 2002 - Inspection report - Daily painting AS 3972 2010 General purpose and blended cements AS 4049 ( set ) - Paints and related materials - Pavement marking materials AS 4049.1 2005 ( R2016 ) - Solvent borne paint - For use with surface applied glass beads AS 4049.2 2005 ( R2016 ) - Thermoplastic pavement marking materials - For use with surface applied glass beads AS 4049.3 2005 ( R2016 ) - Waterborne paint - For use with surface applied glass beads ( Includes Amdt 1:2006 ( R2016 ) ) AS 4049.4 2006 ( R2016 ) - High performance pavement marking systems AS/NZS 4058 2007 Precast concrete pipes ( pressure and non-pressure ) AS 4133 ( set ) - Methods of testing rocks for engineering purposes AS 4191 2015 Portable traffic signal systems AS 4283 1995 Cold mix asphalt for maintenance patching ( available withdrawn ) AS 4373 2007 Pruning of amenity trees AS 4419 2003 Soils for landscaping and garden use REFERENCED DOCUMENTS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 165 Referenced Australian Standards Use Standards , and their amendments , current 3 months before the date for the close of tenders except where different editions and/or amendments are required by statutory authorities , including , but not limited to , NATA and the National Construction Code including the Building Code of Australia .
Dates entered like this ( R2013 ) indicate that a Standard was reviewed and re-issued unaltered in the year cited in the parentheses .
Entries in Times New Roman italics indicate Standards not cited in this document but which may be useful references .
AS 4454 2012 Composts , soil conditioners and mulches ( Includes Amdt 1:2012 ) AS/NZS 4586 1999 Slip resistance classification of new pedestrian surface materials AS/NZS 4663 2002 Slip resistance measurement of existing pedestrian surfaces AS/NZS 4671 2001 Steel reinforcing materials ( Includes Amdt 1:2003 ) AS/NZS 4680 2006 Hot-dip galvanized ( zinc ) coatings on fabricated ferrous articles AS 4742 2003 Earth-moving machinery - Machine-mounted forward and reverse audible warning alarm - Sound test method ( withdrawn ) ( See ISO 9533:1989 ) AS/NZS 5000.1 2005 Electric cables – Polymetric insulated – For working voltages up to and including 0.6/1 ( 1.2 ) kV ( Includes Amdt 1:2006 ) AS 5100.5 2004 Bridge design - Concrete ( Includes Amdt 1:2010 , Amdt 2:2010 , Supp 1:2008 ) AS/NZS ISO 9000 2016 Quality management systems - Fundamentals and vocabulary AS/NZS ISO 31000 2009 Risk Management – Principles and guidelines AS/NZS 61558 ( set ) - Safety of power transformers , power supplies , reactors and similar products for supply voltages up to 1 100 V AS/NZS 61558.2.4 2009 - Particular requirements for isolating transformers for general use ( IEC 61558-2-4 : Ed 2 , SDT ) ( Includes Amdt 1:2012 ) AS/NZS 61558.2.6 2009 - Particular requirements for safety isolating transformers for general use ( IEC 61558-2-6 : Ed 2 , MOD ) ( Includes Amdt 1:2012 ) ISO 9533 2010 Earth-moving machinery - Machine-mounted audible travel alarms and forward horns - Test methods and performance criteria REFERENCED DOCUMENTS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 166 25 OTHER REFERENCED AUTHORITIES AND DOCUMENTS Other Referenced Authorities and Documents AAPA Australian Asphalt Pavement Association APAS Australian Paint Approval Scheme APAS AP-S0041/3 Pavement marking materials – cold applied plastic APAS AP-S0042 Glass beads for use in pavement marking paints APVMA Australian Pesticides and Veterinary Medicines Authority AGBT Austroads Guide to Bridge Technology AGPT Austroads Guide to Pavement Technology AGPT04B-14 - Part 4B Asphalt AGPT04H-08 - Part 4H : Test Methods AGPT04K-09 - Part 4K : Seals AGPT-T Austroads Guide to Pavement Technology - Test methods AGPT-T103-06 - Pre-treatment and Loss on Heating of Bitumen Multigrade and polymer Binders ( rolling thin film oven [ RTFO ] test ) AGPT-T108-06 - Segregation of Polymer Modified Binders AGPT-T109-06 - Ease of Remixing of Polymer Modified Binders AGPT-T111-06 - Handling Viscosity of Polymer Modified Binders ( Brookfield Thermosel ) AGPT-T112-06 - Flash Point of Polymer Modified Binders AGPT-T121-14 - Shear Properties of Polymer Modified Binders ( ARRB ELASTOMETER ) AGPT-T122-06 - Torsional Recovery of Polymer Modified Binders AGPT-T124-16 - Force Ratio of Polymer Modified Binders ( ARRB Extensiometer ) AGPT-T131-06 - Softening Point of Polymer Modified Binders AGPT-T132-06 - Compressive Limit of Polymer Modified Binders AGPT-T142-06 - Rubber content of digested crumb rubber binders - Trichlor bath method AGPT-T190-14 - Specification Framework for Polymer Modified Binders and Multigrade Bitumens AGPT-T231-06 - Deformation Resistance of Asphalt Mixtures by the Wheel Tracking Test .
AGPT-T272-05 - Determination of Abrasion Loss of Bitumen Slurry ( Wet track abrasion test ) AGRD Austroads Guide to Road Design AP-C87-15 Austroads Glossary of Terms AP-G41-15 Bituminous Materials Safety Guide AP-T68-06 Update of Austroads Sprayed Seal Design Method AP-T235-13 Guide to the Selection and Use of Polymer Modified Binders and Multigrade Bitumens AP-T236-13 Update of Double/Double Design for Austroads Sprayed Seal Design Methods ASTM American Society for Testing and Materials ASTM D86 - Standard Test Method for Distillation of Petroleum Products at Atmospheric Pressure ASTM D445 - Standard Test Method for Kinematic Viscosity of Transparent and Opaque Liquids ( and Calculation of Dynamic Viscosity ) ASTM D1298 - Standard Test Method for Kinematic Viscosity of Transparent and Opaque Liquids ( and Calculation of Dynamic Viscosity ) REFERENCED DOCUMENTS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 167 Other Referenced Authorities and Documents BS 381C-637 Medium sea grey CASA Civil Aviation Safety Authority ISSA International Slurry Surfacing Association NATA National Association of Testing Authorities NTCP Northern Territory Code of Practice NTMTM Northern Territory Materials Testing Manual NTTM Northern Territory Testing Methods TB 114 ISSA Test method for wet stripping of cured/bitumen slurry ( wet track abrasion method ) WA 730.1 Main Roads Western Australia , Bitumen Content and Particle Size Distribution of Asphalt and Stabilised Soil : Centrifuge Methods - NRETAS Fact Sheet “ Guidelines for Water Extraction as they relate to Road Construction and Maintenance. ” SPECIFICATIONS Electronically available : https : //infrastructure.nt.gov.au/specification- services/technical-specifications - Standard Specification for Environmental Management - Standard Specification for Small Building Works - Standard Specification for Road Maintenance REFERENCED DOCUMENTS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 168 26 ACTS , REGULATIONS AND CODES Acts , Regulations and Codes applicable to the works and authorities with jurisdiction over the works include , but are not limited to ; ACTS & REGULATIONS Aboriginal Sacred Sites Act Bushfires Act Control of Roads Act Dangerous Goods Act and Regulations Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act Environmental Assessment Act Environmental Offences and Penalties Act Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act Fair Work Act 2009 Food Act 2004 Heritage Conservation Act NT Building Act and Regulations NT Planning Act and Regulations Poisons and Dangerous Drugs Act and Regulations Public Health ( General Sanitation , Mosquito Prevention , Rat Exclusion and Prevention ) Regulations Soil Conservation and Land Utilisation Act Territory Parks and Wildlife Act Territory Parks and Wildlife Conservation Act Traffic Act and Regulations Waste Management and Pollution Control Act Water Act Weeds Management Act Work Health and Safety Act and Regulations CODES AND GUIDELINES Building Code of Australia ( BCA ) CASA Directives CASA Manual of Standards NT Code of Practice for Small On-site Sewage and Sullage Treatment Systems and the Disposal or Re- use of Sewage Effluent .
NT Deemed to Comply Manual NT Health and Safety Guidelines for Commercial Kitchens AUTHORITIES Aboriginal Areas Protection Authority ( AAPA ) Development Consent Authority of the NT ( DCA ) NT Department of Health NT Department of Environment and Natural Resources ( DENR ) NT Fire and Rescue Service ( NTFRS ) NT WorkSafe PowerWater Corporation of the NT ( PWC ) Requirements of the engaged Building Certifier Requirements of the Local Municipal or Shire Councils REFERENCED DOCUMENTS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 169 27 CIVIL STANDARD DRAWINGS FOR ROADWORKS Civil Standard Drawings for Roadworks Note : Use the most recently issued versions of drawings .
CS 0016 Cross Section – Shared Path Railing at Culvert Crossing CS 0601 Northern Territory Regions Map CS 0602 Road Network – Darwin Region CS 0603 Road Network – East Arnhem Region CS 0604 Road Network – Katherine Region CS 0605 Road Network – Tennant Creek Region CS 0606 Road Network – Alice Springs Region – West CS 0607 Road Network – Alice Springs - East CS 1203 Standard Kerb Profiles CS 1204 Cyclists ’ Hold Rail CS 1300 Flexible Guide Posts CS 1301 Flood Gauge Posts CS 1303 Standard Security Fence CS 1306 Stock Fence Design and Details CS 1310 Steel Beam Guard Rail CS 1311 Standard Typical Approach Guardrail at Bridges CS 1312 Standard Approach Guardrail Details for Single Lane Bridges CS 1313 Standard Cattle Grid Plan and Sections with Approach Slab CS 1314 Standard Cattle Grid Plan and Sections without Approach Slab CS 1315 Standard Cattle Grid Details CS 1316 Vehicle Movement Barriers CS 1317 Standard Stock Fence Swinging Floodgate for Stream Crossings CS 1500 Signal Details - Ducting CS 1501 Signal Details - Pole Foundation CS 1502 Signal Details - Mast Arm Foundation CS 1503 Signal Details - Controller Foundation CS 1504 Signal Details - Communication Isolation Pillar CS 1505 Signal Detail Lantern Mounting Details CS 1506 Pedestrian Push Button CS 1507 Signal Detail Detector Installation CS 1520 Line Marking CS 1521 Chevrons and RRPM ’ s CS 1550 Standard Traffic Counting Station Post Mounted Detector Loop and Pit Details CS 1551 Standard Traffic Counting Station Post Mounted Detector Loop Layout CS 1552 Standard Traffic Counting Station Post Mounted Piezo Tube Layout CS 1553 Standard Traffic Counting Station Post Mounted Foundation Details CS 1554 Standard Traffic Control Station Post Mounted Cabinet Wiring Details REFERENCED DOCUMENTS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 170 Civil Standard Drawings for Roadworks Note : Use the most recently issued versions of drawings .
CS 1555 Standard Traffic Counting Station Post Mounted Post Assembly CS 1556 standard traffic counting station post mounted traffic cabinet details CS 1557 Traffic Signal Advanced Warning Sign CS 2100 8.0m Gravel Pavement Resurfacing - Typical Cross Section CS 2101 Shoulder Maintenance Works - Gravel Pavement – Typical Cross Section B CS 2102 Shoulder Maintenance on Various Width Sealed Pavement - Typical Cross Section CS 2103 Shoulder Maintenance on Various Width Sealed Pavement - Typical Cross Section D CS 2104 Road Maintenance Works 9m Gravel Pavement - Typical Cross Section CS 2105 Road Maintenance Works 10m Gravel Pavement - Typical Floodway Cross Section CS 2106 Road Maintenance Works 7m Sealed Pavement - Typical Floodway Cross Section G CS 2107 Road Maintenance Works 9m Sealed Pavement - Typical Floodway Cross Section CS 2108 Standard Specification 10m Carriageway with 8.0m seal – Typical Cross Section J CS 2109 Standard Drawing 10.0m Carriageway with 8.0m seal – Typical Cross Section B95-2284 ( RU3A ) Crow Guard Lid for 200L Drum R09-3124 Irrigation - Telemetry Control Station Detail Civil Standard Drawings Available : https : //infrastructure.nt.gov.au/specification-services/standard-drawings REFERENCED DOCUMENTS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 171 REFERENCED DOCUMENTS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 172 REFERENCED DOCUMENTS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 173 REFERENCED DOCUMENTS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 174 REFERENCED DOCUMENTS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 175 REFERENCED DOCUMENTS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 176 REFERENCED DOCUMENTS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 177 REFERENCED DOCUMENTS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 178 REFERENCED DOCUMENTS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 179 REFERENCED DOCUMENTS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROADWORKS NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 180 28 NORTHERN TERRITORY CLIMATE ZONES TABLE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 5 STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE 2017 REFERENCE TEXT CONTENTS MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS .................................................................................................. 7 1 .
PROVISION FOR TRAFFIC ....................................................................................................... 18 2 .
EARTHWORKS AND DRAINAGE ............................................................................................... 29 3 .
CONFORMANCE TESTING ....................................................................................................... 33 4 .
GRADING AND GRAVEL SHEETING ......................................................................................... 46 5 .
STABILISATION MAINTENANCE ................................................................................................ 54 6 .
SPRAY SEALING MAINTENANCE ............................................................................................. 57 7 .
BITUMINOUS SURFACE MAINTENANCE .................................................................................... 70 8 .
CONCRETE MAINTENANCE ..................................................................................................... 82 9 .
DRAINAGE MAINTENANCE ...................................................................................................... 86 10 .
PROTECTION WORKS MAINTENANCE ...................................................................................... 91 11 .
ROAD FURNITURE MAINTENANCE ........................................................................................... 96 12 .
PAVEMENT MARKING MAINTENANCE .................................................................................... 107 13 .
LANDSCAPE MAINTENANCE ................................................................................................. 112 14 .
SLASHING AND WEED CONTROL .......................................................................................... 125 15 .
TRAFFIC SIGNALS AND INTELLIGENT TRANSPORT SYSTEMS MAINTENANCE ............................ 133 16 .
STREET SWEEPING ............................................................................................................. 178 17 .
AERODROME MAINTENANCE ................................................................................................ 181 18 .
ROAD AND MARINE AMENITY MAINTENANCE ......................................................................... 184 19 .
PROTECTIVE COATINGS ...................................................................................................... 195 20 .
MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT ............................................................................................. 211 21 .
REFERENCED AUSTRALIAN STANDARDS ............................................................................... 234 22 .
OTHER REFERENCED AUTHORITIES AND DOCUMENTS .......................................................... 242 23 .
ACTS , REGULATIONS AND CODES ........................................................................................ 244 24 .
CIVIL STANDARD DRAWINGS FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE ......................................................... 245 25 .
NORTHERN TERRITORY CLIMATE ZONES TABLE ................................................................... 254 26 .
STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 6 This page intentionally left blank .
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 7 MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 1 .
1.1 STANDARDS Comply with the Acts , Regulations , Guidelines and Codes applicable to the works .
Comply with the requirements of Authorities with jurisdiction over the works .
Conform to the Standards and Publications quoted throughout this document unless specified otherwise .
Refer to REFERENCED DOCUMENTS .
Currency of Standards 1.1.1 Use referenced Standards or other documents which are the editions , with amendments , current 3 months before the closing date for tenders , except where other editions or amendments are required by statutory authorities , including , but not limited to , NATA testing authorities and the National Construction Code/Building Code of Australia ( NCC/BCA ) .
Standards in Conflict 1.1.2 Where conflict arises between a referenced standard and particular clauses of this specification the specification prevails .
Overseas Standards 1.1.3 Where no Australian Standard exists standards published by the British Standards Institute ( BSI ) or the American Society for Testing Materials are referenced .
1.2 THE CONDITIONS OF TENDER AND CONDITIONS OF CONTRACT The Conditions of Tender and the Conditions of Contract contain additional requirements which apply to works carried out under any contract awarded by NT Government , including any works carried out using this specification .
1.3 ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT The Standard Specification for Environmental Management applies for all construction and demolition work for building and civil works carried out by or on behalf of the Northern Territory Government .
An electronic copy of this document is available at : https : //infrastructure.nt.gov.au/specification- services/technical-specifications/environmental- management The Standard Specification for Environmental Management takes precedence over this specification .
1.4 PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS Comply with all provisions in the PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS ( PSRs ) in the Request For Tender ( RFT ) or on the project drawings .
Any conflicts must be advised in writing to the Superintendent for clarification .
1.5 AS CONSTRUCTED INFORMATION - WITNESS POINT Hard copies of documents are no longer required .
Electronic copies in Microsoft Word , Microsoft Excel , pdf , .dwg or .dgn , or as specified , are required .
Document all changes and variations of the design as the work proceeds .
Witness Point - Provide amended versions of the information and drawings which reflect the as built conditions .
Provide PDF copies of drawings in A3 size format and provide the drawings in CAD format in AutoCad or Microstation .
Provide copies of text information in A4 portrait format in Microsoft Word , and/or PDF format .
Provide tables and schedules in Microsoft Excel and/or PDF .
Standard : To AS 1100 ( set ) Technical drawing .
Where the drawings are to be reduced , the annotation character heights shall be selected so that the annotation character heights as reproduced are not less than 1.8 mm .
Resolution to be a minimum of 600dpi .
Provide the amended information and drawings to the superintendent progressively as the work proceed , with or before the claim for the variation which led to the need to amend the information and drawings to accurately reflect the as built conditions .
Amended drawings – Hold Point 1.5.1 Hold Point - Before the work commences provide a proposed procedure for recording and submitting the amended drawings .
Use an independent surveyor who is eligible for membership of the Institution of Surveyors Australia or the Institution of Engineering and Mining Surveyors Australia to record the changes and variations .
1.6 DEFINITIONS The terms used in this specification are in accordance with the definitions laid down in AS 1348 unless specified otherwise in the Definitions clauses .
AAPA Aboriginal Areas Protection Authority .
APVMA Australian Pesticides and Veterinary Medicines Authority .
ASTM American Society for Testing and Materials .
Base The layer of pavement immediately above the subgrade or sub-base and/or below the bituminous surfacing extending for the full width of the traffic lanes .
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 8 Carriageway That portion of a road for the use of vehicles , that is between kerbs or barriers where these are provided , including shoulders and auxiliary lanes .
Catch Drain A surface channel constructed along the high side of a road or embankment , outside the batter , to intercept the water .
CLC Central Land Council .
CSR Contractor Service Request .
DIPL Department of Infrastructure , Planning and Logistics Department , the Department of Infrastructure , Planning and Logistics DERN Department of Environment and Natural Resources Dry Density Ratio ( DDR ) The percentage ratio of the field dry density of a material to the modified maximum dry density of that material .
This property is also termed Relative Compaction .
EMP Environmental Management Plan .
EPA Environmental Protection Authority .
Excess Haulage Haulage for the distance in excess of 15 km one way .
Formation Width The width of cut or fill , including table drains , out to the points of any batters .
High Risk Construction Work Has the meaning given to it in the WHS Act .
Hold Point Obtain the Superintendent ’ s written approval for that particular part of the works .
IRI International Roughness Index , stated as a numerical value .
Material Extraction Areas ( Formerly known as Borrow Pits ) An excavation outside the formation limits for obtaining fill , gravel , rock , rubble and other materials .
max .
Maximum .
min .
Minimum MMDD Maximum Modified Dry Density .
NATA National Association of Testing Authorities .
NLC Northern Land Council .
NTCP/NTCOP NT Code of Practice – located in NTMTM .
NTMTM Northern Territory Materials Testing Manual .
Available via https : //infrastructure.nt.gov.au/technical- information NTTM Northern Territory Test Methods – located in NTMTM .
On-call Staff Staff of the Department of Infrastructure , Planning and Logistics , unless the context clearly indicates otherwise .
Pavement The portion of a road constructed for the structural support of , and to form the running surface , for traffic .
PSRs Project Specific Requirements - appear in RFT and refer to this document which is the Technical Specification for the project which is the subject of the RFT , - detail what selections have been made where selections need to be made - are amendments to specified requirements published in this Standard Specification to tailor the specification to suit the project which is the subject of the RFT Recycled plastic Products from recycled and processed plastic wastes that have undergone processes in order to create new plastic products : proprietary products included .
Remove Pick up and transport material to be removed to an approved disposal site .
Use plant and equipment appropriate for the material to be removed and appropriate for the terrain .
RFT , RFQ Request for Tender , Request For Quotation Provisions applicable to one are equally applicable to the other .
Rock Hard naturally occurring elastic material which is not significantly affected by immersion in water and can not be dug with construction equipment normally used for the particular operation .
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 9 Roughness The roughness of the finished road surface in IRI as measured by a Roughness Meter approved by Superintendent .
RTO Registered Training Organisation .
RWA Restricted Work Area .
SDS Safety Data Sheet formerly referred as Materials Safety Data Sheet ( MSDS ) .
Shall Is indicative of a mandatory requirement unless the context clearly indicates otherwise .
Shoulder The layer of material immediately above the sub base or subgrade and adjacent of the pavement .
Stop Berm An independent blockage of a table drain or a diversion of flow into a culvert .
Sub-Base One or more layers of material placed over the subgrade and below the basecourse and shoulders .
Subgrade Top 150 mm of material below subgrade surface .
Subgrade Surface The prepared surface immediately beneath the pavement and shoulder layers .
Surface Formation The formation of a road from material generally cut from the table drains .
Table Drain Block A block constructed in a table drain to divert water into an offlet drain .
TCD Traffic Control Diagram .
TMP Traffic Management Plan .
Unpaved Areas : Those areas within the road reserve boundary which are not part of the road pavement , including any medians not paved , batters and table drains and blocks , but excluding footpaths and vehicle access strips .
Unsuitable Material Any material that does not conform to the properties specified for the materials to be used .
If properties of the replacement materials are not specified , then UNSUITABLE MATERIALS are materials which do not conform to the specified properties of standard fill .
URL Uniform Resource Locator – an internet web address .
Waste Disposal ( waste , rubbish , surplus items , surplus material ) .
Other material is to be removed and disposed of in compliance with the Waste Management and Pollution Control Act .
These other materials are to be disposed of in approved waste disposal sites or facilities .
Weeds Weeds include both declared and non-declared species .
Declared weeds are plant species declared under the Weeds Management Act .
Land managers have a legal obligation to manage these species .
Non-declared weeds are plant species which may represent a hazard to the public , impact road reserve assets or affect the aesthetics of a landscaped area .
These plants can be exotic or native in origin .
Non-declared weeds and their appropriate management methods will be identified by superintendent as part of the contract .
WHS Work Health and Safety .
Also can be a reference to the NT Work Health and Safety ( National Uniform Legislation ) Act and its Regulations and their companion Codes of Practice ( NT and Commonwealth ) .
Witness Point Give the Superintendent sufficient prior notice , in writing , of an action so that that part of the works may be inspected .
WMB Weeds Management Branch , a division of DENR .
You and Your Indicative of the Contractor , any Sub-Contractor engaged to provide services under this contract , and any personnel engaged by either to provide services under this contract .
1.7 PROTECTION OF CULTURALLY AND HISTORICALLY SIGNIFICANT ITEMS Specification Reference Refer to the Northern Territory Government Standard Specification for Environmental Management and to the RFT .
Safeguard sacred Aboriginal relics and places , as defined by the Sacred Sites Act , within the road reserve .
Where there is uncertainty as to the existence of sacred sites or relics , seek confirmation from the Aboriginal Areas Protection Authority ( AAPA ) .
Safeguard any heritage assets including trees , as defined by the NT Heritage Conservation Act , which may be affected by the works .
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 10 Comply with conditions included in any Aboriginal Areas Protection Authority ( AAPA ) clearances or approvals applying to the site of the works .
Observe the restrictions imposed by any Restricted Works Areas conditions applying to the site of the works .
Ensure all personnel working on site , including sub-contractors , are aware of any areas affected by these conditions .
Ensure all personnel working on site , including sub-contractors , comply with the requirements outlined in this clause .
Notify the Superintendent immediately if any items are found which are suspected of being items of significance in terms of this clause .
Protect the items and the area surrounding where they were found .
Do not carry out any works in the area surrounding where the items were found .
The Superintendent will advise the Contractor what actions are to be taken and when work may resume in the affected areas .
1.8 ESTABLISHMENT General 1.8.1 Allow in the tender for establishment on site , including , but not necessarily limited to , the following : Mobilisation Transportation to and establishment on site , including all ongoing costs , of all the requirements to complete that stage of the work .
Mobilisation will not be paid for work within 40 km of the regional post office .
Refer to the Mobilisation diagram in MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT or determined by regional requirements .
( If applicable ) Refer to PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS section of Request for Tender .
Demobilisation Removal and transportation from site of all temporary and construction facilities and equipment .
Restoration of the site , on Practical Completion of the works , compatible with environs .
Camp Site/Compound/Workshop – 1.8.2 Hold Point Hold Point - Obtain written permission from the owner or lessee of the land .
Provide a copy to the Superintendent .
Pay all costs associated with the use of the site ( s ) .
Refer to the Department of Health-Environmental Health Fact Sheet No.700 Requirements for Mining and Construction Projects for camp site requirements .
It is available online at http : //www.health.nt.gov.au/Environmental_Health /Health_Risk_Assessment/index.aspx Maintain all facilities in good condition .
Remove all facilities , unless otherwise agreed in writing with owner or lessee of land , and restore the site to a clean and tidy condition upon completion of the works .
Assume all responsibility for any current and consequential damage caused to the site as a result of occupation .
Rehabilitate site similar to site conditions prior to disturbance .
Refer to Acts , Regulations And Codes Applicable To The Works And Authorities With Jurisdiction Over The Works table in the REFERENCED DOCUMENTS section .
1.9 TIME LIMIT FOR ATTENDANCE Unless otherwise specified , the works must be attended within the following time limits : − Generally the work must be attended within 3 working days of notification .
− For urgent call outs within and outside of normal working hours the Contractor must be mobilised within 2 hours of notification .
− For priority works , which involve health , safety and security , the Contractor must be mobilised within 6 working hours of notification .
EVIDENCE OF UNSCHEDULED 1.10 WORKS When requested by the Superintendent the Contractor will provide evidence for any unscheduled works .
The requirement for evidence shall include the provision of certified copies of the following : - Material invoices - Specialist sub-contractor invoices - Time sheets , time records , vehicle log books and photos .
The provision of satisfactory evidence is a prerequisite to Payment for the work and percentage on-cost .
EXPLOSIVES - HOLD POINT 1.11 Hold Point - Provide evidence of the following requirements of NT Worksafe : - License to carry and store explosives .
- Vehicle license to carry explosives .
- Shot Firer ’ s certificate .
Inspect and record the condition of all structures and services subject to possible effect by use of explosives before and after blasting operations .
MATERIAL EXTRACTION AREAS AND 1.12 WATER SOURCES – HOLD POINT Specification Reference Refer to the Northern Territory Government Standard Specification for Environmental Management and to the RFT .
Material Extraction Areas adjacent to the works will be allowed provided that all the clearances MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 11 and approvals listed in the Approvals For Material Extraction Areas clause in the Standard Specification for Environmental Management are obtained .
Hold point – Provide copies of clearances and approvals to the Superintendent before commencing works .
Material Extraction Areas will not be permitted within 125 m of the road centreline unless otherwise agreed upon by the Superintendent .
1.12.1 Administration Take responsibility for locating , selecting , operating and rehabilitating all Material Extraction Areas and water sources .
Determine any constraints on the use of potential Material Extraction Areas and water sources , including sites of significance , environmental and salinity etc .
1.12.2 Crushing or Screening – Witness Point The crushing or screening plant to be used on the project subject to this contract must be certified as fit for use by a competent person .
The certification of fitness for use must have been issued not more than one year prior to the date of the scheduled completion of the works plus one calendar month .
A competent person is defined in the NT Work Safe Bulletin 09.01.16 Competent Persons for Inspection and Maintenance of Plant .
Witness Point – Provide documentary evidence of the certification that the plant is fit for use issued by a competent person .
Provide documentary evidence of that person ’ s skills and qualifications which indicate their competence as defined in the NT Work Safe Bulletin cited above .
This evidence is to be provided within 2 weeks of the award of the contract .
1.12.3 Operation of Material Extraction Area ACCESS Mark out with flags or other clear markings both proposed access route to Material Extraction Area and boundaries of Material Extraction Areas or proposed Material Extraction Areas .
Obtain approval from Superintendent before commencing extraction or track construction works .
Construct only one access road to each pit .
Confine all transport operations to the access road .
Provide and maintain adequate road drainage .
Provide and maintain erosion and sedimentation controls to the access track and the Material Extraction Areas .
EXTRACTION Strip 100 mm minimum depth top layer throughout the area of operation .
Stockpile stripped material clear of drainage to a maximum height of 1.5 m. Side slopes of sand or gravel to be not steeper than one vertical to two horizontal at any time when the excavation is unattended .
By-products of the excavation operations to be removed or buried unless otherwise required .
Stabilise stockpiles to prevent erosion by using , for example , systems such as silt fences .
For longer term stockpiles grassing and battering to 1:4 as well as silt fences are options .
LIMIT OF EXCAVATION − Not within 6 m of any fence line or utility service .
− Not within sight of road traffic .
− Not within 125 m of any road or railway centre line .
− For waterways : Refer to the Department of Land Resource Management web page titled Land Clearing for the procedures and processes to be followed .
The URL is : https : //nt.gov.au/property/land-clearing .
− Maximum area : 1 ha .
Align the long side with the contour .
− Maximum width : 50 m. − Maximum depth : 2 m. − Leave natural vegetation buffer strips 25 m width between pits .
− Do not dump or stockpile any material in these 25 m buffer strips , − Stockpile cleared vegetation and subsequently spread over the surface of the extraction area .
Existing pits within 125 m of a public road may be used provided : − No significant revegetation exists , − Extension proceeds away from the road , − Site is rehabilitated after use .
1.12.4 Rehabilitation of Material Extraction Areas Rehabilitate existing pits , or progressively rehabilitate new pits : − Backfill all test pits .
− Respread unused material and rip 0.5 m deep at 3 m spacing along the contours .
− Remove and dispose of all rubbish and debris in approved disposal sites .
− Replace stockpiled topsoil and cleared vegetation uniformly over the extraction area .
− Batter walls at three horizontal to one vertical where excavation is less than 1 m depth , and MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 12 six horizontal to one vertical where depth exceeds 1 m. − Rehabilitate the access road .
− Repair any erosion damage to the site .
Rehabilitate the site to prevent future erosion and sedimentation issues .
Refer to PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS section of Request for Tender .
1.12.5 Stream Sites Contact the EPA or Environmental Services prior to conducting any work in a stream site .
EXCAVATION LIMITS − Not within 200 m upstream or downstream of any road structure , pipeline or gauging station .
− Not in a manner liable to cause erosion or further disturbance to the watercourse .
− Not within 15 m of the trunk of a tree and not under the branches of any tree .
CONDITIONS − Leave sizeable islands to ensure groupings of trees that will withstand stream bed erosion .
− Maximum batter slope : Two horizontal to one vertical .
1.12.6 Inspection Allow authorised personnel from the EPA to enter the site at any time .
1.12.7 Records Provide the following details on completion : − List of areas used .
− Chainages of area along the public road .
− Direction and length of haul road .
− Approximate volume of material removed from each site .
Provide suitable forms for such records to the Superintendent .
1.12.8 Water Extraction Comply with DENR requirements for water extraction as they relate to road construction and maintenance .
On completion of the works advise the Superintendent the total volume of water extracted .
Take measures to minimise erosion , sedimentation , site disturbance and damage caused by the extraction and transportation of the water .
Install appropriate temporary control devices or systems .
Rehabilitate disturbed or damaged areas .
STOCKPILES 1.13 Specification Reference Refer to the Northern Territory Government Standard Specification for Environmental Management and to the RFT .
Stockpiles are to be located in previously cleared areas .
If no clear area is available within a reasonable distance from the work site obtain approval from the Superintendent prior to clearing a new area .
The stockpile is to be located within the boundaries of the site of the works .
Construct gravel foundation for stockpiles with 100 mm compacted thickness .
Trim and compact to 95 % relative compaction .
Do not create a stockpile within ; − An environmentally sensitive area .
− A vegetated area without prior approval for clearing as stated above .
− On a flood plain .
− For waterways : Refer to the Department of Land Resource Management web page titled Land Clearing for the procedures and processes to be followed .
The URL is : https : //nt.gov.au/property/land-clearing .
− Where it will affect a site with cultural or heritage significance .
− Within 5m of the boundary of the cleared area .
Cover stockpiles with plastic sheet or other appropriate materials to prevent pre-coat , fines and dust from being released in to the environment during rain or wind events .
Stockpiles in urban areas are not permitted .
Provide a separate site for each aggregate size .
Allow 15 m between adjacent sites .
Ensure sites are well drained and on hard ground .
Avoid contamination by dust .
Maintain access roads and stockpile sites .
Avoid sites under trees , telephone lines , overhead transmission lines or where overhead clearance is less than 6 m. Remove from site any non-conforming aggregate .
For work in or close to regional centres , towns and urban areas , remove all unused aggregate from stockpile sites at conclusion of work .
For rural work , prepare unused aggregate into one neat and tidy stockpile , per aggregate size .
Construct stockpiles at least 1 m high and batter sides 1V : 1.5H .
Trim neatly to facilitate measurement .
Neatly stockpile all waste materials from the screening process .
PLANT AND EQUIPMENT 1.14 Specification Reference Refer to the Northern Territory Government Standard Specification for Environmental Management and to the RFT .
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 13 1.14.1 Geo-spatial data If Geo-spatial data is provided by the Principal it is for information only .
The data must not be relied on as being accurate .
The data must not be uploaded to plant or equipment .
1.14.2 General Do not clean spray bars or other contaminated equipment on the work site .
Clean plant and equipment in a location and in a manner which prevents pollution of the surrounding environment .
Clean plant and equipment before it is brought on to the site and immediately before it leaves the site to make it pest and weed free .
Plant and equipment is to be inspected and maintained as necessary during the course of the works .
Emissions and fluid leaks are to be minimized by ensuring plant and equipment are well maintained , in good repair and in good working order .
1.14.3 Mobile Plant Machinery - Broadband Alarm Standards AS 4742 : Machine-mounted forward and reverse audible warning alarm ( withdrawn ) ISO 9533 : Earth-moving machinery - Machine- mounted audible travel alarms and forward horns - Test methods and performance criteria Definitions Broadband alarm : Pulsed acoustic signal that comprises a range of frequencies and sometimes referred to as quacker , woosher , non-tonal reversing beepers or white sound .
Broadband/White-Sound Alarm Requirement : Broadband Alarms ( White Sound ) must be fitted to all construction vehicles and mobile plant before commencement of works .
Ensure that installation and operations of the alarm/warning systems are sufficient before commencement of works , including , but not limited to : - All alarms clearly audible above the noise level of the machinery or vehicles .
- Alarms are automatically activated when reverse gear is selected in the vehicle to which it is fitted , or when the machine to which the alarm is fitted is switched on and is in use .
- Directional nature of the broadband alarm is appropriate for works .
WORK HEALTH AND SAFETY 1.15 Comply with Work Health and Safety ( NUL ) Act and Regulations and applicable Codes of Practice .
1.15.1 Safety Officer – Witness Point Witness point - Appoint a Safety Officer and notify the Superintendent of the officer ’ s name .
Ensure the Safety Officer is capable and available at all times as required by the Standards .
The Superintendent retains the right to revoke the appointment of the Safety Officer at any time , and direct that another person be appointed .
1.15.2 Work Health and Safety Management Plan - Hold point Hold point - If the Act requires it , provide a copy of the site specific Work Health and Safety Management Plan ( WHSMP ) within 14 calendar days of award of contract .
Do not commence work before the Superintendent has advised that the WHSMP is acceptable for use .
Comply with the Work Health and Safety ( National Uniform Legislation ) Act and Regulations and any applicable Codes of Practice .
A person with control of a construction project , irrespective of monetary value of the contract , where five or more persons are working , or are likely to be working simultaneously on a construction site must ensure that : - a site-specific Work Health and Safety Management Plan is prepared before the work commences ; and - The plan is monitored , maintained and kept up to date during the course of the work .
The person with control of the construction project must ensure that the Work Health and Safety Management Plan includes , but is not limited to : - a statement of responsibilities , listing the names , positions and responsibilities of all persons who will have specific responsibilities on the site for Work Health and Safety ; - the detail of arrangements for ensuring compliance with the Work Health and Safety induction training requirements of this national standard ; - the detail of arrangements for the co- ordination of health and safety issues of persons engaged to undertake construction work ; - the detail of arrangements for managing Work Health and Safety incidents when they occur , including the identities of and contact details of all persons who will be available to prevent , prepare for , respond to and manage recovery from such incidents ; - any site safety rules , with the detail of arrangements for ensuring that all persons at the site , whether employees , contractors , suppliers or visitors , are informed of the rules ; - the hazard identification , risk assessment and risk control information for all work MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 14 activities assessed as having safety risks ; and - The safe work method statements for all high-risk construction work .
1.15.3 Work Involving Chemicals Comply with Work Health and Safety ( NUL ) Act and Regulations .
SDS documentation for chemicals used during the works must be held on site at all times during the works .
Spill clean-up equipment and materials , appropriate for the type and quantities of chemicals used on site , must be kept on site at all times during the works .
They must be kept in a readily accessible location .
The equipment and materials must be maintained and replenished as needed .
Staff trained in the use of the spill clean-up equipment and materials must be on site at all times during the works .
Report all chemical spills to the Superintendent .
Where appropriate , also report spills to the NT Pollution Hotline , phone 1800 064 567 .
Chemicals include , but are not limited to , paints , fuels , oils , herbicides , pesticides , tars , lubricants , cleaning products ( domestic and industrial types ) , inks , dyes , toners , fertilizers etc .
FENCING AND SHORING OF OPEN 1.16 EXCAVATIONS Comply with Work Health and Safety ( NUL ) Act and Regulations .
Design , construct and maintain the excavation and shoring in a safe and satisfactory condition .
Support trenches in saturated or unstable ground with close timbered shoring or similar .
Ensure fencing and access / egress requirements are identified and implemented to comply with Workplace Health & Safety ( NUL ) Act and Regulations .
WORK ON RAILWAY SITES – HOLD 1.17 POINT Comply with Work Health and Safety ( NUL ) Act and Regulations .
Carry out work within railway sites to the approval of the owner and operator of the railway .
The Contractor must comply with all requirements , conditions and directions of the owners and operators of the Railway pursuant to the Northern Territory Rail Safety Act when carrying out work under the Contract within 100 metres of the Railway .
Obtain any approvals or licences required for such work .
Comply with the terms of any current existing interface agreement for work within the railway sites .
Procure railway track possession , railway track isolation and access to railway land necessary for the construction of the works .
Provide documentation detailing all interfaces between the works under the Contract and the Railway or Railway land .
The Contractor must fully comply with the terms of the plan .
The contractor indemnifies in the Principal in respect of any claim made by or liability to any person arising out of : - The performance of work on , over or near the Railway , and - The procurement or utilisation of a Railway track possession or track isolation ( including any postponement , improper use or delay in relinquishing them ) .
Give 14 days written notice to the owner and operator of intent to commence work and provide a work plan showing safe working conditions for the site .
Hold Point - Do not commence work until the work plan has been approved by the owner and operator of the rail system .
Provide copies of the work plan and of the approval to carry out the works to the Superintendent .
If work is required to be carried out within 3 m of the actual rail line , this work must be co-ordinated through the Superintendent .
WORK IN THE VICINITY OF TRAFFIC 1.18 COUNTING STATIONS – HOLD POINT Hold Point - Prior to commencing any excavation , boring of holes , blasting , rock breaking , soil compaction or similar activity in the vicinity of traffic counter station detector loops , obtain the location of the cables .
This information is available from the Department ’ s Transport Infrastructure Planning Division , contact 8924 7531 .
Follow all directions and instructions issued by the Transport Infrastructure Planning Division in relation to work in the vicinity of such cables .
DISTANCE MEASURING EQUIPMENT 1.19 Install distance measuring equipment with a digital display capable of measuring to one metre , in all relevant work and supervisory vehicles within 4 weeks of the Contract being awarded .
Ensure that the measurement of kilometres is consistent with the Permanent Reference Points ( PRPs ) taken from the Department ’ s Road Information Management System ( RIMS ) data sheets .
Verify the accurate locations of all work performed under the Contract to enable the Government Asset Management Database to be updated .
1.19.1 Road Asset Information The Superintendent will provide a current Road Information Management System ( RIMS ) data MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 15 sheet listing when the Contract is awarded and provide regular updates , as required , throughout the Contract .
The data sheet listing will include the following ; − Each road under the Contract , − The respective identification number , − The respective Permanent Reference Points ( PRPs ) and chainages .
Work will be located by reference to the information contained on the data sheet listings .
CONSTRUCTION INDUSTRY WHITE 1.20 CARD All workers on site are to have completed “ General Safety Induction Training for the Construction Industry ” ( CPCCOHS1001A ) and hold a valid current NT White Card issued in their name by NT WorkSafe .
Site specific and Task specific induction training is still required for all work sites and is to be provided by the employer .
AREAS FOR VEHICLE AND PLANT 1.21 MOVEMENT AND PARKING Restrict vehicle and plant movement , turning and parking to the area of the works or to previously sealed , cleared or disturbed areas not within the area of the works .
If no suitable previously sealed , cleared or disturbed area is available obtain Superintendent ’ s approval prior to clearing or disturbing any area for these purposes .
Rehabilitate any area newly cleared or disturbed for these purposes at the completion of the works .
Protect the areas cleared or disturbed and adjacent areas against erosion and sedimentation .
PROJECT NOTICE BOARDS-SUPPLY , 1.22 ERECT AND MAINTAIN PROJECT NOTICE BOARDS Confirm if project notice board is required .
If required allow to supply and install a notice board/project sign in accordance with the NTG standard drawings , wording and image to be supplied .
ASBESTOS 1.23 Comply with the requirements of NT WorkSafe and the Work Health and Safety ( N.U.L ) Act and Regulations .
Refer to the Code of Practice – How to Safely Remove Asbestos and the Code of Practice - How to Manage and Control Asbestos in the Work Place .
CONTRACTOR ’ S RESPONSIBILITY 1.24 AND SUBMISSIONS 1.24.1 Warranties – Witness Point Witness Point - Provide the standard manufacturer ’ s warranty .
Name the Principal as the warrantee .
Contractors to submit details of warranties outlining the responsibilities of the manufacturers and contractors for the period of warranty .
1.24.2 Contractor ’ s Environmental Management Plan ( CEMP ) – Witness Point Witness Point - Submit details of procedures to protect the environment .
Refer to the Standard Specification for Environmental Management .
Submission of a Contractor ’ s Environmental Management Plan ( CEMP ) may be required .
1.24.3 Inspection Test Plans ( ITPs ) – Witness Point Witness Point - Submit ITPs detailing all procedures and test plans to be undertaken .
1.24.4 Project Control Plan ( PCP ) – Witness Point Witness Point - Submit a project control plan for the project which sets out in detail all control procedures for the project .
A framework Project Control Plan document is available at the Department ’ s Specification Services webpage : https : //infrastructure.nt.gov.au/specification- services/tenderers-contractors-consultants- assistance .
This document is to be prepared by the Contractor and not a third party .
1.24.5 Time allowed for assessment of submitted documents This clause is related to documents which are to be submitted by the Contractor to the Superintendent for assessment and/or acceptance and/or approval and/or appraisal .
The documents subject to this clause include , but are not limited to : - Traffic Management Plan - Inspection and Test Plans - Project Control Plan - Quality Assurance Plan - Work Health and Safety Plan - Indigenous Development Plan - Contractor ’ s Environmental Management Plan which incorporates - Erosion and Sediment Control Plan - Acid Sulphate Soils Management Plan - Weed Management Plan - Asbestos Management Plan The Superintendent will provide a response in respect to the submitted documents to the Contractor within a reasonable time .
The length of MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 16 time considered reasonable will depend on the complexity of the documents , the amount of information in the documents and the workload of the Department ’ s personnel who will assess the documents .
The length of time considered reasonable can be negotiated between the Contractor and the Superintendent .
Any such negotiated time must be fair to both parties .
If the documents are rejected , not accepted , not approved or returned for modification , the Superintendent will have an additional reasonable time period to assess the amended documents .
The time taken by the Superintendent to assess submitted documents or to assess re-submitted documents and to respond to the Contractor will not be accepted as a reason for the Contractor to claim an extension of time nor to claim a variation for costs related to the preparation of , or modification to , documents to be submitted or re- submitted .
These time frames do not apply in emergency situations where faster responses are appropriate .
Resubmitted documents must be sent with the changes made clearly marked .
Changes should only be made to the plans to the extent required by the Superintendent .
Any changes not explicitly requested by the Superintendent but made in the resubmitted plans must be clearly visible in the document and the reasons for making the changes must be explained in a separate document or the covering email .
Changes not made obvious and not explained or made obvious but not explained will not be accepted under the contract whether this is advised to the Contractor or not .
Changes which were not requested but are made obvious and which are explained will be assessed during the re-assessment process .
Plans required in respect to works in specialised facilities such as health care facilities and secure facilities will be subject to responses in time frames to be negotiated .
URGENT WORKS ATTENDANCE 1.25 The contractor may be required to respond to urgent works that are outside the standard maintenance service level .
OFFICER AND VEHICLE 1.26 The contractor may be required to supply a suitably qualified and competent person acceptable to the Superintendent to perform other works associated with the contract , including road inspections , responses to reports and emergency requests .
The Contractor shall equip that person with a suitable vehicle , mobile communication , and all necessary equipment to attend the request .
Negotiated Rate Where a type of works is described but does not appear in the Schedule of Rates or is not defined in the Specification and not included in the Schedule Of Rates items , a rate shall be negotiated to cover the works required .
The item of works may then be included in the Schedule Of Rates at the Superintendent ’ s discretion .
DIVING WORK 1.27 General 1.27.1 Comply with the Work Health and Safety ( NUL ) Act and Regulations .
Comply with ADAS Operation Manual or DRDC ( formerly DCIEM ) Diving Manual or NOAA Diving Manual .
Standards 1.27.2 AS/NZS 2299 Occupational diving operations AS/NZS 2299.1 Standard operational practice AS/NZS 2299.2 Scientific diving AS 2815 Training and certification of occupational divers AS 2815.1 Occupational SCUBA diver – Standard AS/NZS 2815.2 Surface supplied diving to 30 m AS 2815.3 Air diving to 50 m AS 2815.4 Bell diving AS/NZS 2815.5 Dive supervisor Definitions 1.27.3 ADAS Australian Diver Accreditation Scheme DRDC Defence Research and Development Canada NOAA National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration ( USA ) WHS ( NUL ) Work Health and Safety ( National Uniform Legislation ) Act and Regulations and applicable NT and Federal Codes of Practice Diver Qualifications 1.27.4 Provide evidence of competency for all personnel undertaking diving work ( general occupational diving or high risk diving as applicable ) .
Minimum competencies required are the competencies required by ADAS deemed by ADAS to be appropriate for the works to be undertaken .
Refer to AS 2815 ( set ) .
Dive Safety Log 1.27.5 Maintain and provide Dive Safety Log ( in accordance with Regulation 180 , of the WHS ( NUL ) Regulations ) .
To be provided for review on request and at completion of works .
Refer to AS/NZS 2299 ( set ) .
Dive Plan 1.27.6 Submit a Dive Plan ( in accordance with Regulation 178 , of the WHS ( NUL ) Regulations ) .
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 17 To be submitted after contract award and at least 14 days prior to commencement of diving works .
Refer to AS/NZS 2299 ( set ) .
The Dive Plan is to include : - the method of carrying out the diving work to which it relates ; - the tasks and duties of each person involved in the dive ; - the diving equipment , breathing gases and procedures to be used in the dive ; - as applicable , dive times , bottom times and decompression profiles ; - hazards relating to the dive and measures to be implemented in the control of risks associated with those hazards ; - emergency procedures .
Crocodile Hazard Management 1.27.7 Provide a Crocodile Hazard Management Plan where diving work is to occur in waters known to have , or suspected of having , crocodiles .
The plan can include , but not be limited to ; - Having spotters at water level and on a bridge - Minimizing movement of vessels once diving work commences to reduce risk of attracting crocodiles - Establishing a communication plan and having a communications system or methodology in place so that all parties conducting the activity can communicate with each other Dive Cage 1.27.8 Diving work in waters known to have , or suspected of having , crocodiles is to be carried out by divers who are protected by a dive cage .
This dive cage should be engineered for the task and can be mounted to either a service barge or other watercraft or lowered from a bridge , depending on the task environment .
Crocodile Net 1.27.9 If a crocodile net is the only viable option provide details of the construction of the net and its support systems and provide details of the risk management plan which will be in place during use of the net .
Response if a crocodile is spotted 1.27.10 Ensure or personnel move to a safe place .
Contact the Crocodile Management Unit of the Parks and Wildlife Service - Darwin All hours 0419 822 859 or 0401 118 776 or Office hours 8999 4691 - Katherine All hours 0407 958 405 or Office hours 8973 8849 If safe and practical to do so , monitor the movement of the crocodile ( s ) so that the personnel from the Crocodile Management Unit can be told of the crocodiles last known location .
OTHER REQUIREMENTS 1.28 ( If applicable ) Refer to PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS section of Request for Tender .
PROVISION FOR TRAFFIC STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 18 PROVISION FOR TRAFFIC 2 .
2.1 GENERAL Minimise obstruction and inconvenience to the public .
Ensure public safety is accommodated at all work sites .
A traffic escort vehicle is required for all resealing works .
Assume responsibility for the safe conduct of traffic through , past or around the works , 24 hours a day , from possession of the site to completion of all works , defects liability period ( if any ) and handover .
Comply with the Acts , Regulations , Codes and Guidelines applicable to the works .
Comply with the requirements of Authorities which have jurisdiction over the works or the sites of the works .
Comply with the Work Health and Safety ( NUL ) Act and Regulations .
2.2 STANDARDS Conform to the current editions of the following Standards and Publications unless specified otherwise : AS 1742.3 Manual of uniform traffic control devices - Traffic control devices for works on roads .
AS 1742.9 Manual of uniform traffic control devices – Bicycle facilities AS 1742.10 Manual of uniform traffic control devices – Pedestrian control and protection AS/NZS 1906.1 Retroreflective materials AS/NZS 3845.1Road safety barrier systems AS 4191 Portable traffic signals AS/NZS ISO 31000 Risk management NTTM NT Test Methods .
NTMTM NT Materials Testing Manual .
AUSTROADS Guide to Road Design AUSTROADS Guide to Bridge Technology NT WorkSafe All Relevant Bulletins DEFINITIONS 2.3 Long term Applies when traffic guidance is required to operate for more than one shift , irrespective of whether it is day or night .
Short term Applies when work is started and completed in one shift and the road is returned to normal conditions by the end of that shift .
Traffic Controller The person responsible for the control of traffic on public roads utilising a stop-slow bat .
2.4 WORKZONE TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT Traffic Management Personnel 2.4.1 All personnel engaged in the works must have a current valid NT Construction Induction White Card , or equivalent qualification recognised by WorkSafe NT .
Evidence must be available on site in the form of a card .
Only persons qualified in nationally accredited units of competency in WorkZone Traffic Management can be utilised for traffic management at worksites .
The four levels of accreditation are : − Workzone Traffic Supervisor ( WZ3 ) − Workzone Traffic Controller ( WZ2 ) − Workzone Traffic Management Plan Designer ( WZ1 ) − Escort mobile road marking operations ( WZ 4 ) The Superintendent may grant approval for the use of a “ Trainee Traffic Controller ” within the work site .
Such approval will only be considered after submission of a written request .
A Trainee Traffic Controller can not commence work until such approval has been granted and received in writing .
Trainee Traffic Controller 2.4.2 A Trainee Traffic Controller must meet all of the following criteria : − be an employee of the Traffic Control Provider , − hold a valid current Australian motor vehicle driver ’ s licence , − be registered with a Northern Territory Registered Training Organisation ( NT RTO ) to undertake the RII09 Resources and Infrastructure Industry Training Package unit of competency “ RIIWHS205D Control Traffic with a STOP/SLOW Bat ” ( or the replacement unit of competency if and when applicable ) , − only work under the direct supervision of a Controller ( WZ2 ) , − have commenced training to become a qualified Controller ( WZ2 ) and complete all PROVISION FOR TRAFFIC STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 19 assessments of competency within 8 weeks of registration .
The direct supervision of a Trainee Traffic Controller is defined as the constant personal oversight of the work by a Workzone Traffic Controller ( WZ2 ) .
WorkZone Traffic Controller ( WZ2 ) 2.4.3 The following prerequisites must be met to enable NT accreditation as a Traffic Controller ( WZ2 ) : − hold a valid current Australian motor vehicle driver ’ s licence , and either − successful completion of the RII09 Resources and Infrastructure Industry Training Package unit of competency “ RIIWHS205D Control Traffic with a STOP/SLOW Bat ” ( or the replacement unit of competency if and when applicable ) training course through an Northern Territory Registered Training Organisation , or − successful completion of the RII09 Resources and Infrastructure Industry Training Package unit of competency “ RIIWHS205D Control Traffic with a STOP/SLOW Bat ” ( or the replacement unit of competency if and when applicable ) training course through a Registered Training Organisation from another State or Territory AND successfully completed a bridging course through a Northern Territory Registered Training Organisation in the above unit of competency .
WorkZone Traffic Supervisor ( WZ3 ) 2.4.4 The following prerequisites must be met to enable NT accreditation as a Traffic Supervisor ( WZ3 ) : − hold a valid current Australian motor vehicle driver ’ s licence , and either − successful completion of the RII09 Resources and Infrastructure Industry Training Package unit of competency “ RIIWHS302D Implement Traffic Management Plan ” ( or the replacement unit of competency if and when applicable ) training course through an Northern Territory Registered Training Organisation , or − successful completion of the RII09 Resources and Infrastructure Industry Training Package unit of competency “ RIIWHS302D Implement Traffic Management Plan ” ( or the replacement unit of competency if and when applicable ) training course through a Registered Training Organisation from another State or Territory AND successfully completed a bridging course through a Northern Territory Registered Training Organisation in the above unit of competency .
WorkZone Traffic Management Plan 2.4.5 Designer ( WZ1 ) The following prerequisites must be met to enable NT accreditation as a Traffic Management Plan Designer ( WZ1 ) : − hold a valid current Australian motor vehicle driver ’ s licence , and either − successful completion of RII09 Resources and Infrastructure Industry Training Package unit of competency “ RIICWD503D Prepare Workzone Traffic Management Plans ” ( or the replacement unit of competency if and when applicable ) training course through an Northern Territory Registered Training Organisation , or - successful completion of the RII09 Resources and Infrastructure Industry Training Package unit of competency “ RIICWD503D Prepare Workzone Traffic Management Plans ” ( or the replacement unit of competency if and when applicable ) training course through a Registered Training Organisation from another State or Territory AND successfully completed a bridging course through a Northern Territory Registered Training Organisation in the above unit of competency .
Escort Mobile Road Marking 2.4.6 Operations ( WZ 4 ) The following pre requisites must be met to enable Northern Territory accreditation as an Escort mobile road marking operations ( WZ 4 ) : − hold a valid current Australian motor vehicle − driver ’ s licence , and either − successful completion of the RII09 Resources and Infrastructure Industry Training Package unit of competency “ RIICRM201D Escort mobile road marking operations ” ( or the replacement unit of competency if and when applicable ) training course through a Northern Territory Registered Training Organisation , or − successful completion of the RII09 Resources and Infrastructure Industry Training Package unit of competency “ RIICRM201D Escort mobile road marking operations ” ( or the replacement unit of competency if and when applicable ) training course through a Registered Training Organisation from another State or Territory AND successfully completed a bridging course through a Northern Territory Registered Training Organisation in the above unit of competency .
Traffic Escort Vehicle – Resealing 2.4.7 Works Provide a traffic escort vehicle for all work sites where resealing works are undertaken under the contract .
The vehicle must have , as a minimum , one rotating beacon light .
The escort vehicle is to be the lead vehicle for traffic permitted to pass through the work site at the direction of the traffic control personnel .
The escort vehicle is to control the speed of the traffic to ensure safety of road works personnel .
The driver of the escort vehicle is to have adequate skills and knowledge to be able to maintain safety of the public and of the roadworks personnel .
PROVISION FOR TRAFFIC STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 20 NT Accreditation in WorkZone Traffic 2.4.8 Management NT accreditation is provided by the following process : − Completion of training course ( or courses ) as outlined above , − Obtain WorkZone Traffic Management ID Card from NT Motor Vehicle Registry .
2.5 TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT PLAN ( TMP ) Standard : To AS 1742.3 Traffic control for works on roads .
Provide a Traffic Management Plan and Generic Traffic Control Diagrams of a complex and noncomplex nature per activity as required for the scheduled works .
Traffic Management Plan – Hold Point 2.5.1 Hold Point – Submit the Traffic Management Plan , with the Traffic Control Diagrams prior to commencing the works .
Provide specific or generic Traffic Control Diagrams ( TCD ) per activity as required and/or as specified .
The Traffic Management Plan ( TMP ) is required to be designed by a Northern Territory accredited Traffic Management Plan Designer .
Include the details of the TMP Designer ’ s name , accreditation number and date of expiry of accreditation on the TMP .
Design the TMP in conformance with the requirements of AS 1742 – ‘ Manual of uniform traffic control devices Part 3 : Traffic control for works on roads ’ .
Produce the plan by electronic means and submit electronically to the Superintendent .
Include sufficient details on the TMP to explain the potential hazards , the assessed risks and the proposed treatments for the proposed work activities and work site which may include some or all of the following : Project Information 2.5.2 − Purpose and Scope − Project Location − Site Constraints/Impacts − Traffic Management Objectives and Strategies − Principal for the Works ; Principal Contractor/Design Consultant including contact details − Responsibilities including role responsibility and authority of key personnel , management hierarchy including site representatives and contact details of the responsible personnel − Prior approvals ( if any ) granted by the Road Authority with relevant reference number .
Works on Roads 2.5.3 − Project scope inclusive of works to be undertaken , staging of works , duration of works ( work hours ) − Existing Traffic and Speed environment − Roles and Responsibilities − Traffic Management Responsibility Hierarchy − Project Representatives − Traffic Management Administration Statutory Requirements 2.5.4 − Work Health and Safety ( NUL ) Act and Regulations − Provide details on the TMP of responsibilities and authorities of all key personnel on the project including project manager , line managers ( site engineers , supervisors etc .
) , contractors and workers , safety personnel and traffic management personnel − Requirements of personal protective equipment , plant and equipment − Procedures for incidents or accidents Monitoring and Measurement 2.5.5 − Site Inspections and Record Keeping − TMP Auditing − Public Feedback − References Management Review 2.5.6 − TMP Review and Improvement − Variations to Standards and Plans − Attention to hazards for non-motorised road users Planning 2.5.7 − Risk Identification and Assessment – Critical element to identify and assess foreseeable potential hazards associated with the work activities and work site − Legal and Other Requirements – Confirmation of use of up-to-date information and legislation − Traffic Assessment ( Vehicular Traffic ) − Volume and Composition − Existing and Proposed Speed Zones − Intersection Capacity − Existing Parking Facilities − High Wide Loads − Public Transport Special Events and Other Works Non-motorised Road Users − Cyclists and Pedestrians − People with Disabilities − School Crossings Site Assessment − Access to Adjoining Properties − Environmental Conditions PROVISION FOR TRAFFIC STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 21 − Impact on Adjoining Road Network Works Programming − Work Sequence − Night Works − Emergency Planning − Consultation and Communication Approvals − Road , Utility and Service Authorities − Public Notification − Notification to Other Agencies Implementation 2.5.8 − Hazard Identification , Risk Assessment and Control − Traffic Control Diagrams − Traffic Control Devices − Signs − Pavement Markings − Variable Message Signs − Delineation − Temporary Speed Zones − Emergency Arrangements − Site Access − Communicating TMP Requirements Submission Of Traffic Control 2.5.9 Diagrams Provide specific or generic Traffic Control Diagrams ( TCD ) per activity as required and/or as specified .
Where a traffic management situation is not covered by a generic TCD , submit the specific TCD to the Superintendent 5 working days prior to undertaking the required works .
Submited TCDs shall , in turn , then become generic .
For Urgent Works , advise of the generic TCD or submit the specific TCD within 2 working days .
Provide amended TCDs which incorporate changes which have been appraised by the Superintendent on site within two working days of the appraisal of the change 2.6 AUDITS OF WORK SITE TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT Appropriately qualified and experienced Auditing Officers from the Department ’ s Road Projects group may perform random audits of traffic management at work sites as part of their daily routine duties .
The Auditing Officer will hold current NT accreditation as a Traffic Management Plan Designer .
Project Officers may collect information on behalf of , and for forwarding to , the Auditor .
Audits undertaken will include verification of : − The Traffic Management Plan held on site − The Traffic Control Diagram ( s ) held on site − Traffic control devices established in accordance with the Traffic Control Diagram − The correctness and currency of accreditation of all personnel associated with traffic management at the work site .
Where the Auditing Officer deems modifications to Traffic Management are required for reasons of public safety or safety on the work site , an Instruction to Contractor ( ITC ) will be issued requesting immediate correction .
If modifications are deemed necessary but not urgent , corrections are to be made at the earliest practicable opportunity .
Non Compliance 2.6.1 Where personnel associated with traffic management at work sites are found not to have current accreditation to an appropriate level in WorkZone Traffic Management , the Superintendent may direct the Contractor to cease work , make the site safe , and withdraw plant , equipment and personnel from the road reserve .
WORK IN RURAL AREAS – HOLD POINT 2.7 Hold Point - Undertake work during daylight hours only unless approval is given by the Superintendent for special circumstances .
2.8 WORK IN BUILT UP AREAS Working Times – Hold Point 2.8.1 Program work , provide and install traffic management devices/controllers , equipment , materials etc. , accordingly so that traffic flows are not impeded during the following hours , from Monday to Friday , excluding Public Holidays : Table 2.1 – Restricted Work Hours In Built Up Area 0700 hours to 0900 hours .
1530 hours to 1730 hours .
This table is only an example of peak traffic periods in urban areas .
Hold Point - Obtain Superintendent ’ s approval if proposing to work inside these hours .
Remove or cover signs or devices as appropriate to stop confusion during these hours .
Further restrictions may apply should the Department deem it appropriate to do so .
Concessions to work within these hours may be approved by the Superintendent , should the need arise and the officer deems it necessary .
Do not operate construction vehicles used in conjunction with the proposed works , either SV plated or vehicles in excess of 19 m on public roads during peak traffic times ( see above , working times ) or in any way impede peak traffic flow during these times .
Vehicles in excess of 19 m in length are only permitted to travel on roads designated for road trains unless an appropriate permit from the Motor Vehicle Registry has been obtained in advance of using such routes .
PROVISION FOR TRAFFIC STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 22 Traffic Lanes 2.8.2 Maintain at least 2 lanes ( one in each direction ) open to traffic at all times unless permitted otherwise on duplicated roads and maintain at least one lane open on two lane roads with appropriate traffic control in place accordingly .
Obtain the written permission of the Superintendent if it is necessary to fully close a road .
Program works so that the closure of turning lanes is minimised .
Obtain prior written approval from the relevant Local Government or Council if traffic is to be detoured onto their road network or the proposed works affects their network/assets accordingly .
Provide a copy of all relevant approvals with the traffic management plan .
2.9 WARNING DEVICES Take care when placing warning signs , work signs , traffic management devices , or plant and equipment within the road reserve to ensure that these do not interfere with or restrict sight lines , particularly at intersections and ensure that the devices are not obscured by trees or other objects .
Ensure that road work signs reflect the current conditions of the site .
Remove or cover signs such as T1-5 ( worker symbolic ) , temporary speed reductions and the like , when not appropriate , such as when no persons are on site .
Refer to AS 1742 for guidance on the appropriate use of these signs .
Works in Progress Signs 2.9.1 For proposed works which are expected to be in progress for greater than 14 days , display signs , sized 1200 x 900mm with 100mm high black Helvetica medium lettering on a white background displaying the following details : − The nature of the works .
− The start and end date of the works .
− The Contractor ’ s business name .
− The Contractor ’ s business phone number .
− The Contractor ’ s after hours phone number .
− The name of the Traffic Management Plan supervisor .
Display these signs prominently at the extremities of all works in progress and in addition to the work signs requirement .
The signs remain the property of the Contractor .
Multi Panel Signs 2.9.2 The use of multi panel sign configuration for “ Traffic Controller Symbolic ” & “ Prepare to Stop ” being mounted on one multi sign frame shall conform to AS 1742.3 .
The use of the “ Prepare to Stop ” sign is mandatory in conjunction with the symbolic traffic controller sign where traffic are required to stop at the controllers position , therefore the Department approves making this the exception to the “ No multi sign rule ” .
These signs must be on the one frame either side by side or one above the other .
The individual signs are to be 900 mm x 600 mm minimum each when used stand alone , but may be reduced in size on a multi panel sign frame provided that the legend and / or symbol size are not reduced .
The Department will allow a multi panel sign frame for this use only in accordance with the directions herein and those contained within AS 1742.3 .
Mount signs on Oz Spike posts or similar , or set in concrete in accordance with the requirement for permanent speed sign installation .
NT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS FOR 2.10 ROAD WORK SIGNS 2.10.1 Sign erection Refer to the Definitions clause .
Refer to Table 2.2 – Sign erection requirements .
Ensure that signs are clean , free of damage and comprise of a minimum of Class 1 retroreflective material in accordance with AS/NZS 1906.1 .
Duplicate all temporary work signs ( place on both sides of roads within the work site ) on all multilane work sites , irrespective of the duration of the works , unless there is insufficient room available to do so , such as the median width being not sufficient to accommodate the signs .
Where necessary , seek direction from the Superintendent where this condition can not be complied width .
2.10.2 Advance warning signs In urban areas T1-1 ( road work ahead ) signs and T2-16/17 ( end road work ) signs at short term work sites are not mandatory , however , they may be used if deemed appropriate .
Use these signs at all long term or rural work sites .
PROVISION FOR TRAFFIC STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 23 Table 2.2 – Sign erection requirements Application Requirements Long term rural areas : Place all signs a minimum 1 m lateral clearance from the travelled path and a minimum of 1.5 m from the lower edge of the sign to the ground .
Long term urban areas : Place all signs a minimum of 2.2 m from the lower edge of the sign to the ground in locations where they could be obscured by parked vehicles , vegetation or trees or may interfere with pedestrian routes .
On traffic islands or medians the heights for signs shall comply with the “ short term all areas ” requirements where it is deemed appropriate but only if they are not obscured by parked vehicles and if they do not interfere with pedestrian routes .
Short term all areas : Display all signs prominently and place a minimum of 200 mm from the lower edge of the sign to the ground , except regulatory signs such as speed , no parking signs etc. , which shall be mounted a minimum of 1.5 m from the lower edge of the sign to the ground .
Place all signs a minimum of 2.2 m from the lower edge of the sign to the ground where they could be obscured by parked vehicles , vegetation or trees or may interfere with pedestrian routes .
Only use T1-25 ( road work on side road ) signs on major or arterial roads or highways where works are being conducted on a lower hierarchy road i.e .
roads with lower volume or speeds that intersect with such a major or arterial road or highway .
Do not use these signs on lower hierarchy roads that intersect with a major or arterial road or highway .
2.10.3 Star pickets & fence droppers Do not use star pickets for support of road work signs , bunting , flagging , fencing , etc .
within 9 m of the trafficked path .
Issues of sign , bunting , flagging , fencing , etc .
stability can be addressed by prudent use of properly manufactured sign legs , sand bags , Oz spike posts and or fence droppers .
Do not use star pickets or any other non-frangible items such as steel drums , for delineation or any other purposes within 9 m of the edge of the trafficked lanes .
Bollards , cones and flagging are appropriate alternatives .
Fence droppers may be used as sign supports or legs and bunting or flagging supports on the condition that that the droppers are securely embedded into the ground and the sign , bunting or flagging is sufficiently secured to the droppers .
Maintain prudent use of end caps to ensure the minimisation of any hazards to workers and the public and the specified sign heights can be achieved .
Star pickets may be used for fencing support within the work site , provided appropriate action is taken to reduce any associated hazard for workers within the site and they are not within 9 m of the travelled path of motorists .
2.10.4 Non-Standard signs – Hold Point Obtain specific approval from the Superintendent before using signs not included in AS 1742.3 .
2.10.5 Variable message signs ( VMS ) Where major disruptions or changes to the traffic part are likely to occur , provide electronic variable message signs in the following situations a minimum of 2 days before any changes occur , where changed conditions and or delays are to be experienced by the general public , particularly peak hour traffic ; − At all approaches to intersections , − At approaches to detours and / or , − At approaches to major works alterations .
Erect variable message signs on all approaches 7 days before “ turn on ” of new traffic signals .
Assume full responsibility for the safe location of the variable message signs .
Use electronic variable message signs capable of displaying a minimum text size as specified in AS 1742.3 and containing at least 3 lines with a minimum of 8 characters per line .
The Superintendent may provide details of the messages to be displayed and the locations of the variable message signs .
Do not , under any circumstances , use variable message signs for private advertising , within the NT Government road reserve or visible from the NT Government road reserve without the written approval of the Superintendent .
2.10.6 Multi Message Signs Do not use multi message signs .
Stand-alone signs must be used .
2.10.7 Work Zone Speed Limits - Mandatory Where work zone speed limits are being proposed to be changed , the proposed temporary speed limits must be approved by the Superintendent prior to implementation of the proposed speed limits .
Erect speed limit signs in accordance with clause 2.10.1 Sign erection .
PROVISION FOR TRAFFIC STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 24 All Traffic Management Practitioners must record in their Daily Diaries time , date and location of each approach , of speed limit installations and removals for legal purposes .
Retain these diaries for a minimum of 12 months from completion of the works if there were no reportable incidents at the site of the works .
If there was an incident , retain the logs until informed that they can be destroyed .
Provide copies of the diaries on request .
2.10.8 Temporary Speed Limits – Hold Point Hold Point - Submit temporary speed limit authorisation applications to alter speed limits to the Superintendent , 2 working days prior to the implementation of temporary speed limits , for approval under the Control of Roads Act .
Place repeater speed limit signs along the road , which has a temporary speed limit imposed , after all intersections with other roads within the speed limited area .
Design the Traffic Management Plans so that speed limits lower than the following minimums are not required .
Table 2.3 – Target Lowest Speed Limits Application Target speed limit not lower than Urban or built up areas .
40 km/h Bridge works , when restricting traffic to one lane and only in conjunction with a stop-traffic situation .
A safety barrier conforming to the relevant Test Level in accordance with AS/NZS 3845 shall also be used .
40 km/h All other rural works .
60 km/h unless site conditions warrant a lower speed limit .
2.10.9 Road Safety Barriers Design , install and maintain all road safety barriers used within the NT Government ’ s road reserve in accordance with AS 1742.3 , AS/NZS 3845.1 and any other relevant and current Australian Standard associated with the works being proposed .
Failure to meet the requirements of the relevant and current standards may result in the project being suspended by the Department or other relevant authorities , such as NT Work Safe , without cost to that authority until the project meets the required safety standards .
EXCAVATIONS , STOCKPILES AND 2.11 GRADIENTS WITHIN WORK ZONES AND CLEAR ZONES 2.11.1 NT WorkSafe Guideline in Relation to Excavations Provide shoring to all trenching or excavations which are deeper than 1.5 m and where a person is required to enter unless an engineer certifies that shoring is not required .
Provide a copy of the Engineer ’ s certification on request .
Comply with the provisions of the Code of Practice for Excavation Works available from Safe Work Australia .
Comply with the NT Work Safe Codes of Practice and Safe Work Australia Codes of Practice applicable to the works .
2.11.2 Requirements for excavations , stockpiles or other gradients Comply with the following requirements for excavations , stockpiles or other level change greater than 150 mm in addition to Appendix D of AS 1742.3:2009 Protection and delineation at excavation works .
Implement the minimum protection requirements in accordance with AS 1742.3 during each work day , however , if any excavations , stockpiles or other steps in level change greater than 150 mm are to be left in place longer than one work shift or are left unattended for any period of time , during any day , overnight or weekend and adequate clearance in accordance with AS 1742.3 is not available , protect them by prudent use of approved road safety barriers , backfilling , covering and or removing from site accordingly .
TEMPORARY PAVEMENT MARKING 2.12 Where new pavement surfacing or existing pavement resurfacing is being undertaken , install temporary raised reflective pavement markers at the end of each day and prior to the loss of daylight at 24 m maximum spacing .
If so instructed by the Superintendent , temporary line marking at the end of each day may also be required until completion of the works when the permanent line marking is reinstated .
Only use temporary raised reflective pavement markers that conform to AS 1742.3 , Section 3.9 .
For long term road construction works where sealed detours merge into existing sealed pavements , or where sealed side roads merge into sealed detours , line mark transition areas in accordance with the standard drawing for Line Marking CS 1520 and in accordance with AS 1742 , including the setting out of arrows , letters , numerals and chevrons .
2.12.1 Removal of Temporary Line marking All line removal works must be carried out in such a manner as to not endanger the health , safety or PROVISION FOR TRAFFIC STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 25 amenity of employees , road users or the general public .
Carry out removal of markings in such a manner as to minimise damage to pavement surfaces .
Obliterate markings so as they are no longer recognisable as marking .
When arrows , letters or figures are to be removed , the removal pattern must be in the shape of a rectangle or square to minimise confusion to the motorist , particularly in wet weather and poor lighting conditions .
The removed marking and the material and the material used to remove the marking must be contained , collected and disposed of in an environmentally acceptable manner .
Refer to DLP Road Network Technical Directive RNDTD08-01 Removal of Line Marking .
TRAFFIC CONTROL - WITNESS POINT 2.13 Modify the Traffic Management Plan during the works to suit site conditions if required or requested by the nominated Departmental Contact Officer .
Witness Point - The Superintendent must appraise all changes to the TMPs and TCDs prior to implementation of any changes , unless there is an urgent need for amendments to mitigate hazards .
In situations where immediate hazard mitigation is necessary the changes may be implemented and the Superintendent advised of the changes as soon as practicable thereafter .
If an incident occurs within , adjacent to , on approach to or departure from the work site , make a photographic record of the traffic control devices , site conditions , placement of plant and equipment etc. , as soon as practical after the event .
Advise the Superintendent of the incident as soon as possible .
Only permit single lane operation of two way traffic when traffic is directed by accredited WZTM controllers and signs or portable traffic signals etc .
are employed , dependant on the site conditions and after obtaining the appropriate approvals .
Organise Police control as required , or as requested by the Northern Territory Police should the need arise .
SIDE TRACKS FOR DETOURS 2.14 2.14.1 Construction Provide side tracks for detours when it is impractical to provide for traffic on the existing road system .
Refer to PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS in the RFT/RFQ .
Design and construct side tracks to conform to AGRD Austroads Guide to Road Design and the following minimum standards : Table 2.4– Side Track Minimum Requirements Part 1 Side track characteristic Roadway Type National Highway Secondary Highway Local Road Carriageway Width 10 m 8 m 6 m Design Speed 80 km/h 60 km/h 40 km/h Horizontal Curve radius with 3 % superelevation 250 m 150 m 50 m Vertical Curve radius ( crest ) 2,500 m 1,000 m 400 m Vertical Curve radius ( sag ) 1,000 m 600 m 400 m Pavement Width 8 m 6 m 4 m Gravel Pavement Thickness ( when specified ) 150 mm 100 mm 50 mm Lateral Clearance to Obstruction ( from edge of carriageway ) 2.5 m 1.2 m 1.0 m Table 2.5 – Side Track Minimum Requirements Part 2 Item Requirement Signs/Warning devices : As in Traffic Control Plan .
Guideposts : At all fills , curves and crests .
Flood gauge posts : At all floodways .
Total length at any one time : 5 km max .
Side track type : Gravelled/Sealed Refer to PSRs Compact top 150 mm to 95 % relative compaction .
Match side tracks neatly to the existing road system .
Provide sufficient resources to direct and assist traffic , when side tracks become restricted .
Carry out immediate remedial works when traffic is delayed by poor side track conditions or surface condition is dangerous .
Provide and maintain adequate drainage .
Ensure drainage measures do not cause or accelerate erosion .
PROVISION FOR TRAFFIC STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 26 2.14.2 Maintenance Maintain the existing road network , and all side tracks , in use by the public .
Prevent dust nuisance by water spraying at regular intervals to keep surface moist .
Do not use waste oil as a dust suppressant .
Remove debris and rubbish .
Maintain road signs and guide posts in a clean state .
Table 2.6 – Side Track Maintenance Requirements Surface type Maintenance required Sealed Surfaces : Patch and repair all surfaces .
Grade and roll shoulders .
Unsealed Surfaces : Regrade and roll to maintain a comfortable riding quality at design speed .
ACCESS TO ADJACENT PROPERTIES 2.15 AND SIDE ROADS Maintain access to adjacent properties and side roads at all times to a level appropriate for the type and frequency of traffic .
Provide and erect proposed and approved signs detailing alternative access , only after approval from the Superintendent is obtained .
Ensure adequate access is maintained for pedestrians and cyclists as required , including delineated access if existing paths are being closed as part of the works .
TEMPORARY PEDESTRIAN ACCESS 2.16 Conform to : AS 1742.9 and AS 1742.10 .
Maintain access for pedestrians , cyclists and persons with disabilities passing through and around the work site .
Where existing paths are to be demolished or will become inaccessible or modified due construction works , provide temporary access to a standard not less than the pre-existing or pre-construction standard .
Temporary access must ; − Be clearly delineated and have adequate width and height clearance .
− Be smooth , free draining and free of obstructions and loose material .
− Provide clear guidance where paths change direction .
− Be illuminated by temporary lighting in urban areas to assist path users where existing street lighting has been removed or affected by the works .
− Be arranged so that path users are clearly visible to vehicle drivers and plant operators at road crossing points .
TEMPORARY BRIDGING – HOLD 2.17 POINT Design and construct any temporary bridging in accordance with the Austroads Guide to Bridge Technology .
Hold Point - Obtain written approval from the Regional Manager , Road Projects prior to commencement of any such works .
Ensure all environmental approvals have been obtained prior to the commencement of the works .
Hold Point - Provide copies of approvals obtained by Contractor to the Superintendent prior to the commencement of the works .
Provide and erect signage , fencing , road safety barriers and or guard railing etc .
to prevent accidental access to the feature being bridged .
CONTRACTOR 'S PLANT AND 2.18 EQUIPMENT - HOLD POINT Provide public traffic right of way at all times unless traffic control is in use .
Keep parking and materials storage clear of trafficked areas and clear zones in accordance with applicable AUSTROADS guides .
Do not leave equipment or tools unattended as a hazard to the public .
Hold Point - On roads carrying significant traffic , floodlight the road and area within 50 m of the site when working at night , if approved by the Superintendent , to a ground level luminance of 10 lux minimum .
2.18.1 Mobile Plant - Broadband Alarm Standards AS 4742 : Machine-mounted forward and reverse audible warning alarm ( withdrawn ) ISO 9533 : Earth-moving machinery - Machine- mounted audible travel alarms and forward horns - Test methods and performance criteria Definitions Broadband alarm : Pulsed acoustic signal that comprises a range of frequencies and sometimes referred to as quacker , woosher , non-tonal reversing beepers or white sound .
Broadband/White-Sound Alarm Requirement : Provide all construction vehicles and mobile plant fitted with Broadband Alarms ( White Sound ) before commencement of works .
Ensure that installation and proper operations of the alarm/warning system is sufficient before commencement of works including but not limited to : - All alarms clearly audible above the noise level of the machinery or vehicle .
- Automatically activated when reverse gear is selected .
- Directional nature of the broadband alarm is appropriate for works .
PROVISION FOR TRAFFIC STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 27 2.18.2 Rotating Beacons on Plant Provide beacons or other vehicle mounted warning devices on the highest point of the cabin roof or superstructure of all plant and equipment and in accordance with clause 3.12 ‘ Vehicle mounted signs and devices ’ of AS 1742.3 where these are being used within the road reserve .
Fit beacons with globes rated at a minimum of 75 watts .
Do not use strobe lights .
Ensure that the light is operational whenever the plant or equipment is working on , or within 9 metres of , the roadway .
Ensure that the light is visible from all approaches and not obscured by exhaust stacks , back hoe arms etc. , or are covered in dust .
Protect the lights from damage by scrub etc .
ROAD WORK ZONE LENGTH 2.19 Conform to the requirements of AS 1742.3 .
TRAFFIC SIGNAL AND COUNT 2.20 STATIONS 2.20.1 Traffic Signals Prior to commencement of the works and for the duration of the works clear the work and co- ordinate with the Department ’ s Traffic Section for the appropriate region .
This includes all works within the trafficked lanes ; − 150 m prior to the stop line − 50 m past the stop line − that affects the normal daily traffic flow at the intersection or for road reserve or median excavations greater than 150 mm − within the area defined by the traffic signal poles and associated pits − between the traffic signal poles and associated traffic signal control cabinet Traffic Count Stations 2.20.2 Count Stations have in-pavement detection systems installed and cutting off or closing traffic lanes can have an impact on their operation .
Prior to the commencement of work within the trafficked lanes within 50 m of traffic signals or within 20 m of a count station controller , clear the work and co-ordinate for the duration of the works with the Department ’ s Traffic Section for the appropriate region .
A map of count station locations is available from the Department ’ s Transport Infrastructure Planning Division , contact 8924 7531 , or from the Annual Traffic count reports at : https : //transport.nt.gov.au/publications PORTABLE TRAFFIC SIGNALS 2.21 Use portable traffic signals conforming to the requirements of AS 1742.3 and AS 4191 .
Complete the portable traffic signal authorisation form ( available from the Department ’ s Traffic section ) to seek formal approval from the Superintendent to use the proposed portable traffic signals and the proposed time settings .
Portable traffic signals are for short-term traffic control applications only .
Where traffic signal control is being proposed for periods greater than 2 months in a single location , consider the installation of temporary traffic signals .
For the area under the control of portable traffic signals , limit the lengths to no more than 1150 m. Use the time settings in the Time Settings clause as a guide for red time clearance and maximum green times .
Frequently observe the prevailing traffic conditions and vehicle speeds and amend the times for the site as appropriate .
Submit the changes to the Superintendent as soon as practicable thereafter .
2.21.1 Temporary Speed Limits – Hold Point Impose a controlled area speed limit not exceeding 80 km/h if the portable traffic signals would otherwise be in a higher speed limit zone .
Hold Point - Work zone speed limits require approval from the Superintendent prior to implementation .
2.21.2 Sight Distance Maintain a sight distance on the approach to portable traffic signals of not less than 150 m. If this can not be achieved , use appropriate advance warning signage to advise road users in advance of the sight line obstruction of the impending traffic signals ahead .
In cases where queuing traffic is extending past the advance warning signage , install further advance warning signs and speed zone signs further in advance , to prevent collisions at the end of the queue awaiting a green light .
Avoid excessive traffic queuing by use of , and adjustment of , appropriate time settings on the portable traffic signals whenever possible .
PROVISION FOR TRAFFIC STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 28 Time Settings 2.21.3 Table 2.7– General Time Settings Mode All Red Min .
Green Max .
Green Amber Manual : M F M S Fixed time : S F S S Vehicle Actuated : S F S S F : Fixed at 15 seconds .
M : Set the manual control switch each cycle .
S : Needs to be selected and preset by operator for each site .
Table 2.8 – Amber Time Approach Speed Amber Time Below 70 km/h Above 70 km/h 4 seconds 5 seconds Table 2.9 - Red and Green Times All Red Period ( s ) Max .
Green Period ( s ) Distance Between Stop Lines at traffic Signals ( m ) – Clearance speed 20 km/h Distance Between Stop Lines at traffic Signals ( m ) – Clearance speed 40 km/h 2 30 0-30 0-50 5 35 34-45 50-90 10 35 45-75 90-150 15 40 75-105 150-210 20 40 105-135 210-270 25 45 135-165 270-330 30 45 165-195 330-390 40 50 195-250 390-500 50 50 250-310 500-620 60 60 310-365 620-730 70 70 365-415 730-830 80 80 415-465 830-930 90 90 465-525 930-1050 100 100 525-575 1050-1150 RESTORATION 2.22 Upon completion of works : − Remove all temporary warning signage and other traffic control devices .
− Remove all temporary works and reinstate the areas to their original state , including the removal and disposal of seal and dragging windrows and debris back across the side track carriageway .
− Stabilize all areas impacted by the works to prevent erosion .
− Where applicable reseed with local native grasses and trees and shrubs .
− Comply with the requirements of the Environmental Approvals and Clearances issued by DIPL and DENR , Environment Heritage and the Arts Division , Environmental Assessment and Policy Section , for the project .
− Reinstate permanent traffic control devices temporarily removed during the works .
OTHER REQUIREMENTS 2.23 ( If applicable ) Refer to PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS section of Request for Tender .
EARTHWORKS AND DRAINAGE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 29 EARTHWORKS AND DRAINAGE 3 .
3.1 OUTLINE DESCRIPTION This section specifies the maintenance requirement for drainage , and the maintenance requirement for formation and subgrade on periodic pavement maintenance projects .
Maintain pavement dimensions in accordance with Drawing No .
CS 2100 .
3.2 STANDARDS Comply with the Acts , Regulations , Guidelines and Codes applicable to the works .
Comply with the requirements of Authorities with jurisdiction over the works .
Conform to the Standards and Publications quoted throughout this document unless specified otherwise .
Refer to REFERENCED DOCUMENTS .
Specification Reference Refer to the Northern Territory Government Standard Specification for Environmental Management and to the RFT .
3.3 DEFINITIONS Refer MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS section , Definitions clause .
3.4 FORMATION WIDTH CLEARING Clearing 3.4.1 Clear the formation of the road a minimum width of 2 metres on each side past the outside batters of the table drains .
Recut the outer batters or table drains , ensuring the prevention of any excess materials from washing back into the table drains , offlet drains culverts or other drainage structures .
In rural and remote non-urban areas cleared vegetation free from declared weeds can be used on site for rehabilitation and erosion control works .
Mulching 3.4.2 Mulch all cleared , weed free , vegetative matter in mechanical brush chippers to a maximum size of 100 mm as the clearing work proceeds .
Do not stockpile cleared material for later mulching , unless this material is suitable for mulching .
Acquire approval to stockpile from Superintendent or remove from site .
Do not mulch declared weeds which are seeding or non-woody declared species .
Otherwise bury or burn material on site .
See Standard Specification for Environmental Management for more details on stockpile management .
STUMPS : Stumps and other material unsuitable for mulching may be buried in disused gravel pits during rehabilitation of the pits .
GRASSES : Do not mulch grass clods , roots or other components containing viable propagules .
This material may be buried in disused gravel pits .
STOCKPILES : Stockpile mulched material on the site at a maximum height of 2 m for use during reinstatement work .
URBAN AREAS : Stockpile mulch on the site for reuse and deliver surplus mulch as directed by the Superintendent ( within 10 km of the site ) for use in local landscaping projects .
RURAL AREAS : Stockpile mulch on the site for reuse and power blow surplus mulch into the adjacent natural vegetated areas adjacent to the works .
3.5 EARTHWORKS IN CUT Description 3.5.1 Operations necessary for excavation , irrespective of the type of material and subsurface conditions , including : − working cuttings so that material meeting standard fill requirements is used for the subgrade , − disposal of excess excavated material , − compaction of material below the subgrade surface , and − shaping and trimming of formation within cuttings .
Rock – Hold Point 3.5.2 Hold point - Obtain agreement from the Superintendent to the extent of the excavation .
Excavate rock encountered in the subgrade , formation , or drain .
Avoid forming pockets of shattered material below the level of the excavation .
Remove all loose material .
Trim the excavation to shed water and minimise erosion .
In subgrade , replace excavated material with select fill compacted to 95 % relative compaction .
Unsuitable Material and/or Weathered 3.5.3 Rock – Hold Point Hold point - Obtain directions from the Superintendent before works commence .
Excavate unsuitable material and/or weathered rock encountered in the subgrade , formation , or drain .
Avoid forming pockets of shattered material below the level of the excavation .
Remove all loose material .
EARTHWORKS AND DRAINAGE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 30 Trim the excavation to shed water and minimise erosion .
In subgrade : Replace excavated material with select fills compacted to 95 % relative compaction .
3.6 EARTHWORKS IN FILL Description 3.6.1 Earthworks in fill includes winning , hauling , placing and compacting material on all prepared areas including : Scours and Washouts .
General Filling , includes holes , pits and other depressions .
Benching 3.6.2 Cut a bench at the toe of the lower side batter when natural surface inclines at steeper than eight horizontal to one vertical .
Ensure the bench slopes downwards towards the centre line of the road and is 3 m wide to provide a sound key for the toe of the fill .
Terrace the existing surface where side slopes are steeper than three horizontal to one vertical to provide a key for the fill .
Construction Methods 3.6.3 Fill by any of the `` Compacted Layer '' , `` Rocky Material '' or `` Rock Fill '' method .
Mix to a homogeneous material before compacting .
Select appropriate method ( s ) .
Compacted Layer Method Use where material generally does not contain cobbles , boulders or broken rock .
− Deposit and spread the material in uniform level layers to a maximum thickness of 250 mm loose measurement for the full width of fill .
− Compact each layer to the specified compaction ( refer Table 4.15 - Dry Density Ratios for Conformance ) before placing the next layer .
− Use standard fill for the subgrade .
Rocky Material Method Use where material contains some cobbles and boulders ( maximum size 600 mm ) with sufficient fines for the work to be free of voids .
− Break up rocks bridging between adjacent materials to prevent cavities being formed .
− Maximum rock dimension : 600 mm or one-half the height of fill at the section where the rock is placed .
− Spread material in layers approximately equal to the maximum rock size .
− Work the rocky material in each layer until it is firm and unyielding .
− Construct to the bottom of the subgrade layer .
Rock Fill Method Use where material is predominantly cobbles or boulders with insufficient fines to fill voids .
− Place and work the material until interlock is achieved .
− Advance the fill by full width construction .
Side dumping shall not be undertaken .
The construction face will be concave , with the shoulder face well in advance of the centre , except when filling in swamps or soft material when the advancing face ends shall be convex .
− Rock Dimensions .
− Maximum vertical dimension : one - third of the height of fill being placed .
− Maximum horizontal dimension : one - half of the height of the fill being placed .
− Construct to 300 mm below the bottom of the subgrade layer .
Within 300 mm of the bottom of the subgrade layer use the Compacted Layer Method or Rocky Material Method , with a maximum particle size of 150 mm .
3.7 FILL MATERIAL General Fill 3.7.1 Use the best locally available material .
Use fill material , whether cut or borrow , that is free of organic matter and has a minimum soaked CBR ( California Bearing Ratio ) of 20 at 95 % MMDD ( Maximum Modified Dry Density ) ( to AS 1289 ) , and a plasticity index between 2 % and 15 % .
Standard Fill 3.7.2 Conform to the following properties : Table 3.1 – Standard fill properties Property Value CBR 4 day soaked at 95 % MMDD to AS 1289 : 20 min .
Maximum Particle Size : 100 mm Plasticity Index : 2 - 15 % Select Fill 3.7.3 Select fill will be comprised of gravel , decomposed rock or broken rock , free from organic matter and lumps of clay .
Conform to the following : Table 3.2 – Select fill grading AS Sieve ( mm ) % Passing ( dry weight ) 75.00 100 9.50 30 - 100 2.36 15 - 65 0.075 5 - 25 EARTHWORKS AND DRAINAGE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 31 Table 3.3– Select fill properties Property Value CBR 4 day soaked at 95 % MMDD to AS 1289 : 30 minimum Plasticity Index : 2 - 15 % maximum Linear shrinkage 2 – 6 % .
3.8 REMOVAL OF EXCESS MATERIAL- HOLD POINT Generally this work applies to the removal of unsuitable material such as silt , rubble , and sand , debris dumped on windrows , floodways , pavements and drains .
Work does not include new works in cut , or heavy excavation of rock .
Haul and dump and spread excess material : − Not less than 125 m from the new road centre line , or − To spoil dump sites specified .
Clear site of organic material/topsoil prior to stockpiling material .
− Spread excess material , level to less than 1.5 m high .
Stabilize to prevent erosion .
Sheet with topsoil .
Ensure dumps do not dam surface water or streams or damage the works or other property .
Ensure dumping is not in streams nor within 25 m of a stream .
Dump and spread the material in legally acceptable location using legal methods .
Comply with AAPA clearances .
Comply with environmental management approvals , including within the road reserve .
Hold Point - Obtain approval from Superintendent prior to hauling and dumping and spreading excess material .
3.9 PREPARATION AND MAINTENANCE OF SUBGRADE SURFACE Trim surface to the compliance tolerances specified free of depressions and free draining .
Maintain and repair any damage to the prepared surface prior to placing further material .
EARTHWORKS FOR DRAINAGE 3.10 3.10.1 Table Drains Construct or rehabilitate and trim to the dimensions shown on the drawings .
Remove all obstructions including dead trees , fallen branches and regrowth .
Grade to prevent ponding of water .
Shape to direct water discharge into culverts , offlet drains or watercourses .
Grades shown below are as ratios of rise : run .
3.10.2 Table Drain Offlets Construct or rehabilitate and trim to the shape of a trapezoidal drain with maximum batter slope 1 : 2 .
Divert table drains into offlet drains at intervals not exceeding 150 m , or as specified .
Refer to PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS .
Remove all obstructions including dead trees , fallen branches and regrowth .
Extend drains as far as required to prevent water ponding in the table drains , with length to be minimum 50 m. Ensure the capacity of the offlet is not less than the capacity of the table drain , and is of similar cross section and dimensions .
Align and grade the offlet so that the water drains away without scour and damage , and to disperse water as sheet flow or into natural watercourses , at a gradient not to exceed 1:40 ( 1.5 % ) .
Divert the table drain offlet drain neatly around natural obstacles such as large rocks and trees .
3.10.3 Table Drain Blocks Construct or rehabilitate and trim table drain blocks at offlets .
Construct blocks from standard fill conforming to the following requirements : Plasticity Index : 6 % minimum .
Length : To extend from edge of shoulder to top of outer table drain batter .
Width : 3 m minimum , at the top , measured parallel to the road centre line .
Height : To edge of shoulders .
Max .
Slope : 1 : 0.67 ( 1.5:1 ) .
Compaction : Layers not exceeding 250 mm compacted thickness .
3.10.4 Stop Berms Construct or rehabilitate and trim stop berms at locations diverting the flow from table drains into a stream or culvert .
Construct berms from standard fill conforming to the following requirements : Plasticity Index : 6 % minimum .
Height : To edge of shoulders .
Max .
Slope : 1 : 0.67 ( 1.5:1 ) .
Compaction : Layers not exceeding 250 mm compacted thickness .
3.10.5 Catch Drains Construct or rehabilitate and trim catch drains .
Carry out prior to formation , subgrade , and other drainage works .
Depth : 500 mm ( minimum ) into solid ground .
Gradients : Ensure free flow , prevent ponding of water , prevent scour .
Outlets : As terrain permits construct at frequent intervals to reduce scour .
Construct a block on continuous grades to divert water into culverts or drains .
EARTHWORKS AND DRAINAGE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 32 Offset : 2 m ( minimum ) and 4 m ( maximum ) beyond the edge of the cutting .
Divert the drain neatly around large rocks and trees .
REPAIR EXISTING FORMATION WIDTH 3.11 Cut back the existing formation and pavement as shown on the drawings by not less than 150 mm on each edge to sound densely compacted material to form a uniform edge ( curved or straight where applicable ) .
Repair the formation width generally with material cut from the table drains to achieve the formation dimensions in accordance with Drawing No .
CS 2100 .
TRIM AND COMPACT UNPAVED 3.12 AREAS Shape , grade and compact verge and unpaved areas as specified .
Refer to Table 4.9.2 - Test Frequencies For Soils - Part 3 of 3 .
Refer to PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS .
SURFACE FORMATION 3.13 Form the road generally with material cut from the table drains , in accordance with the typical cross section .
Allow for construction to the specified height above natural surface by local widening of table drains .
COMPACTION 3.14 Mix to a homogeneous material and compact with no compaction planes and free of cracking to conform to the Dry Density Ratios specified in the Table 4.15 - Dry Density Ratios for Conformance in CONFORMANCE TESTING and the conformance clauses in this section .
CONFORMANCE 3.15 3.15.1 Tolerances Finish earthworks and drainage to a smooth compacted and uniform surface within the limits in Table 3.4 – Conformance Tolerances – Earthworks and drainage .
3.15.1 Proof Rolling – Hold Point – Witness Point Proof roll all areas and obtain satisfactory results before ordering conformance testing of those areas .
Hold Point - Submit a proof rolling procedure to the Superintendent for approval including the method of preparing an area and the extent of proof rolling before commencing proof rolling .
Witness Point - Give the Superintendent not less than 24 hours ’ notice of the location and commencement time for the proof rolling .
Table 3.4 – Conformance Tolerances – Earthworks and drainage Item Requirement Formation Width : Not less than shown on the drawings .
Subgrade Surface : As shown on the drawings .
Subgrade Width : Not less than shown on the drawings .
Batter : Not steeper than the specified slope .
Maximum variation : At any point from specified plane of batter shall be 150 mm in earth and 300 mm in rock .
Table Drain Invert : Maximum 75 mm above or below specified level , free of depressions capable of ponding water .
Plant Requirements ; use plant in proof rolling procedures that comply with the following requirements : Static smooth wheeled rollers with a mass of not less than 12 tonnes and a load intensity under either the front or rear wheels of not less than 6 tonnes per metre width of wheel .
Pneumatic tyred plant with a mass of not less than 20 tonnes and with a ground contact pressure under either the front or rear wheels of not less than 450 kPa per tyre and a ground contact area of not less than .035 m2 per tyre .
Check areas for level tolerance and layer thickness before proof rolling .
Proof roll each layer immediately following completion of compaction .
If proof rolling is carried out at a later time , water the surface and roll with the test roller prior to commencement of proof rolling .
Compliance ; the proof rolling requirements are deemed to comply when an area withstands proof rolling without visible deformation or springing .
Remedial work ; remove and reconstruct areas that deform or break up .
3.15.2 Conformance Testing – Hold Point Ordering procedures ; refer to CONFORMANCE TESTING for testing requirements and test ordering procedures .
Subgrade surface will be tested only when it is within level tolerance and conforms to proof rolling .
Check subgrade surface levels prior to testing .
Hold Point – Obtain the Superintendent ’ s approval of subgrade conformance prior to placing further material .
OTHER REQUIREMENTS 3.16 ( If applicable ) Refer to PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS section of Request for Tender .
CONFORMANCE TESTING STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 33 CONFORMANCE TESTING 4 .
4.1 OUTLINE DESCRIPTION This section specifies the conformance testing criteria for use in road maintenance works .
4.2 GENERAL The Contractor will be responsible for process control testing .
The Superintendent will carry out all conformance tests nominated to be the Superintendent 's responsibility through Panel Period Contracts .
The Contractor will be responsible for ordering the conformance tests .
4.3 DEFINITIONS Conformance Testing The testing to be carried out by the Superintendent to ensure that the work complies with the contract documents .
ITP Inspection Test Plans NATA National Association of Testing Authorities NTCP NT Code of Practice – in NTMTM NTMTM NT Materials Testing Manual NTTM NT Test Methods – in NTMTM Process Testing The testing required to be carried out by the Contractor to ensure that the work is in accordance with the contract documents .
4.4 TEST METHODS – HOLD POINT The methods contained in the NTMTM shall take precedence over all other test methods and procedures , and are used in conjunction with relevant Australian Standards .
The NTMTM is available via https : //infrastructure.nt.gov.au/technical- information When testing can not be performed to the test methods stated , these methods may be substituted with State Road Authority test methods so testing can be performed .
Where required tests are not included in the NTMTM use the appropriate Australian Standard .
Hold Point - The selected test methods must be approved by the Superintendent before testing is done .
Comply with the Acts , Regulations , Guidelines and Codes applicable to the works .
Comply with the requirements of Authorities with jurisdiction over the works .
Conform to the Standards and Publications quoted throughout this document unless specified otherwise .
Refer to REFERENCED DOCUMENTS .
4.5 ITP SUBMISSION – HOLD POINT Hold Point - Submit : ITPs , detailing all procedures and test plans to be undertaken to complete the project , before commencing work .
4.6 SPECIFIC TESTS Conduct field density testing using Nuclear Density Gauges in accordance with NTCP 102.1 and AS 1289.5.8.1 .
Conduct CBR moulding using a compaction hammer conforming to the requirements of AS 1289 .
4.7 PANEL PERIOD CONTRACTORS The Principal has in place Panel Period Contracts with NATA ( National Association of Testing Authorities ) accredited testing companies .
The Superintendent will provide a list of the Panel Period Contractors to be used for conformance testing on the contract when the contract is awarded .
The Superintendent reserves the right to use other NATA accredited laboratories when panel contractors are unable to carry out specific tests .
4.8 ORDERING TESTING When required , in accordance with the contract documents , order the conformance testing in writing directly from the Panel Period Contractors .
Order all testing using the Department ’ s Test Request Form .
Include on the order the following information : − Lot boundaries including start and finish chainages , length and width , − Type of layer , − Type of tests required , − Date and time when lot will be ready for testing .
Start with the first Contractor on the list and rotate in sequence for each set of tests .
Do not bypass any Panel Period Contractor on the list unless that Panel Period Contractor provides a written explanation that he is unable to carry out the required testing to the time frames listed in : Table - Testing and Reporting Completion Times .
In this instance , the written explanation must be provided to the Superintendent at the same time as the order for testing .
Panel Period Contractors that CONFORMANCE TESTING STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 34 are unable to carry out the required testing will be placed at the end of the rotation sequence .
Conformance Testing and Payment 4.8.1 The Superintendent will pay for all conformance testing directly to the Panel Period Contractor selected to perform the conformance tests required under the contract and nominated as the Superintendent ’ s responsibility .
If any tests fail to meet specification , all retesting costs will be a negative variation to the contract .
Failures in bitumen tests ; refer to Superintendent .
When testing has been ordered and the site is not ready for testing at the time specified by the Contractor , the Contractor will bear the cost of time and travel incurred by both the Panel Period Contractor attending to conduct the conformance tests and the Superintendent , where applicable .
The cost will be a negative variation to the contract .
Process Testing 4.8.2 The Contractor is responsible for the ordering up and payment for all process tests carried out .
4.9 NOTICE OF TESTING – WITNESS POINT Give the Panel Period Contractor written notice in advance of each stage of the works requiring conformance testing , including re-testing .
Witness Point - Provide the Superintendent with a copy of the request for testing simultaneously with the request being sent to the Panel Period Contractor .
Any communication with the Panel Period Contractors , other than the ordering of testing or inquiring on the timing of test results , must be forwarded through the Superintendent .
Provide the Superintendent with the results of process control testing as identified in the relevant ITP with all requests for conformance testing .
Witness Point - Notify the Superintendent prior to any rework of failed lots .
TEST FREQUENCIES 4.10 Refer to : Table 4.4 – Test Frequencies for Bitumen Spray Sealing Table 4.5 – Asphalt Testing Frequencies - During Works Table 4.6 – Asphalt Testing Frequencies - After Works Completed – Part 1 Table 4.7 – Asphalt Testing Frequencies - After Works Completed – Part 2 Table 4.8 - Test Frequencies For Soils – Part 1 of 3 Table 4.9 - Test Frequencies For Soils - Part 2 of 3 Table 4.9.2 - Test Frequencies For Soils - Part 3 of 3 Table 4.10 - Test Frequencies For Aggregates And Pavement Surfaces Table 4.11 - Sampling frequencies for fresh concrete Table 4.1 - MMDD Curing Times Refer to Clause 4.14 for Tables CONFORMANCE TESTING RESULTS 4.11 The Panel Period Contractor will provide interim and NATA endorsed test results to the Contractor within the scheduled times ( in working days – Monday to Friday ) from the time of completion of all the field tests .
The interim test results will comprise of final , completed test results and are not preliminary estimates .
Interim test results may not be NATA endorsed .
Testing and Reporting Completion times Refer to : Table 4.13 – Testing and Reporting Completion Times part 1 of 2 and Table 4.14 – Testing and Reporting Completion Time part 2 of 2 .
Refer to Clause 4.14 for Tables 4.11.1 Lot Testing Conformance will be based on lots .
Give each lot a lot number .
Number the lots using a logical system .
Maintain a register of all lots and lot numbers .
Include the location of each lot on the lot register .
Provide a copy of the lot register to the Superintendent upon request .
Lots defined by the contractor must be clearly marked out on the construction site .
Lots of work will be selected by the Contractor , based upon : − A lot will represent no more than one shift 's production − A lot will , be continuous and will have been brought to completion at the same time , − A lot will be composed of essentially homogeneous material with no distinct changes in attribute values .
Each lot will be subject to conformance testing in accordance with NTCP 102.1 .
Defective sections will be excluded from the lot to be tested and identified as a separate lot , and will also be subjected to lot testing .
Quality of the lot will be judged as conformance or non-conformance of each lot .
This will be based on all tests conducted on the lot in accordance with NTCP 102.1 .
Conformance of materials is based on samples from the finished works .
When lots fail to satisfy the conformance criteria , reprocess the entire lot and resubmit for retesting .
Should the lot under consideration be subdivided then each subdivision will be classed as a lot and each subdivided lot will be subject to lot testing .
CONFORMANCE TESTING STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 35 Non-conforming lots which are subdivided after testing will be treated as separate lots and each and every subdivided lot will be retested .
4.11.2 Conformance of Compaction for Soils Density test locations will be selected by the laboratory on a stratified random basis in accordance with NTCP 103.1 .
In situ density is expressed as a percentage of the Maximum Modified Dry Density .
One Modified Dry Density test for each in situ density test will apply .
In situ density will be determined and reported in accordance with NTCP 102.1 and relevant Australian Standards .
A minimum of three tests will apply to each and every lot .
The Mean Dry Density Ratio ( R ) is calculated as follows : n x R = ∑ i xi = an individual test result n = the number of results in the lot .
The Characteristic Mean Dry Density Ratio ( Rc ) is calculated as follows : ks R Rc − = where : R = the mean dry density ratio for the lot k = the multiplier in the below Table .
– MULTIPLIER VALUES FOR SOILS .
s = the standard deviation .
The Standard Deviation ( s ) is calculated as follows : ( ) ( ) 1 2 − − = ∑ n R x s i where : xi = an individual test result R = the mean of n results n = the number of test results in the lot .
When less than 6 tests are used to determine conformance of a lot the Mean Dry Density Ratios in Table 4.15 - Dry Density Ratios for Conformance , Column A apply .
When 6 or more tests are used to determine conformance of a lot the Characteristic Mean Dry Density Ratios in Table 4.15 Dry Density Ratios For Conformance , Column B , apply .
4.11.3 Dry Density Ratios for Conformance Refer to Table 4.15 - Dry Density Ratios for Conformance .
Refer to Clause 4.14 for Tables 4.11.4 Table – Multiplier Values for Soils Table 4.1 – Multiplier Values for Soils Values of the Multiplier k for Characteristic Mean Dry Density Ratio ( Rc ) Number of tests per lot ( n ) k 6 0.50 7 0.54 8 0.56 9 0.59 10 0.61 15 0.68 20 0.72 4.11.5 Conformance of Compaction for Asphalt Relative compaction ( R ) is the percentage ratio of the in-situ density of the compacted asphalt and the reference density of the asphalt for a particular lot .
The reference density will be the mean of the maximum density measurements determined from the asphalt testing for a particular lot .
The Characteristic Value of Relative Compaction ( Rc ) is calculated as follows : ks R Rc − = where : R = the mean density ratio for the lot k = the multiplier in Table 4.2 – Multiplier Values for Asphalt .
s = the standard deviation .
The Standard Deviation ( s ) is calculated as follows : ( ) ( ) 1 2 − − = ∑ n R x s i where : xi = an individual test result R = the mean of n results n = the number of test results in the lot .
CONFORMANCE TESTING STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 36 4.11.6 Multiplier Values for Asphalt Table 4.2 – Multiplier Values for Asphalt Values of the Multiplier k for Characteristic Mean Dry Density Ratio ( Rc ) are shown in the following table .
Number of tests per lot ( n ) k 5 or less 0.0 6 0.719 7 0.755 8 0.783 9 0.808 10 0.828 The work represented by a lot will be assessed as the characteristic value of in-situ air voids where : − Characteristic Value of Air Voids ( % ) = 100 – Rc STABILISED LAYER CONFORMANCE 4.12 4.12.1 Tolerances For stabilised layers conform to the tolerances specified in Table 4.3 – Stabilised Layers Conformance 4.12.2 Testing – Hold Point Hold point - Superintendent to approve conformance of stabilised layer prior to priming .
Refer to Table 4.3 – Stabilised Layers Conformance Table 4.3 – Stabilised Layers Conformance Attribute Requirement Dry Density Ratio : Refer to the table DRY DENSITY RATIOS FOR CONFORMANCE in the Conformance Testing Section .
Stabiliser Application Rate/Content ±10 % of the designated value averaged for each lot Stabiliser Distribution : [ i ] Stabiliser content shall not vary by more than 0.5 % absolute between top and bottom half of a layer at any location as determined in accordance with NTTM 204.8 .
[ ii ] Stabiliser content shall not vary by more than ±0.5 % from the designated value in any point .
Moisture Content during Compaction : [ i ] ±1.5 % of moisture content determined at preliminary trial .
[ ii ] ±1.5 % of optimum moisture content .
[ i ] apply if a preliminary trial is carried out ( i.e .
total area over 1000m2 ) [ ii ] apply if a preliminary trial is not carried out ( i.e .
areas under 1000m2 ) Take samples for Liquid Limit , Plastic Limit , Linear Shrinkage , California Bearing Ratio from the unstabilised pavements .
OTHER REQUIREMENTS 4.13 ( If applicable ) Refer to PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS section of Request for Tender .
CONFORMANCE TESTING STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 37 ADDITIONAL TABLES 4.14 Table 4.4 – Test Frequencies for Bitumen Spray Sealing Test No .
Property Cutback Bitumen/ Emulsions Straight Run Binder Polymer Modified Bitumen AS/NZS 2341.2 , AS 2341.3 AS/NZS 2341.4 Dynamic Viscosity ( 60ºC ) Minimum 1 per project Minimum 1 per project - Dynamic Viscosity ( 135ºC ) - Minimum 1 per project - AS 2341.12 Penetration ( 25ºC ) - 1 per project - AS/NZS 2341.13 Durability of base binder 1 per project 1 per project AG : PT/T103 Loss on Heating ( % mass ) max .
1 per project 1 per project 1 per project AG : PT/T111 Dynamic Viscosity ( 165ºC ) - - 1 per 20 000L AG : PT/T112 Flash Point ( ºC ) min .
1 per project 1 per project 1 per project AG : PT/T121 Consistency ( 60ºC ) - - 1 per 20 000L AG : PT/T121 Stiffness at 150C ( kPa ) - 1 per 20 000L AG : PT/T122 Torsional Recovery at 25ºC , 30s ( % ) - - 1 per 20 000L AG : PT/T124 Toughness at 4oC , 100mm ( Nm ) min .
1 per project 1 per project 1 per project AG : PT/T131 Softening Point ( ºC ) - 1 per project 1 per 20 000L CONFORMANCE TESTING STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 38 Table 4.5 – Asphalt Testing Frequencies - During Works Test Method No .
( Standard No . )
Test Method ( Aspect being tested ) Minimum Test Frequency Daily Production < 100 tonnes Daily Production > 100 tonnes - Mixing temperature Every mix Every mix - Laying temperature Every 30 minutes Every 30 minutes - Asphalt surface temperature at commencement of compaction Every Mix Every mix AS/NZS 2891.7.1 AS/NZS 2891.7.3 Maximum Density 1 No .
1 per 100 t * AS 2341.3 Viscosity of Binder 1 per shift 1 per shift AS/NZS 2891.3.1 AS/NZS 2891.3.2 AS/NZS 2891.3.3 or WA730.1 Bitumen content 1 No .
1 per 100 t * Particle size distribution 1 No .
1 per 100 t * AS/NZS 2891.5 Stability 1 No .
1 per 100 t * AS/NZS 2891.5 Flow 1 No .
1 per 100 t * * One test per nominated tonnage or part thereof .
Table 4.6 – Asphalt Testing Frequencies - After Works Completed – Part 1 Test Method No .
Test Method Frequency AS/NZS 2891.1.1 AS 2891.1.2 AS 2891.1.3 Thickness of layer 1 per core AS/NZS 2891.8 Voids and density relationships for compacted asphalt mixes 1 per core AS/NZS 2891.9.1 AS/NZS 2891.9.2 AS/NZS 2891.9.3 Determination of bulk density of compacted asphalt 1 per core AG : PT/ T231 Deformation resistance of asphalt mixtures by the wheel tracking test 1 per Type per 1000 t Table 4.7 – Asphalt Testing Frequencies - After Works Completed – Part 2 Carry out density testing as soon as practicable after completion of works .
Conform to the following number of cores per lot : Area ( m2 ) > 5000 1000 – 5000 500 – 1000 50 – 500 < 50 No .
of Cores 1 per 1000m2 or minimum 10 1 per 500m2 or minimum 5 4 3 1 CONFORMANCE TESTING STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – October 2015 Page 39 Table 4.8 - Test Frequencies For Soils – Part 1 of 3 Type Of Test General Fill Standard Fill Select Fill/Sand Clay Fill Subgrade Sub-Base Basecourse Bridge Backfill Using Std .
Fill Bridge Backfill Using Select Fill Culvert Backfill Using Std .
Fill Culvert Backfill Using Select Fill Field Density ( FDD ) by NTCP 102.1 and AS 1289.5.8.1 1 in 3,000 m2 ( min .
of 3 tests per lot ) 1 in 3,000 m2 ( min .
of 3 tests per lot ) 1 in 3,000m2 ( min .
of 3 tests per lot ) 1 in 1,000 m2 ( min .
of 3 tests per lot ) 1 in 1,000 m2 ( min .
of 3 tests per lot ) 1 in 1,000 m2 ( min .
of 3 tests per lot ) 3 tests per 100 m3 3 tests per 100 m3 3 tests per 10 m3 3 tests per 10 m3 Modified Compaction ( MMDD ) by AS 1289.5.2.1 1 per FDD 1 per FDD 1 per FDD 1 per FDD 1 per FDD 1 per FDD 1 per FDD 1 per FDD 1 per FDD 1 per FDD Particle Size Distribution by AS 1289.3.6.1 - - 1 per each 2,000 m3 - 1 in 5000 m2 ( min .
of 1 test per lot ) 1 in 5000 m2 ( min .
of 1 test per lot ) - 1 per 300 m3 - 1 per 300 m3 Plasticity Index AS 1289.3.1.1 , AS 1289.3.2.1 , AS 1289.3.3.1 1 per each 2,000 m3 1 per each 2,000 m3 1 per each 2,000 m3 1 in 5,000 m2 ( min .
of 1 test per lot ) 1 in 5000 m2 ( min .
of 1 test per lot ) 1 in 5000 m2 ( min .
of 1 test per lot ) 1 per each 300 m3 1 per each 300 m3 1 per each 300 m3 1 per each 300 m3 Linear Shrinkage by AS 1289.3.4.1 1 per each 2,000 m3 1 per each 2,000 m3 1 per each 2,000 m3 1 in 5,000 m2 ( min .
of 1 test per lot ) 1 in 5000 m2 ( min .
of 1 test per lot ) 1 in 5000 m2 ( min .
of 1 test per lot ) 1 per each 300 m3 1 per each 300 m3 1 per each 300 m3 1 per each 300 m3 California Bearing Ratio by AS 1289.6.1.1 1 per each 2,000 m3 1 per each 2,000 m3 1 per each 2,000 m3 1 in 5 FDD ( min.1 of test per lot ) 1 in 5 FDD ( min.1 of test per lot ) 1 in 5 FDD ( min.1 of test per lot ) 1 per each 300 m3 1 per each 300 m3 1 per each 300 m3 1 per each 300 m3 * run = 1 pass of cement spreader .
FDD = Field Density CONFORMANCE TESTING STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – October 2015 Page 40 Table 4.9 - Test Frequencies For Soils - Part 2 of 3 Type Of Test Subgrade Sub-Base Basecourse Pavement Layer Thickness by NTTM 216.1 - 1 per FDD 1 per FDD Ball Embedment by NTTM 215.1 - - 1 in 5,000 m2 Pavement Degree of Saturation prior to Sealing by AS 1289 - - 1 in 5,000 m2 Stabiliser Spread Rate by NTTM 204.7 1 per run * 1 per run * 1 per run * Stabiliser Content by NTTM 204.1 1 per 1000 m2 with a min .
of 3 tests 1 per 1000 m2 with a min .
of 3 tests 1 per 1000 m2 with a min .
of 3 tests Stabiliser Distribution by NTTM 204.8 1 per 1000 m2 with a min .
of 3 tests 1 per 1000 m2 with a min .
of 3 tests 1 per 1000 m2 with a min .
of 3 tests Soluble Salt Content of Construction Water - 1 per water source - * run = 1 pass of cement spreader .
FDD = Field Density Table 4.9.2 - Test Frequencies for Soils - Part 3 of 3 Type of Test Unpaved areas ( including unpaved medians , batters , table drains and blocks ) Field Density ( FDD ) by NTCP 102.1 and AS 1289.5.8.1 1 for every 100 lineal metres or part thereof Modified Compaction ( MMDD ) by AS 1289.5.2.1 1 per each 3 FDD tests Plasticity Index by AS 1289.3.1.1 , AS 1289.3.2.1 , AS 1289.3.3.1 For Table Drain blocks only - 1 per each 3 blocks CONFORMANCE TESTING STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 41 Table 4.10 - Test Frequencies For Aggregates And Pavement Surfaces Type Of Test Aggregate Pavement Marking Pavement Surface Particle Size Distribution by AS 1141.11.1 1 in 250 t - - Los Angeles Abrasion Value by AS 1141.23 1 in 250 t - - Particle Shape by AS 1141.14 at 2:1 ratio 1 in 250 t - - Flakiness Index by AS 1141.15 1 in 250 t - - Average Least Dimension by AS 1141.20.1 , AS 1141.20.2 * 1 in 250 t - - Sulphate Soundness by AS 1141.24 1 in 1,000 t - - Percentage of Crushed Faces by AS 1141.18 1 in 250 t - - Polished Aggregate Friction Value by AS 1141.40 or AS 1141.41 - - 1 in 20,000 m2 Surface Texture Depth by NTTM 305.1 - - 1 in 5,000 m2 Skid Resistance by NTTM 304.1 - - As nominated by Superintendent Roughness - - As nominated by Superintendent Retroreflectivity of Pavement Marking by NTTM 404.1 or NTTM 404.3 - 1 per 1,000 m - Wear Assessment of Road Marking Paints – Image Analysis to AS 4049.3 Appendix K , Method A Photographic Method - As nominated by Superintendent - * Take Average Least Dimension samples only from the stockpile on the project site .
CONFORMANCE TESTING STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 42 Table 4.11 - Sampling frequencies for fresh concrete Type of Test Frequency Number of samples Slump - AS 1012.3 Per truck Per truck as required Making , curing and compressive strength of concrete - AS 1012.8 and AS 1012.9 1 truck pour 1 set of cylinders * 2 truck pour 2 sets of cylinders * 3 - 5 truck pour 3 sets of cylinders * 6 - 10 truck pour 4 sets of cylinders * 11 + truck pour 4 sets of cylinders plus 1 additional set of cylinders per every additional 1 to 5 trucks after the first 10 trucks * * A set of cylinders consists of 3 cylinders unless directed otherwise .
Table 4.12 – MMDD Curing Times Material Type Plasticity Field Moisture Content ( FMC ) Curing time – min .
Non plastic Sand PI < 2 Any 2 hours Non Plastic Gravels Absorbent stone PI < 2 FMC < 2 % MC , below OMC 6 hours Low Plasticity Gravel and Sands PI up to 10 FMC < 2 % MC , below OMC 6 hours Medium Plasticity Gravel and Sands PI 10 to 20 FMC < 1 % MC , below OMC 12 hours Heavy clays 20 + FMC < 2 % MC , below OMC 24 hours up to 7 days MC = Moisture Content FMC = Field Moisture Content Irrespective of FMC all materials must be cured for a minimum of 2 hours after preparation .
Check and report sub-base and basecourse thickness to nearest 5 mm at each modified compaction test sample site .
CONFORMANCE TESTING STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 43 Table 4.13 – Testing and Reporting Completion Times Part 1 of 2 Attribute being tested Time Allowed for Interim Report in Working Days ( Monday to Friday ) Time Allowed for NATA Endorsed Report in Working Days ( Mon to Fri ) * * Time for completion may be extended by each additional day required for the curing of materials and each additional overnight stay .
For work in remote areas the testing and reporting completion times may be increased by a maximum of 2 days , subject to approval by the Superintendent .
SOILS Field Density 3 5 Modified Compaction * * 3 5 Modified Compaction – Oversize * * 3 Pavement Layer Thickness 2 4 Particle Size Distribution 3 5 Plasticity Index ( Liquid Limit , Plastic Limit ) * * 3 Linear Shrinkage 3 Moisture Content 1 3 CBR – Soaked ( Completion time includes Modified Compaction ) * * 7 9 Cement Content of Stabilised Materials ( Heat of Neutralisation ) 3 5 Cement Content ( EDTA Method ) 6 8 Lime/Cement Content of Uncured Soil ( EDTA Method ) 6 Lime Content of Stabilised Materials ( E.D.T.A Method ) 6 Bitumen Content of Stabilised Materials 2 4 Stabiliser Spread Rate 1 3 Soluble Salt Content of Construction Water 2 4 Standard Ball Penetration Test 1 3 Unconfined Compressive Strength ( 7 Day result ) excluding compaction 8 10 AGGREGATE Specific Gravity 2 4 Particle Size Distribution 2 Particle Shape , by Proportional Calliper 2 Flakiness Index 2 Average Least Dimension ( Direct Measurement ) 2 Clay and Fine Silt ( Settling Method ) 2 CONFORMANCE TESTING STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 44 Table 4.14– Testing and Reporting Completion times Part 2 of 2 Attribute being tested Time for Interim Report Time for NATA Endorsed Report AGGREGATE ( continued ) Particle Density and Water Absorption of Fine Aggregate 3 5 Particle Density and Water Absorption of Coarse Aggregate 3 Sulphate Soundness 8 10 Los Angeles Value 2 4 Pavement Surface Texture Depth 2 Crushed Particles 2 CONCRETE Consistency of Concrete – Slump Test 1 3 Making , Curing and Compressive Strength ( 28 day result ) * * * 29 31 Making , Curing and Compressive Strength ( 7 day result ) * * * 8 10 ASPHALT Bitumen Content and Aggregate Grading 3 5 Stability and Flow of Mix 3 Air Voids and Density Relationship 4 6 Density of Thin Lift Asphalt by Nuclear Gauge 2 4 Bulk Density of Asphalt 4 6 Kinematic Viscosity of Bitumen 3 5 BITUMEN Dynamic Viscosity ( 60ºC ) 1 3 * * Time for completion may be extended by each additional day required for the curing of materials and each additional overnight stay .
* * * Time for completion is related to the curing time specified .
For work in remote areas the testing and reporting completion times may be increased by a maximum of 2 days , subject to approval by the Superintendent .
CONFORMANCE TESTING STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 45 Table 4.15 - Dry Density Ratios for Conformance Works Components A Mean Dry Density Ratio ( R ) in % ( “ n ” is 3 to 5 ) B Characteristic Mean Dry Density Ratio ( Rc ) in % ( “ n ” is 6 or greater ) Natural surface to subgrade , fill , batters , table drain blocks , fill for water course , unpaved areas 90.0 or greater 89.9 or less 90.0 or greater 89.9 or less Conformance Non-conformance Subgrade , sub-base , unsealed base , shoulders , select fill , levees , structures and culverts in fill , bridge foundation backfill , bridge abutment fill 95.0 or greater 94.9 or less 95.0 or greater 94.9 or less Conformance Non-conformance Sealed basecourse 100.0 or greater 99.9 or less 99.0 or greater 98.9 or less Conformance Non-conformance Stabilised basecourse 98.0 or greater 97.9 or less 97.0 or greater 96.9 or less Conformance Non-conformance Backfill all test excavations with the material and density ratio specified for that layer stabilised with at least 3 % cement ( by mass ) .
GRADING AND GRAVEL SHEETING STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 46 GRADING AND GRAVEL SHEETING 5 .
5.1 STANDARDS Conform to the following standards and publications unless specified otherwise : - AS 1141- Methods for sampling and testing aggregates .
- AS 1289- Methods of testing soils for engineering purposes - NTMTM- NT Materials Testing Manual .
Specification Reference Refer to the Northern Territory Government Standard Specification for Environmental Management and RFT .
5.2 OUTLINE DESCRIPTION This section specifies the maintenance requirement for gravel sheeting on unsealed roads , the maintenance grading of unsealed roads , and the maintenance grading of shoulders and verges of sealed roads , including the associated drainage .
Drainage is specified in EARTHWORKS AND DRAINAGE , and measured as per that section when not associated with road maintenance .
5.3 GRADING GENERALLY Provide a finished graded surface free of ruts , corrugations , depressions , excess loose material and debris .
Maintain pavement dimensions in accordance with Drawing No .
CS 2100 .
5.4 GRAVEL SHEETING GENERALLY Provide a finished gravel surface trimmed and tightly compacted , conforming to standards in CONFORMANCE TESTING .
Maintain pavement dimensions in accordance with Drawing No .
CS 2100 .
The standard drawing showing the typical cross section shows the ideal carriageway width and actual widths may vary on individual roads .
Maintain the existing carriageway width of individual roads in the contract .
This may , in some cases , require extra passes of the grader or other equipment .
Do not grade over the crown of the road .
Maintain the profile as per the standard drawing .
5.5 PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS Maintenance grading of unsealed roads 5.5.1 For works associated with maintenance grading of unsealed roads and verges the following table indicates the expected maximum achievable daily production per grader under normal weather conditions .
Table 5.1 – Maintenance grading of unsealed roads Work Type Distance Number of passes Opening Grade 40km Minimum 1 Pass Carriageway Grade 15km Minimum 4 passes Grade Between Inverts 10km Minimum 7 passes Full Maintenance Grade 5km Minimum 9 passes Grade and Roll 12km Minimum 7 passes Grade , Water and Roll 8km Minimum 7 passes Rip and Re-compaction 2km As required Maintenance grading of unsealed shoulders on sealed roads 5.5.2 For works associated with maintenance grading of unsealed shoulders and verges on sealed roads the following table indicates the expected maximum achievable daily production per grader under normal weather conditions Table 5.2 – Maintenance grading of unsealed shoulders on sealed roads Work Type Distance Number of passes Dry Grade 7km Minimum 3 passes Full Maintenance Grade 5km Minimum 5 passes Part Maintenance Grade 10km Minimum 3 passes Grade and Roll 10km Minimum 3 passes Grade , Water and Roll 6km Minimum 3 passes Rip and Re-compaction 3km Minimum 5 passes GRADING AND GRAVEL SHEETING STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 47 5.6 STANDARDS Comply with the Acts , Regulations , Guidelines and Codes applicable to the works .
Comply with the requirements of Authorities with jurisdiction over the works .
Conform to the Standards and Publications quoted throughout this document unless specified otherwise .
Refer to REFERENCED DOCUMENTS .
5.7 DEFINITIONS Refer to Definitions in MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS .
5.8 MATERIALS Natural Gravel 5.8.1 Obtain material from sources of naturally occurring deposits .
in accordance with the Material Extraction Areas and Water Sources clause in MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS .
Produce required properties by crushing , screening , mixing or other processes necessary .
Ensure particles are tough , durable and of a tightly binding nature free of organic or other deleterious matter .
Natural gravel to conform to Table 5.3 – Natural Gravel Particle Sizes and to Table 5.4 – Natural Gravel Properties .
Table 5.3 – Natural Gravel Particle Sizes AS Sieve ( mm ) Percentage Passing Type 1 Type 2 * Type 3 * Type 4 75.0 100 100 37.5 80-100 100 80-100 19.0 50-80 70 - 100 100 60-100 9.5 35-65 50 - 80 70 - 100 50-95 4.75 25-50 35 - 65 50 - 80 40-80 2.36 15-40 25 - 50 35 - 65 30-65 0.425 7-20 10 - 30 15 - 35 20-50 0.075 3-13 4 - 16 6 - 20 5-25 * Grading Types 2 and 3 are for Base and Shoulder .
Table 5.4 – Natural Gravel Properties Attribute Application Northern Area - Sealed base Southern Area – Sealed Base * Unsealed Base And Shoulder Material Sub- Base Liquid Limit ( LL ) 25 % max 30 % 35 % max 30 % max Plasticity Index ( PI ) 1-6 % 1 - 10 % 4 – 12 % 1- 10 % Linear Shrinkage ( LS ) 0-3 % 0 - 6 % 2 – 8 % 0-6 % PI x % passing 0.425 mm Sieve 180 max 300 max 400 max 400 max California Bearing Ratio ( CBR ) 4 day soaked ( AS 1289 ) 80 min 80 min 50 min 30 min at a relative density of 100 % MMDD 100 % MMDD 95 % MMDD 95 % MMD D ( Highest CBR value to be reported ) Los Angeles Abrasion ( LAA ) Loss 50 max 50 max 60 max 60 max Note : Southern Area- Sealed Base * applies to south of a line connecting Birrindudu - Dunmarra - Wollogorang .
Fine Crushed Rock 5.8.2 Manufacture from clean , hard durable rock free from natural gravel , clay , loam or other deleterious substances .
Fine crushed rock to conform to Table 5.5 – Fine Crushed Rock Sizes and to Table 5.6 – Fine Crushed Rock Properties .
Table 5.5 – Fine Crushed Rock Sizes AS Sieve ( mm ) Percentage Passing 37.5 100 19.0 90-100 13.2 75-90 9.5 60-80 4.75 38-60 2.36 25-45 0.425 12-26 0.075 6-14 GRADING AND GRAVEL SHEETING STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 48 Table 5.6 – Fine Crushed Rock Properties Liquid limit ( LL ) 25 % max Plasticity Index ( PI ) 1-6 % Linear Shrinkage ( LS ) 1-3 % Dust Ratio ( DR ) ( % passing 0.075mm ) / ( % passing 0.425mm ) x 100 25-50 CBR , 4 day soaked at 100 % MMDD 100 min ( AS 1289 ) Los Angeles Abrasion ( LAA ) loss : Coarse grained rock Fine grained rock 35max 25 % max PI x % passing 0.425mm sieve 180 max Blends of Natural Gravel and Fine 5.8.3 Crushed Rock Not permitted in urban areas for sealed pavements .
Material to conform to the Natural Gravel tables .
Sand Clay 5.8.4 Obtain Sand Clay from sources of naturally occurring deposits .
Material to conform to the requirements in Table 5.7 – Sand Clay Grading and in Table 5.8 – Sand Clay Properties .
Table 5.7 – Sand Clay Grading AS sieve ( mm ) Percentage Passing 4.75 80 - 100 2.36 60 - 100 0.425 30 - 60 0.075 14 - 28 Table 5.8 – Sand Clay Properties Property Required value Plasticity Index 20 % maximum for sealed pavements 15 % maximum for unsealed pavements .
Linear Shrinkage 1 % - 8 % .
CBR , 4 day soaked at 95 % MMDD 50 minimum .
( AS 1289 ) 5.9 GRAVEL SHEETING Terminology 5.9.1 The term gravel sheeting refers to the sheeting of pavement and shoulders with gravel , sand clay or other suitable approved materials .
Gravel Resheeting – Lots greater 5.9.2 than 600m2 Gravel sheet pavement and shoulders in section lots greater than 600 m2 .
Locate and push up gravel material in accordance with the Material Extraction Areas and Water Sources clause in MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS .
Use gravel material complying with the Materials clause in this section .
Load , haul to site and dump gravel material .
Place , mix , compact and trim the material to the specified layer thickness in accordance with this section .
Stockpile Gravel Material 5.9.3 Locate , push up and stockpile gravel material in accordance with the Material Extraction Areas and Water Sources clause in MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS .
Stockpile materials complying with the Materials clause in this section .
Trim stockpile to a uniform shape for ease of measurement .
Gravel Resheeting from Stockpile 5.9.4 Gravel sheet pavement and shoulders in section lots greater than 600 m2 .
Load from existing stockpile , haul to site and dump gravel material .
Place , mix , compact and trim the material to the specified layer thickness in accordance with this section .
Gravel Repairs to Wash outs and 5.9.5 Blow outs Gravel sheet repair pavement and shoulder wash outs and blow outs in section lots less than 600m2 .
Locate and push up gravel material in accordance with the Material Extraction Areas and Water Sources clause in MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS .
Use gravel material complying with the Materials clause in this section .
Load , haul to site and dump gravel material .
Place , mix , compact and trim the material to the specified layer thickness in accordance with this section .
GRADING AND GRAVEL SHEETING STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 49 Gravel Repairs to Wash outs and 5.9.6 Blow outs from Stockpile – Lots less than 600m2 Gravel sheet repair pavement and shoulder wash outs and blow outs in section lots less than 600m2 .
Load from existing stockpile , haul to site and dump gravel material .
Place , mix , compact and trim the material to the specified layer thickness in accordance with this section .
On-Formation Placing and Mixing 5.9.7 Place material in uniform layers over subgrade surface or lower layers of the pavement .
Remove segregated and contaminated material from the site .
Manually remove materials such as timber , branches , roots and the like .
Do not place material on a previous layer that has : − become waterlogged or cracked ; and/or − otherwise deteriorated .
Mix the material uniformly throughout with water to achieve the specified conforming Dry Density Ratio .
Ensure water is clean and free from oil , alkali , organic or any other deleterious substances , and that the total soluble salts content is less than 3,000 mg/litre , total dissolved salts .
Provide evidence of construction water salt contents .
Compaction 5.9.8 Compact in uniform layers not less than 100 mm nor greater than 200 mm compacted thickness .
Achieve a homogeneous mass with no compaction planes .
Conform to the Dry Density Ratios specified in Table 4.15 - Dry Density Ratios for Conformance in CONFORMANCE TESTING .
Trim Final Pavement Surface 5.9.9 Trim with a dense textured surface , free of laminations .
Remove sticks and any loose material .
Ensure surface is free of cracking .
Do not introduce new material to the surface after final compaction .
Where pavement thickness is 200 mm or greater , scarify to not less than 100 mm depth and recompact where finish not achieved .
Where pavement thickness is less than 200 mm scarify and recompact to full depth where finish not achieved .
CONFORMANCE OF GRAVEL 5.10 SHEETING 5.10.1 Tolerances Final surfaces shall conform to the following : Table 5.9 – Final Surfaces Tolerances Straight Edge Deviation : Maximum 5 mm in 3 m. Compacted Thickness : Not less than shown on the drawings .
Width : Not less than shown on the drawings .
5.10.2 Proof rolling procedure - Hold Point Hold Point - Submit a proof rolling procedure to the Superintendent for approval including the method of preparing an area and the extent of proof rolling .
5.10.3 Proof rolling notice - Witness Point Witness Point - Give the Superintendent not less than 24 hours ’ notice of the location and commencement time for the proof rolling .
Proof roll all areas and obtain satisfactory results before ordering conformance testing of those areas .
Plant Requirements ; use plant in proof rolling procedures that comply with the following requirements : Static smooth wheeled rollers with a mass of not less than 12 tonnes and a load intensity under either the front or rear wheels of not less than 6 tonnes per metre width of wheel .
Pneumatic tyred plant with a mass of not less than 20 tonnes and with a ground contact pressure under either the front or rear wheels of not less than 450 kPa per tyre and a ground contact area of not less than .035 m2 per tyre .
Check areas for level tolerance and layer thickness before proof rolling .
Proof roll each layer immediately following completion of compaction .
If proof rolling is carried out at a later time , water the surface and roll with the test roller prior to commencement of proof rolling .
Compliance ; the proof rolling requirements are deemed to comply when an area withstands proof rolling without visible deformation or springing .
Remedial work ; remove and reconstruct areas that deform or break up .
5.10.4 Conformance Testing – Hold Point Ordering procedures ; refer to CONFORMANCE TESTING for testing requirements and test ordering procedures .
Only the finished compacted base and shoulder conforming to proof rolling and layer thickness will be tested .
Hold Point – Obtain the Superintendent ’ s approval for pavement conformance prior to any surfacing work .
GRADING AND GRAVEL SHEETING STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 50 Backfill and compact all test holes with cement stabilised quality material which is the same as the layer being tested .
5.10.5 Ride Quality Surface roughness ( IRI ) to be less than 2.4 .
Ride quality requirements represents an absolute upper limit and all field values to be less than a value specified .
Lotting and averaging out of field values not permitted .
Rectify all areas where Surface Roughness exceeds specified level .
Exclusions are listed below in the Exclusions to specified roughness limits clause .
Surface roughness testing is to be carried out as directed by the Superintendent .
When lots fail to meet the conformance criteria , rejection of the lot or payment adjustments will be applied .
Refer to Table 23.3 - Rate of Payment Adjustments in MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT , Rate of Payment Adjustment clause .
5.10.1 Roughness testing sequence Data must be collected in the sequence shown in the table within 5 days of completion of testing of the relevant pavement layer .
Ensure that ; the pavement is free of loose material and debris when testing is done , for unbound granular bases , measurements must be undertaken prior to sweeping of the pavement , and free water is not present on the pavement when testing is undertaken .
Table - Testing sequence for pavement type Pavement type Testing sequence Spray seal on granular base Before application of spray seal and after completion of the final wearing surface .
Asphalt Overlays and Thin Shape correcting Surfaces ( thickness < 50 mm ) After all rehabilitation work is complete but before asphalt overlay has commenced .
Also required on final wearing course .
Asphalt pavement ( thickness 50 mm and over ) Prior to , and after , the application of the final wearing course .
5.10.2 Exclusions to specified roughness limits Unless specified otherwise in the PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS ( PSRs ) , the following areas are excluded from the requirement to achieve an IRI of less that 2.4 : - Roundabouts - Railway lines ( 35 m after the event ) - Bridge joints ( 35 m after the event ) - Intersections ( stop bar to stop bar ) - Inspection pit covers and related surface defects within the wheel paths ( 15 m including the event ) - Side streets specified in the PSRs deemed to affect pavement ride quality ( the width of the side street plus 30 m after the event ) - Surface defects related to existing culverts which are not part of the works under the Contract ( width of culvert plus 30 m after the event ) , and - Cattle grids .
MAINTENANCE GRADING OF 5.11 UNSEALED PAVEMENTS Refer to Table 5.1 – Maintenance grading of unsealed roads in Performance Requirements in this work section .
5.11.1 Opening Grade Open roads to conventional vehicles by grading after damage by rain .
Any undamaged pavement may be by-passed by the grader .
Where damaged pavement is encountered , grade the pavement running surface to remove corrugations and fill in ruts , holes and depressions .
Repair scours .
Recover material from the batters and drains at scours to restore shape to the formation .
Repair creek crossings and floodways leaving no windrow on either side .
In the case of saturated table drains , it may only be possible to open grade the centre of the pavement , removing sand and debris to the shoulder .
5.11.2 Maintenance Grade – Carriageway Grade the carriageway pavement and shoulder surface .
Cut the pavement and shoulders to remove all corrugations and fill in all ruts , holes and depressions .
Spread the trimmed material evenly across the full width of the carriageway to a thickness of 25 to 40 mm to fill depressions and to obtain the typical cross section as shown on the Drawing No .
CS 2100 .
5.11.3 Maintenance Grade – Between inverts Grade the area between the inverts of both table drains .
Remove all obstructions including dead trees , fallen branches and regrowth from area to be graded .
Win material from the area between the inverts of both table drains and the edges of the shoulder .
Ensure that vegetation material is not included .
Cut the pavement and shoulders to remove all corrugations and fill in all ruts , holes and depressions .
Spread the accumulated material uniformly over the pavement and shoulders to a thickness of 25 GRADING AND GRAVEL SHEETING STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 51 to 40 mm to fill depressions and to obtain the typical cross section as shown on the Drawing No .
CS 2100 .
Reinstate table drain blocks in accordance with EARTHWORKS AND DRAINAGE .
5.11.4 Maintenance Grade – Between Batters Grade the road formation width between the tops of both outer batters .
Remove all obstructions including dead trees , fallen branches and regrowth from areas to be graded .
Win suitable material from the area between the tops of outer batters and the edges of the shoulder .
Ensure that vegetation material is not included .
Cut the pavement and shoulders to remove all corrugations and fill in all ruts , holes and depressions .
Spread the accumulated material uniformly over the pavement and shoulders to a thickness of 25 to 40 mm to fill depressions and to obtain the typical cross section as shown on the Drawing No .
CS 2100 .
Remove windrows from table drains , offlet drains , creek crossings , floodways and culvert entrances and outlets .
Reinstate table drains and table drain blocks in accordance with EARTHWORKS AND DRAINAGE .
5.11.5 Full Maintenance Grade Grade the road formation width between the tops of both outer batters .
Remove all obstructions including dead trees , fallen branches and regrowth from area to be graded .
Remove windrows which contain vegetation or other unsuitable materials by spreading them evenly outside of the outer batters .
Win material from windrows which contain suitable material and the area back to the edge of the shoulder .
Ensure that vegetation material is not included .
Cut the pavement and shoulders to remove all corrugations and fill in all ruts , holes and depressions .
Spread the accumulated material uniformly over the pavement and shoulders to a thickness of 25 to 40 mm to fill depressions and to obtain the typical cross section as shown on the Drawing No .
CS 2100 .
Remove windrows from table drains , offlet drains , creek crossings , floodways and culvert entrances and outlets .
Reinstate table drains , offlet drains , table drain blocks , catch drains and benches in cut in accordance with EARTHWORKS AND DRAINAGE , and cut new offlet drains where water ponds or where directed by the Superintendent .
5.11.6 Grade and Roll Mainly associated with damp or wet roads .
Grade the area between the inverts of both table drains .
Remove all obstructions including dead trees , fallen branches and regrowth from area to be graded .
Win material from the area between the inverts of both table drains and the edges of the shoulders .
Ensure that vegetation material is not included .
Cut the pavement and shoulders to remove all corrugations and fill in all ruts , holes and depressions .
Spread the accumulated material uniformly over the pavement and shoulders to fill depressions and to obtain the typical cross section as shown on the Drawing No .
CS 2100 .
Roll the surface to achieve a uniform and tightly bound surface free of corrugations , ruts and depressions .
Compact with a minimum of 10 passes of a 15 tonne multi tyred roller .
Passes to be distributed evenly over the carriageway , and to be between the outer edges of the shoulders .
Reinstate table drain blocks in accordance with EARTHWORKS AND DRAINAGE .
5.11.7 Grade Water and Roll Grade the area between the inverts of both table drains .
Remove all obstructions including dead trees , fallen branches and regrowth from area to be graded .
Win material from the area between the inverts of both table drains and the edges of the shoulders .
Ensure that vegetation material is not included .
Cut the pavement and shoulders to remove all corrugations and fill in all ruts , holes and depressions .
Spread the accumulated material uniformly over the pavement and shoulders to fill depressions and to obtain the typical cross section as shown on the Drawing No .
CS 2100 .
Wet mix and roll to produce a uniform and tightly bound surface free of corrugations , ruts and depressions .
Compact with a minimum of 10 passes of a 15 tonne multi tyred roller .
Passes to be distributed evenly over the carriageway , and to be between the outer edges of the shoulders .
Reinstate table drain blocks in accordance with EARTHWORKS AND DRAINAGE .
5.11.8 Rip and Re-compaction Grade the road formation width between the tops of both outer batters .
Remove vegetation from areas to be graded , and remove windrows which contain vegetation or other unsuitable materials by spreading them evenly outside of the outer batters .
Win material from windrows which contain suitable material and the area back to the edge of GRADING AND GRAVEL SHEETING STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 52 the shoulder .
Ensure that vegetation material is not included .
Cut the pavement and shoulders to remove all corrugations and fill in all ruts , holes and depressions .
Spread the accumulated material uniformly over the pavement and shoulders to fill depressions and to obtain the typical cross section as shown on the Standard Drawing .
Scarify and/or rip the full width of the pavement and shoulders , mixing both won and in-situ materials to obtain a uniform homogenised blend of 150 mm compacted thickness .
Wet mix blended materials and compact to minimum 95 % of maximum modified dry density ( MMDD ) .
Trim and finish to produce a uniform and tightly bound surface free of ridges etc .
Reinstate table drains , offlet drains and table drain blocks in accordance with EARTHWORKS AND DRAINAGE .
5.11.9 Reformation and Re-compaction Grade the road formation width between the tops of both outer batters .
Remove vegetation from areas to be graded , and remove windrows which contain vegetation or other unsuitable materials by spreading them evenly outside of the outer batters .
Win material from windrows which contain suitable material and the area back to the edge of the shoulder .
Ensure that vegetation material is not included .
Cut the pavement and shoulders to remove all corrugations and fill in all ruts , holes and depressions .
Spread the accumulated material uniformly over the pavement and shoulders to fill depressions and to obtain the typical cross section as shown on the Drawing No .
CS 2100 .
Top up with nominated compacted depth gravel material conforming to the Materials clauses of the specification .
Scarify and/or rip the full width of the pavement and shoulders , mixing both won and in-situ materials to obtain a uniform homogenised blend of 150 mm compacted thickness .
Wet mix blended materials and compact to minimum 95 % of MMDD .
Trim and finish to produce a uniform and tightly bound surface free of ridges etc .
Reinstate table drains , offlet drains and table drain blocks in accordance with EARTHWORKS AND DRAINAGE .
MAINTENANCE GRADING OF 5.12 UNSEALED SHOULDERS , BATTERS AND DRAINAGE OF SEALED ROADS Refer to Table 5.2 – Maintenance grading of unsealed shoulders on sealed roads in Performance Requirements in this work section .
Provide a finished surface free of ruts , corrugations , depressions , excess loose material , and debris and level with the sealed surface .
Attain and maintain pavement dimensions with standard Drawing No .
CS 2102 .
Ensure that there is no shoulder material left on the seal .
Remove all vegetation from area to be graded .
5.12.1 Drainage Maintenance Grade Grade the road formation width between the top of the outer batter and edge of shoulder .
Reinstate table drains , offlet drains and table drain blocks in accordance with EARTHWORKS AND DRAINAGE .
Remove all obstructions , including dead trees , fallen branches and re-growth from areas to be graded and remove windrows which contain vegetation or other unsuitable materials by spreading them evenly outside of the outer batters .
Win material from windrows which contain suitable material and the area back to the edge of the shoulder .
Ensure that vegetation material is not included .
Spread the accumulated material uniformly over the verge and finish to the standard shape .
5.12.2 Grade and Roll A grade and roll operation will generally be ordered following rain , resulting in sufficient moisture in the shoulder material to gain effective compaction .
Grade the area between the invert of the table drain and the edge of seal .
Remove all obstructions including dead trees , fallen branches and re-growth from area to be graded .
Win suitable material from the area between the invert of table drain and the edge of the shoulder .
Ensure that vegetation material is not included .
Spread the accumulated material uniformly over the shoulder and finish to the standard shape , level with the top of the seal to provide a smooth transition between the shoulder and the seal .
Roll the shoulder surface to achieve a uniform and tightly bound surface free of corrugations , ruts and depressions .
Compact with a minimum of 4 passes of a 15 tonne multi tyred roller , evenly on each shoulder .
Take care not to damage the seal when cutting or spreading .
If the seal is damaged repair the damage with cold mix .
Remove all material from the sealed surface after each day 's work with a power broom , prior to removing work area signs .
5.12.3 Grade Water and Roll Grade the area between the invert of the table drain and the edge of seal .
Reinstate table drain blocks in accordance with EARTHWORKS AND DRAINAGE .
Remove all obstructions including dead trees , fallen branches and regrowth from area to be graded .
GRADING AND GRAVEL SHEETING STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 53 Win suitable material from the area between the invert of table drain and the edge of the shoulder and ensure that vegetation material is not included .
Spread the accumulated material uniformly over the shoulders and finish to the standard shape , level with the top of the seal to provide a smooth transition between the shoulder and the seal .
Provide thorough mixing with water and rolling to produce a uniform and tightly bound surface free of corrugations , ruts and depressions .
Compact with a minimum of 4 passes of a 15 tonne multi tyred roller , evenly on each shoulder .
Take care not to damage the seal when cutting or spreading .
If the seal is damaged repair the damage with cold mix .
Remove all materials from the sealed surface after each day 's work with a power broom , prior to removing work area signs .
5.12.4 Rip and Re-compaction Grade the road formation width between the top of the outer batter and edge of seal .
Reinstate table drains , offlet drains and table drain blocks in accordance with EARTHWORKS AND DRAINAGE .
Remove vegetation from areas to be graded , and remove windrows which contain vegetation or other unsuitable materials by spreading them evenly outside of the outer batters .
Win suitable material from windrows or batters and ensure that vegetation material is not included .
Spread the accumulated material uniformly over the shoulder and finish to the standard shape , level with the top of the seal to provide a smooth transition between the shoulder and the seal .
Scarify and/or rip the full width of the shoulder , mixing both won and in-situ materials to obtain a uniform homogenised blend of 150 mm compacted thickness .
Wet mix blended materials and compact to minimum 95 % of MMDD .
Trim and finish to produce a uniform and tightly bound surface free of corrugations , ruts and depressions .
Take care not to damage the seal when cutting or spreading .
If the seal is damaged repair the damage with cold mix .
Remove all material from the sealed surface after each day 's work with a power broom , prior to removing work area signs .
5.12.5 Reformation and Re-compaction Grade the road formation width between the tops of both outer batters .
Remove vegetation from areas to be graded , and remove windrows which contain vegetation or other unsuitable materials by spreading them evenly outside of the outer batters .
Win material from windrows which contain suitable material and the area back to the edge of the shoulder .
Ensure that vegetation material is not included .
Cut the pavement and shoulders to remove all corrugations and fill in all ruts , holes and depressions .
Spread the accumulated material uniformly over the pavement and shoulders to fill depressions and to obtain the typical cross section as shown on the Drawing No .
CS 2100 .
Top up with nominated compacted depth gravel material conforming to the Materials clause in this work section .
Scarify and/or rip the full width of the pavement and shoulders , mixing both won and in-situ materials to obtain a uniform homogenised blend of 150 mm compacted thickness .
Wet mix blended materials and compact to minimum 95 % of MMDD .
Trim and finish to produce a uniform and tightly bound surface free of ridges etc .
Reinstate table drains , offlet drains and table drain blocks in accordance with EARTHWORKS AND DRAINAGE .
PROTECTION OF RAILWAY LINES 5.13 Prevent damage to railway lines and other railway assets when maintenance equipment crosses at railway crossings .
Lift grader blade and rippers during crossing .
Remove any dirt and debris deposited onto tracks by maintenance equipment crossing .
Advise the appropriate rail authority immediately if railway line tracks are damaged .
REMOVAL OF ROAD MATERIALS 5.14 FROM CATTLE GRIDS Remove any gravel or fill material which enters cattle grids during maintenance operations .
PROTECTION OF ROAD FURNITURE 5.15 Remove , protect , store , replace any road furniture damaged during the work and reinstate all removed or damaged road furniture items within the work zone as the work proceeds .
OTHER REQUIREMENTS 5.16 ( If applicable ) Refer to PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS section of Request for Tender .
STABILISATION MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 54 STABILISATION MAINTENANCE 6 .
6.1 OUTLINE DESCRIPTION This section specifies the stabilisation requirements of materials for use in sealed and unsealed roads , shoulders , verges and inverts , and the in-situ wet mixing of existing pavement and shoulders by pulverisation .
6.2 STANDARDS Comply with the Acts , Regulations , Guidelines and Codes applicable to the works .
Comply with the requirements of Authorities with jurisdiction over the works .
Conform to the Standards and Publications quoted throughout this document unless specified otherwise .
Refer to REFERENCED DOCUMENTS .
6.3 DEFINITIONS Optimum Moisture Content The amount of water by mass , expressed as a percentage of the dry mass of the material , at which maximum modified dry density ( MMDD ) is obtained with the stabiliser added .
6.4 MATERIALS Stabiliser 6.4.1 Lime : Hydrated Ca ( OH ) 2 or Quicklime CaO conforming with AS 1672.1 .
Do not use agricultural lime ( Calcium Carbonate ) .
Cement : To AS 3972 - type GP or GB .
Supply and store as specified in product Safety Data Sheet ( SDS ) .
Additives – Hold Point 6.4.2 Hold Point - Use additives only with the approval of the Superintendent .
Follow manufacturer 's recommendations when using retarders , water reducing or other additives .
Water 6.4.3 Ensure water is clean and free from oil , alkali , organic matter and other deleterious substances , and that the total soluble salts content is less than 3,000 mg/litre ( total dissolved salts ) .
For Southern Regions amend the maximum salt content as instructed by the Superintendent .
Curing Agent 6.4.4 Surface applied curing membrane other than the use of water to be : Bitumen emulsion ARS Grade 320 , or Cut-back bitumen Class AMC 2 or AMC 3 .
Materials to be stabilised 6.4.5 Stabilise the existing subgrade layer or the existing pavement and shoulder layer .
Refer to EARTHWORKS AND DRAINAGE and GRADING AND GRAVEL SHEETING for specification for top-up materials properties .
Materials to be Wet Mixed 6.4.6 Pulverise and wet mix the existing pavement and shoulder layer including seal .
6.5 IN-SITU STABILISATION Preparation of Subgrade Layer 6.5.1 Remove the top 150 mm base course layer , or other nominated requirements , and stockpile to one side of formation for re-use .
Refer to PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS in the RFT/RFQ .
Avoid contamination of base-course material .
Extend the base-course preparation 5 m each end of the required section .
Shape and trim the surface to alignment , levels and cross sections necessary to produce the final subgrade levels and compacted thickness .
Preparation of Pavement and 6.5.2 Shoulder Layer Scarify the existing pavement sections and new material , where necessary , full depth before spreading .
Tyne the surface lightly when quicklime is used .
Compact lightly to reveal irregularities in the spread material and to permit the stabilising equipment to traverse the area without excessive displacement of the surface .
Shape and trim the surface to the alignment , levels and cross-sections necessary to produce the final levels and compacted thickness .
Commencement & Continuity of Work 6.5.3 Complete full width stabilisation in one day .
Cease stabilising during the following conditions : − Wet weather or if rain is likely to fall .
− Windy periods which could cause loss of stabiliser , or dust nuisance .
Spreading – Hold Point 6.5.4 Select the spread rate to achieve an unconfined compressive strength of 1.5 to 2.0 MPa .
Spread the cement using a computerised cement spreader .
Calibrate and check the spread rate prior to commencement .
Adopt the following rate for 150 mm thickness layers for tender purposes : Cement : 6 kg/m2 Hydrated Lime : 8 kg/m2 Hold Point - Assess spread rate based upon test results of materials to be stabilised .
Obtain the Superintendent 's approval of the spread rate .
QUICKLIME Water the spread material sufficiently to allow full slaking .
Avoid over-watering .
STABILISATION MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 55 LIME SLURRY Mix the lime slurry initially in a separate paddle mixer or similar .
Use a mechanical sprayer with agitation to maintain a lime/water ratio within ±10 % of the initial ratio .
Lime/water ratio : Generally between 1:2 ( i.e .
1 tonne per 2,000 litres ) and 1:0.8 ( i.e .
1 tonne per 800 litres ) , measured by mass .
Mixing – Hold Point 6.5.5 Use plant capable of : − mixing the stabiliser with the nominated material uniformly over the full depth to be stabilised ; and − adding water uniformly to the materials while mixing with application rate between 0 to 10 % ( by mass ) of the material being mixed .
Use purpose designed pavement re-claimer with an undercut rotor stabiliser .
Hold Point – For small areas in remote locations obtain Superintendent 's approval for use of alternative plant suitable for the particular situation , including rotary hoes and graders .
Mix until uniform in colour and free of lenses , pockets or clumps of stabiliser .
Pulverise clayey material until at least 90 % passes 19 mm sieve .
Add water to the materials during mixing to achieve a moisture content suitable for compaction .
CEMENT STABILISATION Commence compaction and finishing immediately following satisfactory mixing .
LIME STABILISATION Shape the treated layer to the approximate section after satisfactory mixing and lightly compact .
Cure for a period of 24 to 72 hours .
Commence final mixing .
Add water during final mixing if necessary to achieve moisture content suitable for compaction .
Mix until uniform in colour and free of lenses , pockets or clumps of lime .
Compaction 6.5.6 Compact parallel to the centre line of the pavement and for the full depth of the stabilised layer .
Commence compaction at the lower edge of the pavement and work progressively towards the crown or the higher edge .
Allow for progressive and uniform overlap between passes .
Wet the surface lightly after compaction to reduce moisture loss and lay the dust when necessary .
CEMENT STABILISATION Complete the compacting and finishing within two hours of adding water .
Finishing 6.5.7 Finish the final surface to a smooth , dense , closely knit surface , free from compaction planes and cracks and finished to the tolerances specified .
Do not fill or add material to the surface of the pavement to meet tolerance requirements .
Maintain the surface material at not less than its optimum moisture content during all finishing operations .
Reconstruct non-complying areas at no cost to the Principal .
Construction Joints 6.5.8 LONGITUDINAL JOINTS Minimise longitudinal joints by stabilising the full width of traffic lanes or wider as one continuous operation .
Keep the joints straight or following the road curvature as appropriate .
TRANSVERSE JOINTS Form joints following any break in excess of two hours in the continuity of the stabilisation operations .
Cut the end of the material to a plane face at an angle not exceeding 45 degrees from the vertical .
Check the surface adjacent to the joint with a straight edge prior to recommencement and further cut back the joint as necessary to achieve surface tolerance .
Curing 6.5.9 Keep the finished surface damp , without leaching , until further construction or curing operations are carried out .
Alternatively cure by applying a bitumen emulsion or a bitumen primer as specified .
Apply the bituminous curing membrane as soon as possible after mixing and compaction but no later than 24 hours after relative compaction results are available .
Application rate for bitumen emulsions : 0.3 to 0.45 litres/m2 .
Maintain clear of vehicular traffic for four days .
6.6 PULVERISATION AND WET MIXING Prepare pavement and shoulder layer , mix , compact , and finish the layer all in accordance with the in-situ stabilisation clauses .
Break up and pulverise the existing pavement and shoulder layer including the existing sealed surface with a pavement re-claimer to a maximum particle size of 37.5 mm , incorporating the broken- up seal into the layer .
STABILISATION MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 56 Use reclaimer plant capable of pulverising previous cement stabilised layers .
Make allowance for 2 % Cement added and mixed to the existing materials .
Allow for transportation of the material in the rate for the works .
6.7 CONFORMANCE Tolerances 6.7.1 For stabilised and wet mix layers conform to the tolerances specified in GRADING AND GRAVEL SHEETING and with the following : Table 6.1 – Conformance of stabilisation - additional tolerances Property Required value Dry Density Ratio : Refer to Table 4.15 - Dry Density Ratios for Conformance in CONFORMANCE TESTING Stabiliser Application Rate/Content : ±10 % of the designated value averaged for each lot Stabiliser Distribution : Do not vary the stabiliser content by more than 0.5 % absolute between top and bottom half of a layer at any location as determined in accordance with NTTM 204.8 .
Moisture Content during Compaction : ±1.5 % of optimum moisture content .
Samples for Liquid Limit , Plastic Limit , Linear Shrinkage , CBR will be taken from the unstabilised pavements .
Testing – Hold Point 6.7.2 Average one test per 1000 m2 for the layer under consideration with a minimum number of three tests .
STABILISER APPLICATION RATE The Contractor is responsible for checking the application rate .
Determine the stabiliser application rate in accordance with NTTM 204.7 .
Determine the stabiliser content in accordance with NTTM 204.1 .
Refer to CONFORMANCE TESTING for test frequencies .
Correct application deficiencies by the application of additional stabiliser and remixing if mixing has already commenced .
STABILISER CONTENT The Superintendent will carry out conformance testing .
COMPACTION The Superintendent will carry out conformance testing .
Check areas for level tolerance and layer thickness before testing .
Sample only from the finished compacted pavement complying with level tolerance and layer thickness .
Proof roll all areas with maximum pneumatic tyre roller units .
Remove all areas that breach up or deform and reconstruct as specified .
Dry Density Ratios will be determined 24 hours after final compaction .
Backfill test holes within 24 hours of testing with new stabilised material .
Hold Point – Obtain the Superintendent ’ s approval for conformance of the stabilised layer prior to priming .
Surface Roughness 6.7.3 Surface roughness testing will be carried out by the Superintendent at the discretion of the Superintendent .
6.8 OTHER REQUIREMENTS ( If applicable ) Refer to PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS section of Request for Tender .
SPRAY SEALING MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 57 SPRAY SEALING MAINTENANCE 7 .
7.1 OUTLINE DESCRIPTION This section specifies the requirement for bituminous spray seal work for areas greater than 300m² .
Refer to BITUMINOUS SURFACE MAINTENANCE for details of spray sealing work for areas less than 300m² , patching work using hot mix and cold mix asphalts and crack sealing work .
STANDARDS 7.2 Comply with the Acts , Regulations , Guidelines and Codes applicable to the works .
Comply with the requirements of Authorities with jurisdiction over the works .
Conform to the Standards and Publications quoted throughout this document unless specified otherwise .
Refer to REFERENCED DOCUMENTS .
Australian Standards 7.2.1 AS 1141 Methods for sampling and testing aggregates AS 1160 Bitumen emulsions for construction and maintenance of pavements AS 1742 Manual of uniform traffic control devices AS 1906.3 Retroreflective materials and devices for road traffic control purposes – Raised pavement markers ( retroreflective and non- retroreflective ) AS 2008 Residual bitumen for pavements AS 2106 Methods for the determination of the flash point of flammable liquids ( closed cup ) - General AS 2157 Cutback bitumen AS 2341 ( set ) Methods of testing bitumen and related roadmaking products AS 2341.6 Methods of testing bitumen and related roadmaking products - Determination of density using a hydrometer AS 2341.9 Methods of testing bitumen and related roadmaking products - Determination of water content AS/NZS 2341.13 Methods of testing bitumen and related roadmarking products – Long-term exposure to heat and air AS 2758 ( set ) Aggregates and rock for engineering purposes AS 3568 Oils for reducing the viscosity of residual bitumen for pavements Austroads 7.2.2 AGPT04H-08 Austroads Guide to Pavement Technology – Part 4H : Test Methods .
AGPT04K-09 Guide to Pavement Technology – Part 4K : Seals .
AGPT-T190-14 Specification Framework for Polymer Modified Binders .
AP-G41-15 Bituminous Materials Sealing Safety Guide .
AP-T68/06 Update of the Austroads Sprayed Seal Design Method .
AP-T235-13 Guide to the Selection and Use of Polymer Modified Binders and Multigrade Bitumens .
AP-T236-13 Update of Double/Double Design for Austroads Sprayed Seal Design Methods .
AP-C87-15 Austroads Glossary of Terms .
ASTM D 1298-12b Standard Test Method for Density , Relative Density , or API Gravity of Crude Petroleum and Liquid Petroleum Products by Hydrometer Method .
Other 7.2.3 NTMTM NT Materials Testing Manual .
ASTM American Society for Testing Materials .
NT Weeds Management Act .
AUSTRALIAN ASPHALT PAVEMENT ASSOCIATION ( AAPA ) Guide to the manufacture , storage and handling of polymer modified binders ( Available via http : //www.aapa.asn.au/documents/item/308 ) Advisory Note 7 Guide to the manufacture , storage and handling of binders for spray sealing ( and hot mix asphalt ) ( available via http : //www.aapa.asn.au/technology- and-publications/advisory-notes ) Specification Reference Refer to the Northern Territory Government Standard Specification for Environmental Management and to the RFT .
7.3 DEFINITIONS Refer to Definitions in BITUMINOUS SURFACE MAINTENANCE .
7.4 SCOPE Spray sealing treatments for routine maintenance include : − Prime , − Primerseal , − Initial Seal or Reseal , − With conventional bitumen , cutback bitumen or bitumen emulsion binder , − With modified binder , SPRAY SEALING MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 58 − Incorporating geotextile fabric reinforcement , Spray sealing work consists of : − Supply and delivery of materials , − Storage and handling of raw materials , − Precoating of aggregate , − Preparation of pavement surfaces , − Preparation of bituminous materials , − Application of primer and/or primer binder and/or binder , − Spreading and rolling of aggregate , − Removal of loose aggregate .
Cycle and Pedestrian shared Path 7.4.1 Maintenance All relevant design principles contained in Austroads Guide to Road Design Part 6A : Pedestrian and Cyclist Paths must be integrated in the design of cycle ways , pathways and associated infrastructure .
Refer to Design drawings ( if any ) and conform to local Council requirements .
Refer to PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS section of Request for Tender .
7.5 MATERIAL REQUIREMENTS Aggregates 7.5.1 Aggregates must be clean , hard , durable , skid resistant , dry crushed stone , or gravel of uniform quality free from declared weeds and their seeds and other deleterious material , and conform to the properties specified .
Minimum two crushed faces .
Nominate source of aggregate supply .
Submit to the Superintendent current NATA endorsed test result certificates providing evidence that the nominated aggregate supply conforms to specified properties .
Aggregate used for testing must be sampled from project site .
Conform to Table 7.5 - Aggregate Grading and Average Least Dimension , and to Table 7.6 - Aggregate Properties .
Refer to Clause 7.22 for Tables Cutter and Flux 7.5.2 Cutter is to be Kerosene or Jet A1 Aviation Turbine Fuel – conform to Table 7.1 – Cutter oil properties .
Do not use diesel products .
Table 7.1 – Cutter oil properties Property Min .
Max .
Test Method Density at 15 oC , km/m3 775 830 ASTM D1298 AS 2341.6 Distillation Initial Boiling Point oC 140 - ASTM D86 Distillation Final Boiling Point oC - 280 ASTM D86 Flash Point oC ( Penksy- Martens closed cup ) 38 - AS 2106.2 Water content , % by volume - 0.1 AS 2341.9 Viscosity , mPa.s at 40 oC - 2.0 ASTM D445 Refer AS 3568 – 1999 Table 1 for complete table .
Precoat and adhesion agents 7.5.3 Precoat and Adhesion Agents are to be in the concentrated form and not contain Diesel as part of the mixture .
Precoat all aggregates to conform to the following : Precoat mixture is to be 100/0/100/1 and not contain Diesel as part of the mixture .
Bitumen residue ( by mass ) : 50 % .
Kerosene ( by Mass ) 50 % Adhesion agent ( by mass ) : minimum 1 % Bitumen 7.5.4 Standard Classes of bitumen to conform to the requirements of AS 2008 .
Manufacture all AS 2008 bitumens in a refinery and have NATA endorsed certificates of manufacture .
Durability Value , in accordance with AS/NZS 2341.13 – Long-term exposure of bitumen to heat and air , shall be a minimum of 7 days with no maximum value .
Multigrade bitumen to comply with AGPT-T190-14 Specification framework for polymer modified binders .
Cut Back Bitumen 7.5.5 Conform to the requirements of AS 2157 and Table 7.7 - Cut Back Bitumen Properties .
Designation is by AMC class .
Refer to Clause 7.22 for Tables Bitumen Emulsion 7.5.6 A rapid setting bitumen emulsion made with bitumen Class 320 .
SPRAY SEALING MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 59 Refer to PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS in the Request for Tender document for details of type of emulsion to be used .
Conform to the requirements of AS 1160 .
Utilise within 90 days of manufacture .
Spraying temperature : 60 % bitumen content 30 to 60º C. Generally Bitumen emulsion to be ; Type ; CRS Binder Grade ; 170 % Binder ; 60 Polymer Modified Binder 7.5.7 A mixture of Standard Class bitumen and elastomeric polymer or crumb rubber additive .
All conformance testing to be carried out in accordance with Austroads and Australian Standard Test Methods .
Base binders for the production of PMB must meet the specification limits outlined in Table 7.8 – Base Binder for Polymer Modified Bitumen from the refinery .
All base binders must be process tested for conformance to ensure compliance before manufacture into PMB ’ s .
Polymer Modified Binders must conform to the requirements outlined in Table 7.9 – Polymer Modified Binders for Sprayed Sealing Applications .
Refer to Clause 7.22 for Table Manufacture of Polymer Modified Binders must meet the requirements of the “ Guide to Manufacture , Storage and Handling of Polymer Modified Binders , Australian Asphalt Pavement Association , 2013 ” .
SPRAYERS AND PERSONNEL 7.6 Sprayers must have current calibration accredited by a tester nominated on the Australian Asphalt Pavement Association website .
All calibrated sprayers must be listed on the Australian Asphalt Pavement Association website .
A copy of the calibration certificate must be with the vehicle at all times .
Calibrate sprayers yearly .
Ensure sprayer driver and operator are skilled and trained with an understanding of sprayer calibration and an appreciation of the requirements of the work .
Ensure relevant personnel understand the types and quantities of the various materials and mixtures to be used .
Bitumen Spraying plant and equipment must be in good working condition at all times .
PREPARATION OF PAVEMENT 7.7 Remove raised reflective pavement markers .
Repair any damage to the pavement surface caused by the removal of raised reflective markers with an emulsion/sand mixture before sealing .
Sweep the entire pavement surface to remove loose stones , dust , dirt and foreign matter immediately before spraying .
Do not use steel brooms on fine crushed rock type or low plasticity type materials or on airstrips .
Maintain the prepared surface .
Extend sweeping clear of the area to be sealed .
Remove adherent patches of foreign material with a steel scraper .
Dampen the prepared surface lightly immediately before spraying ( for priming and primersealing only ) .
Remove water from the surface of primed or sealed pavements before applying binder .
Do not allow traffic on the prepared surface .
7.8 SETTING OUT Mark out by string line or paint .
Include pavement widening .
Reseal works follow existing seal .
7.9 BINDER COAT REQUIREMENTS General 7.9.1 The Contractor must rectify bleeding or flushing seals at thier own cost during the defined defects period where binder application rates were applied at greater than 105 % of the designated volume .
References Austroads Technical Report AP-T68/06 – Update of the Austroads Sprayed Seal Design Method Austroads - Guide to the Selection and Use of Polymer Modified Binders and Multigrades – AP- T235-13 ( 2013 ) Update of Double/Double Design for Austroads Sprayed Seal Design Methods AP-T236-13 .
Standard Specification for Roadworks , Spray Sealing ( Department of Infrastructure ) AS2008 - Bitumen for Pavements ( 2013 ) Definitions S10E – A class of polymer modified bitumen , used for spray seal work , with an elastomeric modifier , conforming to specified binder properties in the Standard Specification for Roadworks It must be manufactured from bitumen that conforms to the classes in AS2008 .
SPRAY SEALING MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 60 SAMI – Strain Alleviating Membrane Interlayer .
A layer of seal sprayed onto an existing cracked surface , prior to asphalt resurfacing .
Table 7.2 - Binder type requirements PRIMING AND PRIMER SEALING Region Binder Type All Class C240/C320 Applied in cutback form TACK COAT AND ENRICHMENT Region Binder Type All CRS170/60 Applied in emulsion form INITIAL SEAL WORK Region Binder Type Darwin , Katherine , East Arnhem Tennant Creek , Alice Springs S10E RESEALING WORK Region Binder Type All S10E SAMI WORK ( Using 14mm aggregate ) Region Binder Type All S25E Selection of binder type other than those specified above can be considered in special circumstances and to the approval of the Executive Director Civil Construction ( Chief Engineer ) Civil Services .
For example , resealing a heavily cracked surface may require a S20E or S25E binder type or crumb rubber S45R .
Material properties for S10E binders and other binder types are contained in the Standard Specification for Roadworks , Spray Seal section .
For further guidance refer to Austroads - Guide to the Selection and Use of Polymer Modified Binders and Multigrades ( TT1357 2012 ) Heat to spraying temperature but do not exceed the maximum .
Avoid heating bitumen in quantities excess to requirements Prevent foaming .
Prime , primer seals and enrichment 7.9.2 coats Provide bitumen complying with ; Table 7.9 – Polymer Modified Binders for Sprayed Sealing Applications .
Generally bitumen class 320 for cut back as follows : Prime : AMC 0 to AMC 00 Primer Seal : AMC 5 to AMC 6 Enrichment Coat : CRS 170/60 ( If applicable ) Refer to PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS in the RFT for cut back requirements .
Cut-back bitumen to be mixed on site .
Heat bitumen to a temperature appropriate for achieving final spraying temperature making allowance for incorporation of the unheated cutter .
Add unheated cutter to heated bitumen and circulate until a homogeneous mixture is achieved .
Spray immediately circulation is complete .
Allow at least three days to elapse after priming before applying the binder coat .
Ensure primer soaks in and dries off before applying binder coat .
Keep traffic off the primed surface for 3 days after priming .
Use a primer seal if traffic can not be kept off surface for 3 days .
Straight Run Binder Coats 7.9.3 Do not use Straight Run Binder Coats unless you have prior approval from the Executive Director Civil Construction ( Chief Engineer ) .
Provide bitumen Class 320 complying to AS 2008 .
Ensure product meets the requirements of the specification at point of delivery .
Polymer Modified Binder Coats 7.9.4 Provide bitumen in conformance with Table 7.9 – Polymer Modified Binders for Sprayed Sealing Applications blended with the required polymer as follows : Prepare the product in a manufacturing or blending plant that complies with the “ Guide to the Manufacture , Storage and Handling of Polymer Modified Binders , Australian Asphalt Pavement Association , 2013 ” .
− Initial seal coat : Class S10E − Reseal coat : Class S10E Store , mix , heat and spray the polymer modified binder as recommended by the polymer manufacturer .
Both coats of two coat seals shall contain polymer .
Allow for adhesion agent in Bitumen item .
Binder Coats , Tender Quantities 7.9.5 Spray Rates : Calculated using Austroads Design Method .
SPRAY SEALING MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 61 ( If applicable ) Refer to PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS for spray rates used as a basis for calculating tender quantities .
SAMPLING OF BINDER 7.10 7.10.1 Test Request Darwin Urban areas – Test requests are to be sent to the panel period contractor to witness sampling and arrange testing .
All other areas - the supplier is to sample and deliver the sample to Department staff within 48 hours .
Supply of Sampling Containers 7.10.2 Supply all sampling containers as required for sampling purposes .
− Sample containers are to be leak proof and having a capacity of not less than one litre .
− Sample containers must be clean , rust free and capable of receiving a product at high temperatures .
Definition of Sampling 7.10.3 − A sample is three containers of product collected at the same time from the same supply source .
− One sample container is for the Contractors analysis .
− Two sample containers are for the Department to analyse .
− Note : Refer to the Superintendent for requirements if samples are non-conforming .
7.10.4 Frequency of Samples Refer to CONFORMANCE TESTING .
Collection of Samples - Witness Point 7.10.5 Take samples prior to addition of adhesion agents .
Conformance test sampling is to be collected at point of delivery .
Ensure bulkers and road tankers have adequate sampling cocks installed so as samples can be taken on transfer from the bulker to the sprayer .
Do not take samples from the spray wagon .
Witness Point – Take samples from the point of delivery on transfer from the bulker to the sprayer or as directed .
Where transfer is for works in the urban area or for small works ensure that conformance testing is ordered and samples are taken at the point of transfer from bulker to sprayer .
All sampling must be in accordance with Australian or Austroads standards .
The supplier is to perform the sampling .
Ensure staff carrying out sampling are competent in sampling methods .
Ensure sampling techniques do not allow contamination of the samples .
Where samples are not collected , 10 % reduction adjustments ( Table 21.1 Payment Adjustments in MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT ) will apply to the total materials represented .
Refer to Table 7.9 – Polymer Modified Binders for Sprayed Sealing Applications .
Identification of Samples 7.10.6 Mark samples with the following information on the container at the time of collection .
− Container number .
− Sample number .
− Date and time of sample taken .
− Designation or Classification of Materials .
− Sample Temperature .
− Tanker/Sprayer Identification Number .
− Name of Supplier .
− Road Name and number .
− Site Identification .
− Location and Chainage .
Reseals - Maintain an electronic register of all samples which includes the information listed above .
Provide a copy of this register to the Superintendent on request .
Storage and Delivery of Samples 7.10.7 Store all samples taken to prevent accidental damage or contamination .
Submit sample containers at the completion of each days spraying .
7.10.8 Stockpile Sites Refer to Stockpiles clause in MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS .
SUPPLY OF AGGREGATE 7.11 Supply and deliver aggregate into stockpiles at the locations specified in the PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS section of the RFT .
The quantity of aggregate delivered is to be within 5 % or 20 m3 of the specified quantity , whichever is the lesser .
PRECOATING AGGREGATE 7.12 All aggregates used must be dry before precoating .
No precoat is required for SAMI and Emulsion seals , unless stated in the response schedules .
Apply a uniform film of precoating material to the aggregate .
Aggregate which has been excessively precoated will be rejected .
Precoating is to take place at preapproved site stockpile locations unless otherwise approved by the Superintendent .
SPRAY SEALING MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 62 All precoating must be performed with a powered shaking screen deck precoater which removes dust , dirt and oversize materials and evenly applies precoat to the aggregate .
ADHESION AGENT - MANDATORY 7.13 Use 1 % adhesion agent in the binder .
Written Superintendent approval must be obtained for variation of this rate .
Do not use diesel based adhesion agents .
Circulate in binder for 20 minutes before spraying .
Provide the Superintendent a copy of the Safety Data Sheet information of the adhesion agent prior to its intended use .
SPRAYING – WITNESS POINT 7.14 Witness Point - Give the Superintendent 48 hours ’ notice of intention to spray bitumen .
Store bitumen at lowest practical temperature and for the shortest possible duration .
Comply with the following temperature control requirements for polymer modified binders : Table 7.3 – Temperature control requirements for polymer modified binders Property Straight Run Binder Polymer Modified Binder Temperature at point of spraying 175 to 185 ºC 180 to 200 ºC Holding time at spraying temperature 7 days maximum 2 days maximum Temperature for medium term storage 130 to 150 ºC 140 to 160 ºC Holding time for medium term storage 30 days 7 to 10 days Seek approval to vary these requirements .
Remove bitumen from the site when temperature limits are exceeded .
Atmospheric Conditions 7.14.1 Commence spraying only when pavement temperature : − is in excess of 20ºC , or − has been in excess of 15ºC for at least one hour .
For cutback work , commence spraying when pavement temperature is in excess of 10 ºC .
For emulsion work , commence spraying when pavement temperature is in excess of 5 ºC .
Cease spraying if rain threatens , or in windy or dusty conditions .
Protect the work in the event of a sudden change in weather by closing the affected section of road or by rigidly controlling traffic speed .
7.14.2 Preparing the Sprayer Circulate the mixture .
Check the horizontal and vertical alignment and the cleanliness of the spraybar and its extensions .
Determine the appropriate number of nozzles for the width to be sprayed .
Ensure the end nozzles fitted are EAN18W .
Check that the nozzles in use are symmetrical about the sprayer .
Check the alignment and setting of the nozzle to ensure that the fans of material from intermediate nozzles are parallel and at an angle of 30º to the centre line of the spraybar .
Ensure that the fans from the end nozzles are parallel to each other and at an angle of 45 degrees to the centre line of the spraybar .
Set the height of the spraybar so that the lower faces of the nozzles are 250 mm ( or that specified on the calibration certificate ) above the pavement when the sprayer is full .
Fit an end shield to the spraybar when necessary to prevent spraying material on the kerb , or to counter any wind effects which would compromise uniform spraying .
Position the guide rod to conform to the setting out and edges of spray .
Check by making a dummy run .
Application Spray Rates – Hold Point 7.14.3 Application spray rates shall be determined by the Superintendent , using appropriate Austroads design methods .
For new seals and reseals , supply the following to the Superintendent , 3 working days prior to the planned commencement of sealing , to allow the spray rates to be calculated : − Particle Size Distribution ( 1 per 250 tonne - minimum 3 tests ) − Average Least Dimension ( ALD ) ( 1 per 250 tonne - minimum 3 tests ) − Flakiness Index ( FI ) of the aggregate , ( 1 per 250 tonne - minimum 3 tests ) − Ball Penetration testing ( for new seal work ) − Dryback results ( for new seal work ) Refer to Conformance Testing for sampling requirements of aggregates .
Hold Point – Do not commence spraying until the spray rates are advised by the Superintendent .
SPRAY SEALING MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 63 Spray rates to be at 15 ºC adjusted in accordance with Table 7.10 - Bitumen Equivalent Volumes .
For primers , primer seals and polymer modified binders , the rate of application refers to the whole of the mixture , including all modifiers , cutback materials , combining oils and adhesion agents .
For enrichments and emulsion seals , the rate of application refers to the whole of the mixture .
7.14.4 Preparation for Sprayer Run – Witness Point Record the volume and temperature of the sprayer contents while it is on level ground .
Supply Sprayer Tank dips before and after each sprayer run .
Witness Point - Allow visual inspection when requested .
Determine the length of sprayer run from the available quantity in the sprayer and the application rate .
Ensure the area to be sprayed is not greater than the area that can be covered by aggregate in the loaded trucks .
Start and finish each spray run on a protective strip of paper placed on the pavement .
The paper to be wide enough to ensure the sprayed material is being discharged correctly over the full width of spray .
Place sufficient protective paper to protect road fixtures .
Place paper on the pavement and masking around areas to be sprayed or wherever the sprayer is stationary on the road pavement .
Seal joins are only allowed where line marking is to be placed .
No joins are allowed in wheel paths .
Excess overspray and spills must be removed before sealing works proceed .
7.14.5 Installation of Temporary Pavement Markers Temporary Pavement Markers to conform to AS 1906.3 .
Spacings of temporary pavement markers to be in accordance with AS 1742 or as directed by the Superintendent .
Sprayer Run 7.14.6 Attain uniform spraying speed before spraying commences .
Avoid an excess or deficiency of material due to faulty overlap at longitudinal joints when spraying a road in half-widths .
Overlap to be 300 mm with an intermediate nozzle .
Do not use end nozzles on an overlap .
Make allowances for “ Fog Spraying ” when joining to existing seals .
Cease spraying before the level of material in the tank falls to a level which reduces the full discharge of the pump .
Remove and dispose of all paper as per the EMP .
Clean off any sprayed material from road fixtures .
Hand Spraying 7.14.7 Plan work to minimise the requirement for the use of a hand sprayer .
Any strips of pavement not adequately covered with sprayed material to be sprayed later with the hand attachment .
APPLICATION OF AGGREGATE – 7.15 HOLD POINT Supply current test results of materials to be used .
Load aggregate into tip trucks using an approved aggregate loader which removes dust , dirt and oversize stone while applying precoat .
Hold Point - Obtain approval from the Superintendent for use of the proposed aggregate loader before commencing aggregate loading operations .
Apply aggregate to sprayed binder within : − 10 minutes where the pavement temperature is 20ºC or greater .
− 5 minutes where the pavement temperature is between 15 and 20ºC .
Polymer Modified Binders : Apply aggregate within 5 minutes irrespective of pavement temperature .
Apply aggregate to emulsion coat before the emulsion breaks .
Spread the aggregate evenly and uniformly over the sprayed surface at a rate of 900/ALD m2/m3 .
Seek approval for variations to this rate .
Use a mechanical spreader .
Rerun or hand cover bare or insufficiently covered places after the first spreading .
Aggregate spread in excess of the application rate designated in the procedure will be removed and stockpiled at full cost to the Contractor .
Aggregate Spread Rates 7.15.1 Spread the aggregate evenly and uniformly over the sprayed surface at a rate complying with Error !
Reference source not found .. Use a mechanical automated spreader , manual spreader boxes are not to be used .
Rerun or hand cover bare or insufficiently covered areas after the first spreading .
Remove all excess aggregate .
SPRAY SEALING MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 64 Table 7.6 – Aggregate Spread Rates STRAIGHT RUN BINDER COATS Aggregate Size Traffic Volume Application Rate m2/m3 10 mm and greater > 200 vehicles/day 900/ALD 10 mm and greater < 200 vehicles/day 850/ALD 7 mm and less 900/ALD POLYMER MODIFIED BINDER COATS Aggregate Size Traffic Volume Application Rate m2/m3 10 mm and greater < 300 vehicles/day 750/ALD 10 mm and greater > 300 vehicles/day 800/ALD 7 mm and less 160 – 200 TWO COAT SEALS First coat Aggregate Size Traffic Volume Application Rate m2/m3 10 mm and greater > 200 vehicles/day 950/ALD 10 mm and greater < 200 vehicles/day 900/ALD Second Coat Aggregate Size Number of Thicknesses Application Rate m2/m3 10 1 1050 – 1100 / ALD 7 ( ALD known ) 1 1100 – 1150 / ALD 5 or 7 ( no ALD ) 1 250 - 300 5 or 7 ( no ALD ) 2 175 - 225 Rolling Rate 7.15.2 Roll the treated surface with self-propelled rubber tyred rollers with a minimum tyre pressure of 600 kPa and a minimum wheel load of 1 tonne .
Roller speed on the first pass to be between 5 and 10 km/h , with subsequent passes between 15 and 25 km/h .
Conform to the following : − Entire area to receive one roller pass immediately after covering .
− 75 % of rolling within 1 hour of covering .
− 100 % of rolling within 2 hours of covering .
Minimum Rolling Rate : 1 roller hour per 2,000 litres of binder .
Ensure a uniform distribution of aggregate .
Drag broom to distribute surplus aggregate but do not dislodge embedded aggregate .
Drag broom before 50 % of rolling is complete .
Drag brooms are no to be rotary brooms .
For two coat treatments , double the specified rolling rate if the second coat is to be applied immediately or the surface is not to be trafficked .
Roll in daylight hours only .
Sweep all loose aggregate from the carriageway at completion of rolling .
Ensure aggregate on the final surface is uniformly distributed and firmly held by the binder .
Adjust drag broom to distribute surplus aggregate , but not to dislodge embedded aggregate .
Ensure aggregate on the final surface is uniformly distributed , and firmly held by binder .
Re-roll the surface after sweeping to ensure uniform bedding of aggregate in binder .
Rolling Rate Airstrips 7.15.3 Roll the treated surface with at least one self- propelled rubber tyred roller with a minimum weight of 20 tonnes .
Roll the treated surface with self-propelled rubber tyred rollers with a minimum tyre pressure of 600kPa and a minimum wheel load of 1 tonne .
Rubber Tyred Minimum Rolling Rate : One roller hour per 800 litres of binder .
Steel Drum Roller Minimum Rolling Rate : One pass on the second coat .
Ensure a uniform distribution of aggregate .
Drag broom to distribute surplus aggregate but fo not dislodge embedded aggregate .
Drag broom before 50 % of rolling is complete .
Drag brooms are not to be rotary brooms .
Ensure aggregate on the final surface is uniformly distributed and firmly held by the binder .
Roll in daylight hours only .
Using a suction type broom to sweep all loose aggregate from the carriageway at completion of rolling , remove from site .
Re-roll the surface after sweeping to ensure uniform bedding of aggregate in binder .
TRAFFIC ON RESEALS 7.16 Cross reference : PROVISION FOR TRAFFIC , Workzone Traffic Management , Traffic Escort Vehicle- Reseal Works .
Co-ordinate work to minimise traffic delays .
Prohibit traffic : SPRAY SEALING MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 65 − until at least 3 passes of a roller has taken place or until sufficient rolling has taken place to prevent damage to the applied seal , whichever is greater ; and − from adjacent strip of roadway during spraying .
Sweep all loose aggregate from the carriageway at completion of rolling .
WASTE MATERIAL 7.17 Refer to the Northern Territory Government Standard Specification for Environmental Management and to the RFT .
In urban areas , remove all excess aggregate by suction broom .
Ensure no aggregates are distributed onto the verge .
Remove from the site and legally dispose of all waste material .
Clean and remove all aggregate from the shoulders and verges in urban areas .
Urban areas aggregate removal / sweeping regime : Initial sweep after rolling has concluded Second sweep after 24 hours Third sweep after 48 hours .
Sweep all aggregate from the extremities of the shoulders in rural areas .
REPORTING 7.18 7.18.1 Spraysheets Supply to the Superintendent at the end of each days production paper or electronic copies of spraysheets that record the following information for all spray runs conducted .
− Contractors Name − Project Details − Contract Number − Specification schedule number − Road Name − Product Type Sprayed − Precoat type used , Precoat litres / m3 − Aggregate supplier , Aggregate Type , Aggregate size − Run number , Start Time of spray run − Pavement Temperature , Ambient Temperature − Start Chainage of spray run – actual km of road − End chainage of spray run – actual km of road − Total Length , Width of spray run − Total area of spray run − Temperature of product at spraying − Start Dip , End Dip − Total sprayed hot , Correction factor , Total sprayed cold − Application rate cold − Ordered application rate − Percent of application rate ordered − Number of rollers used − Bitumen sample number − Signature of contractor representative − Signature section for client representative CONFORMANCE 7.19 Tolerances 7.19.1 Final surfaces shall conform to the following : Aggregates are to conform to Table 7.6 - Aggregate Properties .
Refer to Clause 7.22 for Tables Skid resistance determined by NTTM 304.1 .
Final surfaces with non-conforming skid resistance will be rejected .
Rectify non-conforming work by methods approved by the Superintendent .
Rectification work is at the Contractor ’ s expense , including the cost of testing .
Remove from the site binder which has been overheated or has deteriorated or become contaminated prior to its application to the road .
Spray rates applied at less than 95 % or more than 105 % of the rate indicated in the procedure will be rectified by resurfacing at the Contractor ’ s expense inclusive of all materials .
ADJUSTMENT TO VOLUMES FOR 7.20 SPRAY RATES This includes the prime coat , enrichment coat , emulsion coat , primerseal and seal coats .
Refer to Table 7.10 - Bitumen Equivalent Volumes and MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT CLAUSES for schedules of adjustments .
OTHER REQUIREMENTS 7.21 ( If applicable ) Refer to PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS section of Request for Tender .
SPRAY SEALING MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 66 TABLES 7.22 Table 7.5 - Aggregate Grading and Average Least Dimension Sieve Size ( mm ) % Passing ( Dry Mass ) Nominal Size of Aggregate 20 mm 16 mm 14 mm 10 mm 7 mm 5 mm 26.5 100 19.0 85 - 100 100 16.0 - 80 - 100 100 13.2 0 - 15 0 – 20 85 - 100 100 9.5 0 - 5 0 – 2 0 - 15 85 - 100 100 6.7 0 - 2 0 - 5 0 - 15 85 - 100 100 4.75 0 - 2 0 - 5 0 - 15 85 - 100 2.36 0 - 2 0 - 5 0 - 15 1.18 0 - 2 0 - 5 Min .
ALD * 12.0mm 9.5mm 8.0mm 5.5mm 3.5mm 2.5mm * Refer to Test Methods AS 1141.20.1 , AS 1141.20.2 .
- Direct Measurement .
Table 7.6 - Aggregate Properties Aggregate Property Traffic Count ( Annual Average Daily Traffic ( AADT ) : Two Lanes ) Less than 300 VPD * 300 to 6,000 VPD More Than 6,000 VPD AS 1141.14 Misshapen Particles : Calliper Ratio 2:1 25 % max 15 % max 12 % max AS 1141.15 Flakiness Index 35 max 30 max 25 max AS 1141.23 Los Angeles Abrasion ( LAA ) : Fine Grained Aggregate 30 % max 25 % max 20 % max Coarse Grained Aggregate 40 % max 35 % max 30 % max AS 1141.24 Sulphate Soundness 15 % max 12 % max 10 % max AS 1141.40 , AS 1141.41 Polished Aggregate Friction Value 40 min 40 min 45 min * VPD ( Vehicle per day ) .
AS 1141.18 : Crushed particles in coarse aggregate derived from gravel .
Ensure 80 % minimum by mass is classified as crushed particles .
AS 1141.25.1 Degradation factor – Source rock ( Washington Degradation Test ) .
Igneous rocks shall have a minimum value of 50 .
AS 1141.26 Secondary minerals content in igneous rocks shall not exceed 25 % .
AS 1141.29 Accelerated soundness index by reflux .
Igneous rocks shall have a minimum value of 94 .
AS 1141.50 Resistance to stripping of cover aggregates from binders .
The maximum stripping value of precoated aggregate ( precoat shall contain 1 % adhesion agent . )
shall be 10 % .
SPRAY SEALING MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 67 Table 7.7 - Cut Back Bitumen Properties Class AS 2157 Viscosity ( Dynamic ) At 60ºC Pa.sec Approximate Parts Bitumen To Cutter Spraying Temperature deg .
C Light AMC 00 0.008 - 0.016 100 - 100 Ambient AMC 0 0.025 - 0.05 100 - 80 35 - 55 Medium AMC 2 0.22 - 0.44 100 - 40 75 - 100 AMC 3 0.55 - 1.10 100 - 30 95 - 115 AMC 4 2.0 - 4.0 100 - 20 110 - 135 Heavy AMC 5 5.5 - 11.0 100 - 12 120 - 150 AMC 6 13.0 - 26.0 100 - 7 135 - 160 AMC 7 43.0 - 86.0 100 - 3 150 - 175 Table 7.8 – Base Binder for Polymer Modified Bitumen Property Specification limit minimum Specification limit maximum Viscosity at 60oC , Pa.s 140 380 Viscosity at 135oC , Pa.s 0.25 0.65 Penetration at 25oC ( 100g , 5s ) , pu ( pu unit is 0.1mm ) 40 Flashpoint oC 250 N/A Matter Insoluble in toluene , percent mass N/A 1.0 Short Term effect of heat and air ( Rolling Thin film Oven Test ) Viscosity of residue at 60oC as a percentage of original N/A 300 Long term effect of Heat and air , days 7 Density at 15oC , t/m3 TBR SPRAY SEALING MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 68 Table 7.9 – Polymer Modified Binders for Sprayed Sealing Applications Test Method Binder Property PMB Class S10E S20E S25E S35E S45R S55R PEFORMANCE RELATED PROPERTIES AGPT/T121 Consistency at 60 ºC ( Pa.sec ) min .
400 2000 6000 350 1800 4000 AGPT/T121 Stiffness at 15 ºC ( kPa ) max .
140 130 95 160 180 140 AGPT/T131 Softening Point ( ºC ) min .
48 65 80 48 55 62 AGPT/T132 Compression Limit at 70 ºC , 2kg ( mm ) min .
NA NA NA NA 0.2 0.2 INDEX PROPERTIES AGPT/T121 Elastic Recovery at 60 ºC , 100s ( % ) min .
NA NA 85 NA 25 35 AGPT/T121 Elastic Recovery at 15 ºC , 100s ( % ) min .
NA NA 65 NA 30 50 AGPT/T124 Toughness at 4 ºC , 100mm ( Nm ) min .
TBR TBR TBR TBR TBR TBR HANDLING PROPERTIES AGPT/T103 Loss on Heating ( % mass ) max .
0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 AGPT/T111 Viscosity at 165 ºC ( Pa.sec ) max .
0.55 0.55 0.8 0.55 4.5 4.5 AGPT/T112 Flash Point ( ºC ) min .
250 250 250 250 250 250 PRODUCTION CONTROL AGPT/T122 Torsional Recovery at 25 ºC , 30s ( % ) min .
22 50 52 16 25 30 AGPT/T141 Rubber Content by analysis ( % ) NA NA NA NA TBR TBR Note 1 .
Class of PMB : S=Sealing , E=Elastomeric Polymer , R=Granulated Crumbed Rubber Note 2 .
NA means not applicable for that PMB class , TBR = To be reported Note 3 .
AG : PT Test Methods are available from Austroads Guide to Pavement Technology Part 4H : Test Methods Note 4 .
Manufacturers to target consistency of 450 Pa.sec at 60 ºC for S10E , within the range 400 to 600 Pa.sec .
Note 5 .
Manufacturers to target consistency of 3200 Pa.sec at 60 ºC for S20E , within the range 2000 to 5000 Pa.sec .
SPRAY SEALING MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 69 Table 7.10 - Bitumen Equivalent Volumes Equivalent Volumes of Bituminous Material Measured at Higher Temperature Converted to 15ºC ( 15ºC Converted Higher Temperature ) .
Interpolate to determine equivalent volumes at temperatures other than those shown .
TEMP .
( ºC ) FACTOR 15 1.0000 ( 1.0000 ) 40 0.9844 ( 1.0158 ) 50 0.9782 ( 1.0223 ) 60 0.9720 ( 1.0288 ) 70 0.9659 ( 1.0353 ) 80 0.9597 ( 1.0420 ) 90 0.9537 ( 1.0486 ) 100 0.9476 ( 1.0553 ) 110 0.9416 ( 1.0620 ) TEMP .
( ºC ) FACTOR 120 0.9356 ( 1.0688 ) 130 0.9296 ( 1.0757 ) 140 0.9237 ( 1.0826 ) 150 0.9178 ( 1.0896 ) 160 0.9119 ( 1.0966 ) 170 0.9060 ( 1.1038 ) 180 0.9002 ( 1.1109 ) 190 0.8944 ( 1.1181 ) 200 0.8886 ( 1.1253 ) 210 0.8829 ( 1.1326 ) BITUMINOUS SURFACE MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 70 BITUMINOUS SURFACE MAINTENANCE 8 .
Refer to SPRAY SEALING for bitumen requirements .
8.1 OUTLINE DESCRIPTION This section specifies the repairs and minor rehabilitation to existing bituminous surfaces and pavements with asphalt , and includes the repair of potholes , edge defects , surface deformations and cracks .
This section specifies the requirement for sealing works of less than 300m2 in area .
8.2 STANDARDS Comply with the Acts , Regulations , Guidelines and Codes applicable to the works .
Comply with the requirements of Authorities with jurisdiction over the works .
Conform to the Standards and Publications quoted throughout this document unless specified otherwise .
Refer to REFERENCED DOCUMENTS .
AS 2891 Methods for sampling and testing asphalt .
Refer to Standards in SPRAY SEALING .
Specification Reference Refer to the Northern Territory Government Standard Specification for Environmental Management and to the RFT .
Traffic Escort Refer to PROVISION FOR TRAFFIC , WorkZone Traffic management , Traffic Escort Vehicle – Reseal works .
8.3 DEFINITIONS Reference should be made to AUSTROADS – AP-C87-15 Austroads Glossary of Terms to give definitions on all aspects of Bituminous Surfacing works where required .
Adhesion agent A substance used for the purpose of promoting the adhesion between binder and aggregate .
ASTM American Society for Testing and Materials .
Coarse aggregate Where the average grain size of the constituent minerals is greater than 5 mm .
The average grain size is determined optically under a petrographic microscope or by calibrated hand lens .
Cold Mix Asphalt A premix , blended from bitumen , aggregate , sand , and mineral filler , and having a flux oil in the binder .
It is workable at ambient temperatures .
Cutter A light petroleum distillate ( kerosene ) added to bitumen to temporarily reduce its viscosity .
the Department , or DIPL Department of Infrastructure , Planning and Logistics .
Fine aggregate Where the average grain size of the constituent minerals is less than 5 mm .
The average grain size is determined optically under a petrographic microscope or by calibrated hand lens .
Flux oil A petroleum distillate added to bitumen produce a long term reduction in its viscosity .
Hot mix asphalt A hot mixed homogeneous blend of bitumen , aggregates , sand , mineral fillers produced at an approved asphalt plant .
It is delivered , placed and compacted hot .
Ensure that the asphalt has a current mix design to the requirements of AGPT Part 4B Asphalt .
Job mix The mix utilised for asphalt surfacing which is determined from laboratory testing of proposed materials and complies with the specified properties .
NATA National Association of Testing Authorities .
NTCP Northern Territory Code of Practice .
NTMTM Northern Territory Materials Testing Manual .
NTTM Northern Territory Test Methods .
Pavement Profiling The use of a pavement profiler to remove worn , oxidised , aged or out of shape pavements , and for correcting poor surface conditions to make the pavement suitable for re-sheeting or resealing .
PMB Polymer Modified Binder .
Precoating material A material used for precoating aggregate to promote adhesion of bitumen .
Do not use diesel .
Prime An application of a Primer to a prepared base without cover aggregate to provide penetration of the surface temporary waterproofing and to obtain a bond between the pavement and the subsequent seal or asphalt .
It is a preliminary treatment to a more permanent bituminous surface .
Do not use diesel products .
Primerseal An application of primer binder with a fine cover aggregate to a prepared base to provide penetration of the surface and retain a light cover aggregate .
Do not use diesel products .
BITUMINOUS SURFACE MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 71 Reseal A seal applied to an existing sealed , asphalt or concrete surface .
Regulation patching Surface repairs and shape correction without dig- out and/or squaring up , will usually not be straight sided due to irregularities in the pavement and feathering repair techniques .
Reconstruction patching Repairs with profiling , dig-out and/or squaring up , may be confined to the surface course or extend through all courses .
Seal A sprayed application of bituminous binder into which aggregate is incorporated .
May include more than one application of binder and aggregate , and may include geotextile fabric .
Wearing surface The section of pavement upon which the traffic travels .
This includes the layer ( s ) of asphalt or spray seal in a flexible pavement above the base .
8.4 IDENTIFICATION AND TYPES OF FAILURES The Superintendent will identify the defect and then order the appropriate method of repair by issue of a Contractor Service Request ( CSR ) .
Defect types are grouped into one of the following modes of pavement distress ; Deformations : Includes : corrugations , depressions , rutting , and shoving .
Cracks Cracks promote water entry and can be a primary cause of other defects including deformations and potholes .
Edge breaks Occur along the interface of a sealed pavement and unsealed shoulder .
Potholes Steep sided or bowl shaped cavities or delaminations extending into layers below the wearing course , usually due to failures associated with an aged , cracked or debonded bituminous surface .
Patch An area of pavement surface where the original has been replaced or covered .
Surface texture deficiencies Includes polishing , ravelling , bleeding .
Generally rectified by reseal not specified in this section .
8.5 REPAIR OPERATIONS Undertake repair operations to rectify identified distress modes .
Pothole Patching 8.5.1 Applies to potholes , delaminations , and edge break defects .
Hole must be meticulously cleaned before repair , all loose and unbounded material must be removed .
Trim edges to sound material , creating angle sides to the bottom .
Tack coat the sides , bottom and lip of pothole for a minimum width of 20 mm with bitumen emulsion .
Remove excess tack coat .
Place patching material in layers no greater than 3 times the nominal size , and thoroughly compact .
Finish the pothole slightly higher than adjacent pavement surface , between 3 mm and 5 mm .
Level the patch by hand raking , motor grader or pull type blade .
Remove all loose aggregate around the edges of the patch so patch can be raked and rolled to a smooth junction with the old surface .
Compact asphalt material with hand tamper for small holes and where possible , compact by using a rammer or vibrating plate .
Compact large patches with a vibrating smooth drum roller .
Hot mix can be topped with a light application of sand to prevent pick up .
Remove all waste materials from the road reserves and dispose in an approved manner .
Temporary patching – Hold Point 8.5.2 Hold point - Temporary patching with aggregate and emulsion requires approval of the Superintendent .
For such work , keep traffic off the patch until patch is stable .
Regulation Patching 8.5.3 Patch defect areas where only the surface needs repair .
Applies to deformations .
The Superintendent will specify the suitable type of hot mix asphalt for the patch material in the CSR .
Remove all debris and any loose materials on the pavement .
Repair any potholes or cracks as required , refer other clauses .
Apply a tack coat to the area under repair at the application rate to suit surface conditions .
Supply , place , spread and compact the asphalt in layers until finished surface is flush with the existing surface .
Compact in layers approximately 3 times the size of the mix aggregate and bring up to surface in layers level with the intended surface profile .
Compact smaller holes with vibrating plate compactor and/or mechanical tampers .
Compact larger patches with a small vibrating roller .
BITUMINOUS SURFACE MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 72 Depending on the size of the patch , level by hand raking , a pull type drag , or paver .
Remove all aggregate larger than the feather edge so that the edges of the patch can be raked and rolled to a smooth junction with the old surface .
Brush off and remove all loose material from area .
Reconstruction Patching 8.5.4 Patch defect areas requiring squaring up and or the removal of distressed pavement .
The Superintendent will specify the suitable type and size hot mix asphalt for patch material in the CSR .
Excavate the area to the required depth with reclaimer/profiler plant , and clean excavation of all loose aggregate , dust and water .
Cut back the edges of the hole to sound material , cut the side vertically in order to provide shoulders against the movement of the patch , and square the bottom .
Square up the surface shape of the patch to provide a neat appearance .
Refer to Pothole patching clause .
Apply a tack coat to the sides and bottom of the hole .
Avoid applying too much tack coat so as not to induce a condition known as a fatty patch .
Supply , place , spread and compact the asphalt in layers in the hole until finished surface is flush with existing surface .
Compact in layers approximately 3 times the size of the mix aggregate and bring up to surface in layers level with the intended surface profile .
Depending on the size of the patch , level by hand raking , a pull type drag , or paver .
Remove all aggregate larger than the feather edge so that the edges of the patch can be raked and rolled to a smooth junction with the old surface .
Compact larger patches with a small vibrating roller .
Depending on the size of the patch , level by hand raking , a pull type drag , or paver .
Remove all waste materials from the road reserve .
Waste stock piles are not permitted for any duration .
Reconstruction Patching – 8.5.5 Alternative Method Obtain the prior approval of the Superintendent to use this method of reconstruction patching where asphalt is not locally available .
Excavate the distressed pavement to sound material or to a depth of 300 mm .
Square up the surface shape of the patch to provide a neat appearance .
Clean the excavation of all loose material , dust and water .
Cut back the edges of the hole to sound material .
Cut the sides vertically in order to provide shoulders against movement of the patch , and square the bottom .
If sound material is not reached at 300 mm depth , stabilise the subgrade 150 mm deep with 3 % cement for granular materials or 3 % lime for clay materials .
( Allow 10 kg/ m2 for 150 mm depth ) .
Supply , place , spread , mix and compact base course gravel in 100 mm maximum layers until flush with the existing surface .
Broom the surface of the patch and remove waste material from the site .
Apply spray seal or emulsion to the patch and overlap the existing surfacing by 100 mm .
Apply 10 mm size aggregate to the surface .
Rectify any failure of the surfacing at no additional cost .
Crack Sealing 8.5.6 For cracks wide enough to be treated , first clean the crack with air pressure , and then fill with a binder having viscosity low enough to enable it to be poured or worked into cracks .
Do not undertake crack sealing when wet .
Take care to ensure that the cutback bitumen , bitumen emulsion , rubberised bitumen or latex modified bitumen used does not bridge across the crack at the surface .
Assist the binder to penetrate cracks by using a squeegee .
Lightly sand the surface to prevent traffic picking up surplus binder if necessary .
For wide cracks , first clean the crack and fill with fine asphalt or bituminous slurry .
Large areas with fine cracks and minimal pavement distortion will be spray sealed , slurry sealed or resurfaced with plant mix , in accordance with other sections of the specification .
8.6 MATERIALS Aggregates 8.6.1 The combined particle size distribution to be in accordance with Table 8.7 – Mix Proportions Refer to Clause 8.19 for Tables COARSE AGGREGATES Coarse aggregates must consist of crushed stone , with a minimum of 3 crushed faces , which is clean , hard , of high strength , angular , which has adequate skid resistance , which is durable and free from laminated particles , clay and other aggregations of fine material , soil , organic matter and any other deleterious material .
Coarse aggregate must not fracture under compaction equipment or deteriorate rapidly Conform to the following : BITUMINOUS SURFACE MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 73 Proportion of misshapen particles : 15 % maximum at 2:1 calliper ratio .
Los Angeles Abrasion ( LAA ) ; − Fine grained aggregate : 30 % maximum loss .
− Coarse grained aggregate : 35 % maximum loss .
− Sulphate Soundness : 12 % maximum loss .
− Polished Aggregate Friction Value : 45 minimum .
FINE AGGREGATES Fine aggregates must consist of clean , hard , sharp , washed , durable natural sand and/or material manufactured from crushed stone of uniform quality free from clay and other aggregations of fine material , soil , organic matter and any other deleterious material .
Where crushed fine materials are from sources other than the source of the coarse material used in the asphalt mix , the parent rock must meet all the requirements of Coarse Aggregates .
Mineral Filler 8.6.2 Filler must consist of mineral material consisting of natural or crushed mineral materials , hydrated lime or cement with a particle size less than 0.075 mm .
Filler must be dry , free from lumps , clay , organic material or any other deleterious material , and complies in all respects with the requirements of AS 2150 .
Bituminous Binder 8.6.3 Standard Classes of bitumen to conform to the requirements of AS 2008 .
Durability Value in accordance with AS/NZS 2341.13 – Long-term exposure ( of bitumen ) to heat and air shall be a minimum of 7 days with no maximum value .
Bitumen Emulsion 8.6.4 A rapid setting bitumen emulsion made with bitumen conforming to AS 1160 .
Cut Back Bitumen/Prime 8.6.5 Conform to the requirements of AS 2157 and Table 7.7 - Cut Back Bitumen Properties .
Designation is by AMC class .
Refer to Clause 7.22 for Table Cutter 8.6.6 Cutter to be Kerosene .
Do not use diesel products Precoat and Adhesion Agents 8.6.7 Precoat all aggregates to conform to the following : − Adhesion agent ( by volume ) : minimum 1 % precoat .
− Bitumen residue ( by mass ) : minimum 50 % precoat .
− Kerosene ( by mass ) : 50 % − Viscosity ( Dynamic ) at 60ºC : 0.003 to 0.020 Pa. 8.7 SAMPLING OF BINDER Supply of Sampling Containers 8.7.1 Supply all sampling containers as required for sampling purposes .
- Sample containers are to be leak proof and having a capacity of not less than two litres .
- Sample containers must be clean , rust free and capable of receiving a product at high temperatures .
Definition of sampling 8.7.2 - Refer to NTMTM - A sample is three containers of product collected at the same time from the same supply source .
- One sample container is for the Contractor ’ s analysis .
- Two samples containers are for the Department to analyse .
Frequency of samples 8.7.3 Refer to CONFORMANCE TESTING and to Conformance clauses in this section .
Additive 8.7.4 An additive may be proposed provided that full details of the type of additive are provided and the mix design standards of the Proportioning Of Mixes clauses in this section are attained .
8.8 PROPORTIONING OF MIXES FOR HOT MIX ASPHALT Mix Type for Hot Mix Asphalt 8.8.1 The Superintendent will order Rural and/or Urban Mix Type Number with issue of CSR .
Manufacture of Hot Mix Asphalt 8.8.2 Mix in a plant capable of producing asphalt that complies with the approved design mix .
Bitumen temperature : 135ºC to 160ºC prior to mixing .
Heat aggregates to such a temperature that when filler and binder are added , the temperature of the mixed asphalt is between 135ºC and 170ºC .
Mix Assessment and Approval of Hot 8.8.3 Mix Asphalt Types Provide current mix design to Level 1.and Level 3 as per AGPT Part 4 B Asphalt .
Conform to the minimum mix requirements as shown in Table 8.1 - Properties of Hot Mix Asphalt .
BITUMINOUS SURFACE MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 74 Table 8.1 - Properties of Hot Mix Asphalt Marshall Characteristics Rural Urban Compactive effort ( number of blows each end of specimen ) : 50 75 Stability of mix ( kN ) : 5 min .
10 min .
Flow ( mm ) : 2 – 5 2 – 5 Air voids ( % ) : 3 – 7 3 – 7 Voids in mineral aggregate ( % ) : 14 min .
14 min .
Wheel tracking 10000 passes 5 + or - 1 5 + or - 1 Conform to Table 8.7 – Mix Proportions , Table 8.8 – Aggregate and Mineral Filler Mix Proportions and Table 8.9 – Total Mix Proportions of Cold Mix Asphalt .
Refer to Clause 8.19 for Tables 8.9 PROPORTIONING OF MIXES FOR COLD MIX ASPHALT Mix Type for Cold Mix Asphalt 8.9.1 The Superintendent will order the Mix Type Number with issue of a CSR .
Manufacture of Cold Mix Asphalt 8.9.2 Dry mix aggregate and mineral filter to provide a homogenous blend .
Add bituminous binder until the specified percentage is reached .
Carry out further mixing until a minimum of 90 % of the coarse aggregate particles are coated .
Add additional bitumen so that a satisfactory mix can be achieved , if so directed by the Superintendent .
Refer to Table 8.8 – Aggregate and Mineral Filler Mix Proportions and Table 8.9 – Total Mix Proportions of Cold Mix Asphalt .
Refer to Clause 8.19 for Tables Table 8.2 - Specification Limits for the Binder Mix of Cold Mix Asphalt Bitumen 100 parts Flux Between 5 and 15 parts , depending on location and climatic conditions .
Will be specified on the CSR .
Cutter 10 parts SURFACE PREPARATION 8.10 8.10.1 Resurfacing of Existing Bituminous and/or Concrete Surfaces All vegetation and loose and extraneous matter must be removed prior to the application of bituminous resurfacing materials .
Depressions greater than 25 mm must be filled with an asphalt correction course layer .
Minimum asphalt layer thicknesses must be observed during this procedure .
8.10.2 Tack Coat Apply a fine spray of bitumen emulsion lightly and evenly over the whole of the area to be covered with asphalt .
The pavement must be dry and dust free before any application of tack coat .
Apply tack coat by spray bar fitted to mechanical sprayer .
Hand spray only in areas where it is impractical to use the mechanical sprayer .
Protective splash boards or spray skirts must be used to eliminate over spray beyond the surface where tack coat is being applied .
Application rate of Residual Binder must be between 0.1 – 0.2 litres/square metre unless otherwise directed by the Superintendent .
Allow the tack coat to ‘ break ' before laying the asphalt .
Clean and tack coat existing surfaces against which new work is to be laid .
Re-apply Tack coat where damaged by construction traffic or weather .
TRANSPORT AND SUPPLY 8.11 Insulate the bodies of trucks , block out corners with timber , and cover the body with a fitted tarpaulin when transporting distance is over 20 km or when temperatures are below 20ºC .
SPREADING AND LAYING 8.12 Lay the final surface layer at a uniform thickness , and as one continuous operation .
Construct a transverse joint whenever the operation ceases .
Remove from site , prior to initial rolling , asphalt which has cooled below the required initial rolling temperature .
Hand spread in locations where mechanical spreading is not practical , and to correct localised depressions or irregularities .
Take the asphalt directly from the spreader hopper or dump asphalt onto metal sheets or existing hard clean surfaces .
Do not dump asphalt directly onto the area where it is to be spread .
Complete the work as one continuous operation .
Remove from site all excess or spilt asphalt .
BITUMINOUS SURFACE MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 75 8.12.1 Minimum Temperatures of Hot Mix Asphalt Conform to the minimum laying and initial rolling temperatures .
Cease laying asphalt during heavy or continuous rain , or in wet conditions where the material will not adhere or key to the surface .
Laying temperature : 135ºC .
Initial rolling temperature : 105ºC .
8.12.2 Joints Generally Minimise the number of longitudinal and transverse joints .
Offset joints in multiple layer work by at least 100 mm so that joints in the surface course do not overlay joints in the previous course .
Overlap the finished asphalt by 25 to 75 mm when spreading .
Push the overlap asphalt back immediately to form a ridge along the joint .
Roll the ridge to form a smooth joint .
Remove excess asphalt prior to final rolling .
Prevent the accumulation of coarse particles along the joint by raking .
8.12.3 Transverse Joints Form by cutting the end of the spread material to a vertical face and remove loose material .
Check the surface adjacent to the joint with a straight edge and correct any surface defects immediately .
Treat the face of the joint with bitumen emulsion tack coat prior to spreading adjacent section .
Provide ramps of compacted asphalt ( maximum grade 5 % relative to pavement grade ) when joints are left overnight on trafficked pavements .
8.12.4 Longitudinal Joints Keep joints straight or follow the line of curvature .
Minimise the unsupported length left overnight .
Rectify broken sections of unsupported edge by cutting a vertical face before resuming laying .
Treat the face of the joint with bitumen emulsion tack coat prior to spreading adjacent section .
Longitudinal joints shall not be left overnight on a pavement in use by traffic .
Transverse Match of Overlay to Existing Pavement : − Saw cut existing asphalt pavement 20 mm depth along the match line of joint .
− Remove taper wedge of existing asphalt pavement along the overlay side of match joint .
− Feather the asphalt overlay down to the existing pavement to achieve a maximum slope of 1 in 40 and for the full width of the pavement .
− Ensure depth of overlay above existing pavement in taper wedge area is not less than 20 mm .
COMPACTION 8.13 8.13.1 General For large patches , compact by using at least two rollers , one pneumatic tyred and one tandem steel wheeled .
Provide additional steel wheeled roller ( s ) for each additional 30 tonne ( or part thereof ) spread in excess of 30 tonne per hour .
Stand compaction plant clear of new asphalt surface .
Do not use plant or vehicles which have fuel or oil leaks .
Defer rolling if excessive displacement of the asphalt occurs but only until the asphalt has cooled sufficiently to permit rolling to continue .
Do not use chemicals or detergents in rollers ; use water only .
Sanding of the asphalt area is required for rolling purposes .
Remove sand before opening to traffic .
8.13.2 Initial Rolling Roll immediately behind the spreader using a steel wheeled roller having a minimum weight of 8 tonnes and a maximum unit load on the rear drum equivalent to 55 kN/m width of drum .
Provide steel wheeled rollers with adjustable scrapers and keep the drums moist with water .
Prevent the mix from sticking to the drums .
Avoid ponding of water on the pavement surface .
8.13.3 Intermediate Rolling Roll with a self-propelled pneumatic tyred roller of at least 10 tonnes mass , a minimum tyre pressure of 550 kPa and a minimum total load of 1 tonne on each tyre .
Increase the load to 2 tonnes per tyre where practicable .
Ensure tyre pressures are uniform and maintained within 5 % of the specified figure .
Rolling surfaces to be smooth .
8.13.4 Final Rolling Roll with a steel wheeled roller as used for initial rolling .
8.13.5 Joint Compaction Compact all joints and edges .
Roll all joints .
Overlap adjoining roller runs by a minimum of 1m .
All joints and free edges must be constructed and compacted to obtain acceptable surface texture .
Rolling of unsupported edges must not result in shape loss and/or excessive lateral displacement .
BITUMINOUS SURFACE MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 76 8.13.6 Rolling Speed Steel wheeled roller : 1.5 m/sec .
maximum , steady and uniform .
Pneumatic tyred roller : 0.75 m/sec .
maximum for the first pass .
4.5 m/sec .
maximum for subsequent passes .
Avoid abrupt stops and starts .
Vibrating Plant 8.13.7 Table 8.3 - Vibrating Plant Specifications Property Requirement Mass : 6 tonnes minimum .
Drum width : 1.5 m minimum .
Vibrating frequency : 2,000 – 3,000 cycles per minute .
Amplitude range : 0.4 – 8.0 mm .
Initial passes ( not less than two ) to be non- vibrating .
Provide steel wheeled rollers with adjustable scrapers and keep drums moist with water .
Disengage vibrator when accelerating , decelerating or standing .
8.13.8 Deep Lift Rolling Pattern Applies to asphalt placed in layers exceeding 75 mm compacted thickness .
Asphalt to be placed and compacted in layers not exceeding 150 mm maximum .
Commence rolling not less than 300 mm clear of the edge of asphalt that is laterally unsupported .
Advance outwards towards the edge in 100 mm increments .
Delay rolling within 200 mm of an unsupported edge to allow mix cooling and minimise distortion .
Complete rolling in such time that specified densities are obtained .
8.13.9 Hand Tampers Compact by vibratory plates or hand tampers in location inaccessible to rollers .
Side tamp before rolling the edge of all asphalt which is not laterally supported .
Finish hand tamped surfaces smoothly , conforming to machine finished areas .
CONFORMANCE 8.14 8.14.1 Conformance Testing The Contractor will be responsible for process control testing .
The Superintendent will carry out all conformance testings through Panel Period Contracts .
The Contractor will be responsible for ordering the conformance tests .
8.14.2 Tolerances Conform to the following : Surface to be smooth , dense and true to shape .
− Thickness : Not less than specified .
− Surface levels : 0 to + 10 mm maximum deviation from design level .
− Straight edge deviation : 5 mm maximum in 3 m. − Surface roughness : IRI 2.4 maximum .
− Skid resistance : Not less than specified in NTTM 304.1 .
− Bitumen content : Maximum variation 0.3 % by mass .
− Job mix : Within the following variation limits .
Table 8.4 - Job Mix Variation Limits AS Sieve ( mm ) % Passing ( By Mass ) 4.75 or larger + or – 7 2.36 + or – 5 1.18 to 0.30.150 + or – 4 0.15 + or – 3 0.075 + or – 2 8.14.3 Conformance Sampling and Testing Sample materials as directed by Superintendent 8.14.4 Asphalt Testing Frequencies For large patching works , conform to the testing frequencies in Error !
Reference source not found .. 8.14.5 Conformance of compaction ( Lot Testing ) Base the conformance of compaction on lots , determined from cores .
− Subdivide all items of work into lots .
− Give each lot a lot number .
− Number the lots using a logical system .
− Maintain a register of all lots and lot numbers .
− Include the location of the lot on the lot register .
BITUMINOUS SURFACE MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 77 Table 8.5 - Asphalt Testing Frequencies Test Method No .
Test Method Minimum Test Frequency AS/NZS 2891.3.1 AS/NZS 2891.3.2 AS/NZS 2891.3.3 Bitumen content 1 per 50 t - Mixing temperature Every mix - Laying temperature Every 30 minutes AS/NZS 2891.7.1 AS/NZS 2891.7.3 Density 1 per 50 t AS/NZS 2891.1.1 AS 2891.1.2 AS 2891.1.3 Thickness 1 per density AS/NZS 2891.3.1 AS/NZS 2891.3.2 AS/NZS 2891.3.3 Particle size distribution 1 per 50 t Viscosity 1 per 10,000 L AS/NZS 2891.5 Stability of mix 1 per 50 t AS/NZS 2891.5 Flow 1 per 50 t AS/NZS 2891.8 Air voids 1 per 50 t AS/NZS 2891.8 Voids in mineral aggregate 1 per 50 t Lots of work will be selected by the Contractor , based upon : − Lot will represent no more than one shift ’ s production .
− Lots will be continuous and have been brought to completion at the same time .
− Lot will be composed of homogeneous material with no distinct changes in attribute values .
Each lot will be subject to conformance testing .
Lots will be checked for level tolerance .
Quality of the lot will be judged as conformance or non-conformance of each lot including all tests conducted on the lot .
When lots fail to satisfy the conformance criteria , payment adjustments or rejection of the lot shall be in accordance with the Payment Adjustments clause in Measurement and Payment .
Should the lot under consideration be subdivided then class each subdivision as a lot and subject each subdivided lot to lot testing .
Treat non-conforming lots which are subdivided after testing as separate lots and retest each and every subdivided lot .
Core sample locations will be selected by the laboratory on a stratified random basis in accordance with NTCP 103.1 .
Supply copies of the completed stratified random selection with each compaction report .
There shall be 6 cores per lot .
Refer to CONFORMANCE TESTING , Conformance Testing Results , Conformance of Compaction for Asphalt .
Conform to the following limits of characteristic Value of Air Voids : Table 8.6 - Limits of Characteristic Value of Air Voids Light traffic Medium traffic Heavy traffic Conformance 3.0 – 9.0 3.0 – 9.0 3.0 – 8.0 The Conformance Of Compaction clause only applies to a specified asphalt thickness of 30 mm or greater .
Backfill all core holes with asphalt conforming to the specified properties for the subject mix , and compact to the required density .
8.14.6 Surface Roughness Surface roughness testing will be carried out by the Superintendent at the discretion of the Superintendent .
SPRAY SEALING – AREAS LESS 8.15 THAN 300M² Comply with the SPRAY SEALING section with the following exceptions : Binder Coat Requirements 8.15.1 PRIME AND PRIMER SEALS Cut-back bitumen to be mixed on site .
Heat bitumen to a temperature appropriate for achieving final spraying temperature making allowance for incorporation of the unheated cutter .
Add unheated cutter to heated bitumen and circulate until a homogeneous mixture is achieved .
Spray immediately circulation is complete .
Allow at least three days to elapse after priming before applying the binder coat .
Ensure primer soaks in and dries off before applying binder coat .
Provide Standard Class 320 bitumen , cut back as follows : Prime : AMC 00 Primer Seal : AMC 6 BITUMINOUS SURFACE MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 78 STRAIGHT RUN BINDER COATS Provide Standard Class 320 bitumen as follows : − Primerseal coats − Seal coat for geotextile seal or re-seal Heat to spraying temperature but do not exceed the maximum .
Avoid heating bitumen in quantities excess to requirements .
Prevent foaming .
POLYMER MODIFIED BINDER COATS Provide conforming bitumen blended with the required polymer as follows : Prepare the product in a manufacturing or blending plant that complies with the AGPT .
T190 − Initial seal coat : Class S10E − Reseal coat : Class S10E Provide test results from a NATA registered testing facility - when requested , of the properties of the binder modified with the nominated type and quantity of polymer .
Store , mix , heat and spray the polymer modified binder as recommended by the polymer manufacturer .
Both coats of two coat seals shall contain polymer .
Spraying – Hold Point 8.15.2 APPLICATION SPRAY RATES Ensure current test results are supplied to the Superintendent before spraying begins .
Spray rates to be at 15ºC adjusted in accordance with Clause 7.22 , Table 7.10 - Bitumen Equivalent Volumes .
For primers , primer seals and polymer modified binders , the rate of application refers to the whole of the mixture , including all modifiers , cutback materials , combining oils and adhesion agents .
For enrichments and emulsion seals , the rate of application refers to the residual bitumen .
Determine the application spray rates using appropriate Austroads design methods .
Hold Point – Do not commence spraying until the Superintendent is advised and gives approval to the proposed application spray rates .
Supply the following to the Superintendent to enable the proposed spray rates to be approved .
− Average Least Dimension ( ALD ) , − Flakiness index ( FI ) of the aggregate Ensure samples are taken from stockpiles of material that are to be used , generally from site stockpiles .
8.15.3 Preparation for Sprayer Run – Witness Point Record the volume and temperature of the sprayer contents while it is on level ground .
Supply Sprayer Tank dips before and after each sprayer run .
Witness Point - Allow visual inspection when requested .
Determine the length of sprayer run from the available quantity in the sprayer and the application rate .
Ensure the area to be sprayed is not greater than the area that can be covered by aggregate in the loaded trucks .
Start and finish each spray run on a protective strip of paper placed on the pavement .
The paper to be wide enough to ensure the sprayed material is being discharged correctly over the full width of spray .
Place sufficient protective paper to protect road fixtures .
Place paper on the pavement and masking around areas to be sprayed or wherever the sprayer is stationary on the road pavement .
Seal joins are only allowed where line marking is to be placed .
No joins are allowed in wheel paths .
Excess overspray and spills must be removed before sealing works proceed .
Sprayer Run 8.15.4 Attain uniform spraying speed before spraying commences .
Avoid an excess or deficiency of material due to faulty overlap at longitudinal joints when spraying a road in half-widths .
Overlap to be 300 mm with an intermediate nozzle .
Do not use end nozzles on an overlap .
Make allowances for “ Fog Spraying ” when joining to existing seals .
Cease spraying before the level of material in the tank falls to a level which reduces the full discharge of the pump .
Remove and dispose of all paper as per the EMP .
Clean off any sprayed material from road fixtures .
Hand Spraying 8.15.5 Plan work to minimise the requirement for the use of a hand sprayer .
Any strips of pavement not adequately covered with sprayed material to be sprayed later with the hand attachment .
BITUMINOUS SURFACE MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 79 8.15.6 Application Of Aggregate – Hold Point Supply current test results of materials to be used .
Load aggregate into tip trucks using an approved aggregate loader which removes dust , dirt and oversize stone while applying pre-coat .
Hold Point - Obtain approval from the Superintendent for use of the proposed aggregate loader before commencing aggregate loading operations .
Apply aggregate to sprayed binder within : - 10 minutes where the pavement temperature is 20ºC or greater .
- 5 minutes where the pavement temperature is between 15 and 20ºC .
Polymer Modified Binders : Apply aggregate within 5 minutes irrespective of pavement temperature .
Apply aggregate to emulsion coat before the emulsion breaks .
Spread the aggregate evenly and uniformly over the sprayed surface at a rate of 900/ALD m2/m3 .
Seek approval for variations to this rate .
Use a mechanical spreader .
Rerun or hand cover bare or insufficiently covered places after the first spreading .
Aggregate spread in excess of the application rate designated in the procedure will be removed and stockpiled at full cost to the Contractor .
Rolling Rate 8.15.7 Roll the treated surface with self-propelled rubber tyred rollers with a minimum tyre pressure of 600 kPa and a minimum wheel load of 1 tonne .
Roller speed on the first pass to be between 5 and 10km/h , with subsequent passes between 15 and 25 km/h .
Conform to the following : - Entire area to receive one roller pass immediately after covering .
- 75 % of rolling within 1 hour of covering .
- 100 % of rolling within 2 hours of covering .
Minimum Rolling Rate : 1 roller hour per 1,500 litres of binder .
For two coat treatments when the second coat is to be applied immediately , the total rolling on the first coat shall be double that specified .
Roll in daylight hours only .
Sweep the surface after rolling .
Ensure a uniform distribution of aggregate .
Adjust drag broom to distribute surplus aggregate , but not to dislodge embedded aggregate .
Ensure aggregate on the final surface is uniformly distributed , and firmly held by binder .
Re-roll the surface after sweeping to ensure uniform bedding of aggregate in binder .
TRAFFIC ON RESEALS 8.16 Co-ordinate work to minimise traffic delays .
Prohibit traffic : - until at least 3 passes of a roller has taken place or until sufficient rolling has taken place to prevent damage to the applied seal , whichever is greater ; and - from adjacent strip of roadway during spraying .
Sweep all loose aggregate from the carriageway at completion of rolling .
WASTE MATERIAL 8.17 Remove from the site and dispose of all waste material in legal waste disposal facility .
Specification Reference Refer to the Northern Territory Government Standard Specification for Environmental Management and to the RFT .
OTHER REQUIREMENTS 8.18 ( If applicable ) Refer to PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS section of Request for Tender .
BITUMINOUS SURFACE MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 80 TABLES 8.19 Table 8.7 – Mix Proportions Mix Type 1 2 3 4 Dense Graded % Passing ( Dry Mass ) AS Sieve ( mm ) 5 mm 10 mm 14 mm 20 mm 53.0 - - - - 37.5 - - - - 26.5 - - - 100 19.0 - - 100 95 – 100 13.2 - 100 85 – 100 75 – 90 9.5 - 90 - 100 70 – 85 60 – 80 6.7 100 70 - 90 62 – 75 50 – 70 4.75 85 - 100 58 - 76 53 – 70 40 – 60 2.36 55 - 75 40 - 58 35 – 52 25 – 43 1.18 38 - 57 27 - 44 24 – 40 18 - 35 0.60 26 - 43 17 - 35 15 – 30 14 - 27 0.30 15 - 28 11 - 24 10 – 24 9 - 21 0.15 8 - 18 7 - 16 7 - 16 6 – 15 0.075 4 - 11 4 - 7 4 – 7 3 – 7 Bitumen binder ( % by mass ) 5.0 - 7.0 4.5 - 6.5 4.6 - 6.5 4.0 – 6.0 Compacted thickness ( mm ) 10 - 25 25 - 40 35 – 55 50 – 80 Bitumen film thickness ( min micron ) 8.5 8.5 8.5 8.5 The grading curve shall be smooth and shall not vary from the outer one third of the range between the specified limits for one sieve size to the opposite outer one third of the range between the specified limits for an adjacent sieve size .
BITUMINOUS SURFACE MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 81 Table 8.8 – Aggregate and Mineral Filler Mix Proportions Conform to the following mix proportions Mix Type CM 1 CM 2 CM 3 CM 4 Dense Graded AS Sieve ( mm ) 7 mm 10 mm 14 mm 20 mm % Passing ( Dry Mass ) 53.0 - - - - 37.5 - - - - 26.5 - - - 100 19.0 - - 100 95 – 100 13.2 - 100 85 - 100 - 9.5 100 90 - 100 70 - 85 58 – 74 6.7 90 - 100 - - 45 – 60 4.75 70 - 90 58 - 70 46 - 65 37 – 50 2.36 45 - 60 35 - 50 28 - 45 22 – 36 1.18 - 22 - 38 15 - 30 12 – 26 0.60 15 - 30 12 - 27 10 - 23 6 – 20 0.30 10 - 20 6 - 16 5 - 17 4 – 15 0.15 4 - 14 4 - 14 3 - 11 2 – 10 0.075 3 - 8 2 - 6 2 - 5 1 – 5 Total % 100 100 100 100 The grading curve shall be smooth and shall not vary from the outer one third of the range between the specified limits for one sieve size to the opposite outer one third of the range between the specified limits for an adjacent sieve size .
Table 8.9 – Total Mix Proportions of Cold Mix Asphalt Conform to the following mix proportions .
Mix Type CM 1 CM 2 CM 3 CM 4 Dense Graded Size 7 mm 10 mm 14 mm 20 mm Material % Of Total Mix Aggregate and filler % 94.2 – 95.2 94.8 – 95.8 95.0 – 96.0 95.3 – 96.3 Residual binder % 4.8 - 5.8 4.2 - 5.2 4.0 - 5.0 3.7 - 4.7 Total Mix % 100 100 100 100 CONCRETE MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 82 CONCRETE MAINTENANCE 9 .
OUTLINE DESCRIPTION 9.1 This section specifies miscellaneous minor repairs or replacement of concrete structures such as stormwater side entry pits , wing/head walls , kerbs and gutters , cycle/footpaths etc .
and does not apply to buildings , bridges or concrete pavements .
STANDARDS 9.2 Comply with the Acts , Regulations , Guidelines and Codes applicable to the works .
Comply with the requirements of Authorities with jurisdiction over the works .
Conform to the Standards and Publications quoted throughout this document unless specified otherwise .
Refer to REFERENCED DOCUMENTS .
Refer to Waste Disposal clause in MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS section .
Refer to Error !
Reference source not found .
in CONFORMANCE TESTING .
MATERIALS – HOLD POINT 9.3 Hold point - Provide manufacturer 's test certificates for quality of cement , aggregate and reinforcement .
Cement 9.3.1 Type GP or GB to AS 3972 .
Store cement in watertight containers or shelters until used .
Do not mix or store special cement with normal Portland cement .
Fine Aggregate 9.3.2 Clean , hard , tough , durable , uncoated grains , homogeneous in quality , free from clay , dirt and organic material .
Coarse Aggregate 9.3.3 Clean , hard , durable , crushed stone or gravel , free from clay , dirt and organic material .
Water 9.3.4 Clean and free from oil , alkali , organic or other deleterious substances .
Chemical Admixtures – Hold Point 9.3.5 Hold point - Do not use admixtures without obtaining prior written approval from the Superintendent .
Admixtures and their use must conform to AS 1478.1 .
Where two or more chemical admixtures are proposed for incorporation into a concrete mix , their compatibility must be certified by the manufacturers .
Store admixtures in accordance with the manufacturer ’ s recommendations .
Reinforcement – Hold Point 9.3.6 Conform to AS/NZS 4671 .
Supply , cut , bend and fix steel reinforcement as specified .
Secure reinforcement and bar supports to prevent displacement during construction and concrete placement .
Hold Point - Do not place concrete until the reinforcement has been inspected by the Superintendent .
Recycled Crushed Glass ( RCG ) 9.3.7 Clean , hard , durable RCG free from clay , dirt and organic material .
Source the material from glass food and beverage containers , drinking glasses , and window ( or flat ) glass and plain ceramic .
Do not use glass from hazardous waste containers , reinforced and laminated glass , light bulbs , fluorescent tubes and cathode ray tubes .
The source glass must be free of debris and contaminants such as paper and cardboard , plastic , fabrics , residues from original contents and toxins .
Use RCG conforming to Specification for Recycled Crushed Glass as an Engineering Material Section 9 available at : https : //infrastructure.nt.gov.au/specification- services/technical-specifications EQUIPMENT 9.4 The Contractor will provide all general and specialised equipment , tools and materials , to carry out and test the Work .
The Contractor must be fully equipped on each attendance call .
9.5 CONCRETE Refer to CONFORMANCE TESTING for sampling frequencies for fresh concrete .
Ready-mix Concrete 9.5.1 Unless otherwise specified , Production Assessment in accordance with AS 3600 shall be used .
CONCRETE MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 83 Register the project with the concrete supplier for submittal of Production Assessment data and nominate the Superintendent for receipt of this information .
Supply concrete with the following properties unless specified otherwise : Compressive strength N25 Aggregate size , generally 20 mm Aggregate size , machine extruded kerbs and gutters 10 mm Slump 80 mm , + or - 15 mm The Superintendent reserves the right to carry out independent sampling and testing of concrete .
Job-mixed Concrete 9.5.2 Use Project Assessment in accordance with AS 3600 .
The Contractor will be responsible for sampling and testing .
Provide concrete with properties as specified for ready-mix concrete .
Determine the quantities of materials to be used by mass or by equivalent dry loose volume .
Provide and maintain gauges for measurement of the materials .
The Superintendent reserves the right to carry out independent sampling and testing of concrete .
Addition of Admixtures 9.5.3 Refer to clause Materials - Chemical Admixtures .
Chemical admixtures may only be added subsequent to slump test compliance confirmation .
A further slump test post admixture addition may also be required .
Where Superintendent approval has been granted for the addition of superplasticiser at the plant prior to dispatch of concrete , a slump test of each batch must be performed and recorded by a NATA accredited testing laboratory prior to the addition of the superplasticiser .
The slump test report must record the time of the addition of the superplasticiser , amount of superplasticiser added and product identification .
Do not add chemical admixtures unless the exact amount required is measured using a regularly maintained and calibrated device of the required accuracy .
Make allowance for the reversion time of superplasticisers .
Delay the addition of superplasticisers as long as practicable before the concrete is discharged from the mixer .
Agitate concrete for at least 5 minutes following the addition of superplasticiser before dispensing .
FOUNDATIONS 9.6 Provide a foundation compacted to 95 % relative density within 150 mm of the base of concrete .
9.7 CONSTRUCTION General 9.7.1 Repair , reinstate or replace concrete structures to match existing dimensions , cross sections and grade or as otherwise directed by the Superintendent .
Work to be all inclusive and include but not limited to ; saw cutting , excavation and removal of broken sections , disposal of waste material , formwork , reinforcement , etc .
Kerbs and Gutters 9.7.2 Repair , reinstate or replace damaged kerb and gutter as integral units to match existing dimensions and grades , as per Standard Drawing CS 1203 .
Cycle and Pedestrian shared Path 9.7.3 Maintenance For concrete shared use paths provide 100mm minimum thick concrete to AS 1379 N25 with reinforcing mesh SL62 placed centrally .
Mesh material to AS/NZS 4671 , installation to AS 2870 .
All relevant design principles contained in AUSTROADS must be integrated in the design of cycle ways , pathways and associated infrastructure ( Austroads guide to Road Design Part 6A : Pedestrian and Cyclist Paths ) .
Refer to Civil design drawings ( if any ) and conform to local Council requirements .
Refer to PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS section of Request for Tender FORMWORK – WITNESS POINT 9.8 Formwork to be accordance with AS 3610.1 .
Design and construct forms so that they are mortar tight , have adequate strength and removable without damaging the concrete .
Formwork material to be suitable for the purpose and finish specified .
Build forms true to line and braced in a substantial and non-yielding manner .
Witness Point - Do not place concrete until the formwork has been inspected by the Superintendent .
9.9 HANDLING AND PLACING – WITNESS POINT – HOLD POINT Witness Point - Give the Superintendent sufficient notice so that inspection may be made before and during pouring concrete .
Hold Point - Provide verification that all constituent materials , formwork , falsework , reinforcement , and environmental conditions CONCRETE MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 84 comply with all requirements .
Do not cast any concrete without that verification .
Do not place concrete if the temperature of the concrete exceeds 35ºC , or if the ambient air temperature exceeds 40ºC .
Place and compact concrete within the times shown in Table 9.1 - Maximum concrete placing time after adding mixing water after the addition of the mixing water to the mix : Table 9.1 - Maximum concrete placing time after adding mixing water Concrete temperature at time of placing Maximum Time ( minutes ) 25 to 28ºC 75 28 to 32ºC 60 32 to 35ºC 45 Place concrete in a continuous operation between construction joints so that the face of the concrete is in a plastic state when succeeding concrete is placed against it .
Do not allow concrete to free-fall from a height greater than 1.5 m. Place all concrete in dry weather unless otherwise approved .
Vibrate concrete to remove entrapped air , but avoid over-vibration that may cause segregation .
For each truck of premixed concrete provide an identification certificate on delivery listing the information required by AS 1379 and any other particular requirements for special class concrete .
JOINTING 9.10 9.10.1 Construction Joints Roughen and clean the face of hardened concrete before placing fresh concrete against it .
Remove soft material , foreign matter and laitance .
Thoroughly moisten the joint surface .
Expansion / Contraction Joints 9.10.2 Joints to be 10 mm wide over full length and filled with a bitumen impregnated fibrous filler .
Provide vertical transverse expansion/contraction joints as follows : − Footpaths : 6 m spacing maximum .
− At junctions with other concrete structures − Inverts : 15 m spacing maximum .
− All other works : As shown on the drawings .
Tooled Joints 9.10.3 Provide tooled joints as follows : − Transverse vertical grooves 20 mm depth minimum .
− Joints at right angles to outer edge of concrete works .
− Footpaths : 2 m spacing maximum .
− Kerbs/Inverts : 3 m spacing maximum .
− All other works : As shown on the drawings .
SURFACE FINISHES 9.11 Finish surfaces to a smooth and even colour .
Remove free surface water during final screeding of unformed surfaces .
Round off exposed edges and corners .
Protect exposed surfaces from rain until final set has occurred .
Conform to Table 9.2 – Concrete finishes .
Curing 9.11.1 Protect and cure all exposed surfaces immediately after the concrete has taken its initial set .
Maintain all surfaces , including those within loosened formwork , in a moist condition by : − flooding ; − continuous spraying with water ; or − other methods approved by the Superintendent .
Prevent staining during the curing process of all concrete surfaces that will be visible in the completed works .
Continuously maintain the protection and curing of each element for the minimum time specified by AS 3600 to provide the concrete with durability corresponding to the specified exposure classification .
Do not use curing compounds in lieu of moist curing unless approved .
Backfilling 9.11.2 Backfill areas around the concrete with specified material .
Compact the backfilling in layers not exceeding 150 mm compacted thickness .
Reinstate damaged grassed areas with topsoil and grass seed to match existing surrounds .
PATCH REPAIR OF CONCRETE 9.12 STRUCTURES Remove spalled and unsound concrete to expose a sound surface .
Where necessary remove damaged steel reinforcement and replace as required .
CONCRETE MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 85 Saw cut outer perimeter of the repair to a depth of at least 15 mm in order to prevent featheredging .
Scabble and wash down the surrounding sound concrete surface to ensure removal of all contamination .
Pre wet the prepared concrete substrate and steel reinforcement and apply a bonding agent to enhance the bond at the repair interface .
Erect formwork as per FORMWORK clause and cure as per CURING clause .
Table 9.2 – Concrete finishes Type Description Application S1 Left rough to give key but not honeycombed or porous Surfaces to be rendered .
S2 Wood float As specified .
S3 Steel trowel without polish Internal surfaces subject to foot traffic .
Kerb and gutter .
S4 Wood float and broomed finish - broom finish - broom across direction of traffic Surfaces subject to vehicular traffic .
S6 Steel float followed by moist hair broom Surfaces subject to foot traffic .
F1 Remove mortar fins , etc. , repair minor blow holes by bagging where approved or rub down with Carborundum stone Formed surfaces exposed to view .
F2 Off forms - F3 Exposed RCG Application of RCG to be hand spread once application of the exposed mix has been bull floated RCG to be measured 1000 grams per square meter , or as otherwise specified by the Superintendent .
Colour and size of RCG to be specified by Superintendent RAIN DAMAGE 9.13 Remove and replace rain damaged concrete .
EXISTING SERVICES – HOLD POINT 9.14 Hold Point - Obtain the Superintendent ’ s approval before altering the line or level of existing services .
Place an expansion joint between concrete works and service .
CONFORMANCE 9.15 Refer to the DRAINAGE MAINTENANCE for culvert structures and pits .
Conform to Table 9.3 – Concrete Conformance - Tolerances .
Table 9.3 – Concrete Conformance - Tolerances AS Measured Tolerance Finished level : + or - 15 mm from the specified level .
Invert level : + or - 5 mm from the specified level .
Straight edge deviation of surface : 3 mm maximum in 3 m , or 6 mm maximum in 15 m. Alignment : + or - 10 mm from the specified alignment .
Chainage at vehicle crossing + or - 150 mm Width of vehicle crossing : + or - 25 mm .
DEFECTIVE CONCRETE AND 9.16 MATERIALS Concrete which is not placed , cured or finished as specified , does not have the specified strength or other specified properties , is not sound , dense , durable or crack-free will be considered defective .
Bear all cost and delays resulting from the rejection of concrete and subsequent rectification .
Remove the concrete to a point agreed with the Superintendent at which a visually and structurally acceptable construction joint can be made , and the defective element rebuilt .
Repair defective surface finishes if approved by the Superintendent .
Approval will not be given if the defective area is too extensive or the techniques proposed are not adequate to ensure a visually acceptable and durable repair .
MAINTENANCE CLEANING 9.17 High pressure water may be used for cleaning of concrete paths and structures .
Clean surfaces at a pressure rating that will provide an even , streak free cleaned surface without causing damage .
Chemicals may be used to remove specific types of stains or to ease cleaning and must be used in accordance with the product SDS and environmental requirements .
Mask or protect adjacent surfaces .
OTHER REQUIREMENTS 9.18 ( If applicable ) Refer to PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS section of Request for Tender .
DRAINAGE MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 86 DRAINAGE MAINTENANCE 10 .
OUTLINE DESCRIPTION 10.1 This section applies to the repair or replacement of precast concrete box culverts including inlet and outlet structures and precast concrete pipe culverts not exceeding 1950 mm nominal diameter .
STANDARDS 10.2 Comply with the Acts , Regulations , Guidelines and Codes applicable to the works .
Comply with the requirements of Authorities with jurisdiction over the works .
Conform to the Standards and Publications quoted throughout this document unless specified otherwise .
Refer to REFERENCED DOCUMENTS .
Specification Reference Refer to the Northern Territory Government Standard Specification for Environmental Management and to the RFT .
DEFINITIONS 10.3 Refer to Definitions in MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS .
Culvert An underground pipe , box or arch constructed in an embankment or trench .
Culvert Skew Angle The angle between a line drawn perpendicular or radial to the road centre line and the centre line of the culvert .
Culvert Chainage The chainage measured along the road centre line at its intersection with the culvert centre line .
Large Box Culverts Precast box culverts and link slabs having spans greater than 1200 mm , heights greater than 1200 mm or fill heights exceeding 1600 mm .
Recycled Crushed Glass ( RCG ) RCG conforming to Specification for Recycled Crushed Glass as an Engineering Material Section 9 , available via https : //infrastructure.nt.gov.au/specification- services/technical-specifications .
MATERIALS 10.4 10.4.1 Conformance Conform to requirements specified in CONFORMANCE TESTING .
The Contractor will be responsible for process control testing .
The Superintendent will carry out all conformance testing nominated to be the Superintendent 's responsibility through Panel Period Contracts .
The Contractor will be responsible for ordering the conformance tests .
Ensure that all pipes and box culverts are indelibly marked with a Standards Australia conformance stamp .
Pipes and box culverts not stamped shall be removed from site at the Contractor 's expense .
10.4.2 Precast Reinforced Concrete Pipes Use flush joint type pipes with external rubber bands .
Ensure that pipes are clearly marked as to their class .
10.4.3 Precast Reinforced Concrete Box Culverts – Hold Point - Witness Point Use box culverts of the inverted U type suitable for installation on a cast-in-situ concrete slab .
Design and supply box culverts which have a span not greater than 1200 mm , height not more than 1200 mm and a fill height not more than 1600 mm in accordance with AS 1597.1 .
Design all other box culverts in accordance with AS 1597.2 .
Use Standard Vehicle Loadings including NT Standard Road Train , with addition of the HLP 400 Abnormal Vehicle Loading on all National Highways , and HLP 320 on all other routes .
Provide culverts designed for exposure classification in accordance with the Exposure Classification Table in AS 5100.5 .
Refer to 26 Northern Territory Climate Zones Table .
Hold Point - Provide drawings showing complete reinforcement and dimensions with tolerances and obtain the Superintendent ’ s approval prior to fabricating any units .
Provide manufacturer ’ s certification that the provided culverts comply with the applicable sections of AS 5100.5 and with AS 1597 .
Certify that the design is reflected accurately by the shop drawings and that the design is adequate to resist all specified loads and the soil loads pertaining to the site .
Provide a table of construction axle loads versus minimum required cover for each box culvert size .
Witness Point - Give the Superintendent notice prior to casting concrete .
10.4.4 Corrugated Steel Pipes , Pipe Arches and Arches Supply in accordance with the details specified .
Assemble in accordance with the manufacturer 's instructions .
Bedding 10.4.5 Use : A clean granular material free from sticks , stones and other deleterious material with a Plasticity Index less than 6 , conforming to the Table 10.1 Bedding Material Size , or DRAINAGE MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 87 RCG conforming to Specification for Recycled Crushed Glass as an Engineering Material Section 9 , or A blend of both materials shown above .
Table 10.1 – Bedding Material Size AS Sieve ( mm ) Percentage Passing by Dry Mass 19.0 100 2.36 50 – 100 0.60 20 – 90 0.30 10 – 60 0.15 0 – 25 0.075 0 – 10 10.4.6 Concrete Conform to the requirements of CONCRETE MAINTENANCE .
10.4.7 Mortar Use one part fresh cement and three parts clean sharp sand mixed with potable water to yield a stiff but workable mixture .
10.4.8 Select Fill Conform to the requirements of EARTHWORKS AND DRAINAGE .
CONSTRUCTION OF CULVERTS AND 10.5 STRUCTURES 10.5.1 Setting Out – Hold Point Measure culvert length along the invert to the outside face of headwalls .
Measure pits and/or manholes to the inside face of the wall .
Finished surface levels for kerbside structures are measured at the top of the kerb .
Set out the culvert and/or structure with pegs before construction .
Hold Point - Obtain the Superintendent 's approval for the setting out before construction .
10.5.2 Excavation – Witness point Excavate in whatever material is encountered .
Use of explosives must be in accordance with MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS .
Pump , bail , sheet , shore and brace as necessary .
Divert water when necessary .
Rectify foundations which are affected by rain or surface water entering the excavation .
The total width of trench at and below the level of the top of the pipe shall be the width of culvert plus 300 mm minimum clearance each side .
Backfill with select fill up to the specified level if the trench is excavated too deep .
Any such backfilling will be at the Contractor 's expense .
Witness Point - Excavate unsuitable material below specified level if directed by the Superintendent .
Replace with select fill , compacted as specified .
10.5.3 Culverts in Fill under Construction Place and compact fill to Manufacturer ’ s instructions and design specifications .
Use select fill .
Refer to PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS in the RFT .
Conform to Compacted Layer Method in Construction Methods in EARTHWORKS AND DRAINAGE .
Re-excavate the fill in accordance with the Excavation clause to permit the construction of the culvert .
10.5.4 Construction Loading on Culverts Provide the minimum compacted thickness of cover specified in Table 10.4 - Minimum Required Cover Thickness in Metres before allowing traffic to cross a culvert .
( Table appears at end of this work section . )
Do not permit construction vehicles having axle loads greater than 10 tonnes to cross large box culverts under any depth of fill unless specific certification is provided by the culvert crown unit manufacturer that the culverts have been designed to cope with those loads .
10.5.5 Bedding Place bedding 75 mm compacted thickness for the full width of the trench or 0.6 m greater than the width of the culvert for non-trench conditions .
Compact bedding to 90 % relative compaction .
Shape the bedding to hold pipes in position during compaction of additional fill .
Place and compact a further ( haunching ) layer of bedding of 150 mm compacted thickness over the full width of the previous layer after the pipe is in position .
Consider increasing thickness of haunching for large pipe culverts under high fills , to upgrade maximum bedding factor given in Table 5 of AS/NZS 3725 .
10.5.6 Laying Generally Lay culverts commencing from the downstream end .
End caps , when used , shall provide a tight waterproof seal .
10.5.7 Laying Pipe Culverts Face rebates or sockets upstream .
Rest the full length of the pipe barrel on the bedding .
Position ‘ TOP ’ marking on pipes to within 5 degrees of the vertical axis .
DRAINAGE MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 88 Fill all joints with stiff mortar firmly rammed into openings .
Remove excess mortar from barrel of culvert .
Apply external rubber bands .
Brace pipes of 1200 mm diameter and greater with toms until the completion of the embankment and pavement .
The toms shall bear against a sill along the invert and a cap against the crown of the pipe .
Provide toms opposite every pipe joint .
Cast collars and blocks in one operation .
Restrain the culvert prior to constructing the collars or blocks by partially backfilling with bedding around the barrel of the culvert to one-half of the pipe diameter .
10.5.8 Laying Box Culverts Lay precast box culverts on a cast-in-situ reinforced concrete base slab .
Ensure concrete base slab exceeds external width of box culverts as shown on the typical details .
Butt box culverts firmly together .
Cut away lifting hooks and seal over the affected area with an approved epoxy resin .
Fill all joints with a stiff mortar firmly rammed into the openings .
Remove excess mortar from the barrel of the culvert and apply external joint seals , Densopol HT60 or equivalent , 150 mm wide .
10.5.9 Connection to Existing Systems – Witness Point Repair all cut openings and make watertight .
Demolish existing headwalls to make way for the extension of the culvert .
Clean out new work and existing work affected by the new work .
Witness Point – Advise superintendent within two days when clean out is completed 10.5.10 Backfill – Witness Point – Hold Point Witness Point - Notify the Superintendent before backfilling where holes or fissures occur in rock trenches .
Hold Point - Do not place backfill against any in-situ concrete structure until the concrete has attained 80 % characteristic strength and approval has been given .
Place backfill in layers not exceeding 150 mm compacted thickness .
Ensure the maximum difference in height of backfill on each side of a culvert is 300 mm .
Backfill around the culvert for the full width of the trench , and for a minimum 300 mm above the top of the culvert , or to subgrade surface if less , with select fill .
Backfill the remainder of the trench with standard fill .
Stabilise all backfill with 2 % cement by mass and compact to 95 % relative compaction .
Produce a uniform mix .
Complete compaction within one hour of adding mixing water .
Use compaction equipment which will not damage the culvert and in-situ structures .
Carry out conformance testing using the Department ’ s Panel Period Contractors for Testing .
Stabilise top 150 mm of backfill , for a distance of 1 m adjacent to culvert headwalls and wing walls , so as to be erosion resistant .
Remove surplus material from the site .
Reinstate to subgrade level trenches cut through pavements and other construction by backfilling the trench with stabilised select fill compacted to 95 % relative compaction .
Construct base/sub-base layers of the pavement in accordance with PAVEMENTS AND SHOULDERS .
10.5.11 Reinstate Surface .
Reinstate trenches cut outside of pavements and other construction by backfilling with standard fill compacted to 90 % relative compaction .
INLET AND OUTLET STRUCTURES 10.6 AND MAINTENANCE HOLES Construct in accordance with the Construction Of Culverts And Structures clause .
Compact foundations to 95 % relative compaction to a depth of 150 mm minimum .
Replace unsuitable material as specified in the Excavation Clause .
INLET AND OUTLET CHANNELS – 10.7 WITNESS POINT Excavate the inlet and outlet of all culverts to facilitate the flow of water .
Conform to the following : − Bed width : Minimum 150 mm greater than overall width of culvert .
− Side batters : 45 degrees maximum to horizontal .
− Bed grade : 0.5 % in the direction of flow for a minimum distance of 50 m. Clean out new work and existing work affected by the new work .
Witness Point – Advise superintendent within two days when clean out is completed OPEN UNLINED DRAINS 10.8 Excavate and dispose of all excess material as specified in EARTHWORKS AND DRAINAGE .
Trim drains to form neat levees .
Compact levees to 95 % relative compaction .
Allow natural surface runoff .
DRAINAGE MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 89 REMOVAL OF EXISTING CULVERTS 10.9 AND DRAINAGE STRUCTURES Demolish and remove from the site existing culverts and drainage structures identified for removal by the Superintendent .
Dispose of waste material in accordance with the Standard Specification for Environmental Management and the Request for Tender ( RFT ) .
SUBSOIL DRAINS 10.10 10.10.1 Excavation Impervious Material Excavate below the top of the impervious zone to a minimum depth equal to the outside diameter of the pipe plus 75 mm .
Place a bedding layer of 50 mm of filter material in the trench and compact with a vibrating plate or similar .
Pervious Material Excavate and backfill under the pipe with impervious material as specified .
10.10.2 Filter Material Shall be a hard durable stone having a Los Angeles Abrasion Loss not greater than 35 % .
Conform to the grading specified by the manufacturer of the subsoil pipe .
If manufacturer 's grading not supplied , conform to Table 10.2 – Filter material grading .
Table 10.2 – Filter material grading AS Sieve ( mm ) Percentage Passing 37.50 100 19.00 90 – 100 9.50 65 – 85 4.75 45 – 65 0.60 0 – 5 Geotextile Fabric 10.10.3 Refer to Geotextile Grades clause in PROTECTION WORKS MAINTENANCE .
Supply and lay an approved non-woven polypropylene or polyester geotextile fabric having an equivalent opening size ( EOS ) of 120 micrometre and typical geotextile strength rating ( G ) of 1350 minimum .
Cut or fold the fabric to the required shape .
Patch , repair , or replace damaged fabric .
Cover geotextiles in accordance with the following : − Untreated UV susceptible geotextiles : Within 5 days of placing .
− UV treated or low susceptibility geotextiles : Within 30 days of placing .
Encase the length of the trench with the fabric placed in such a way as to fully encompass the pipe and filter .
Overlap the fabric 300 mm over the top of the filter material .
10.10.4 Subsoil Drain Pipe Use 100 mm diameter Class 400 .
Use compatible couplings and fittings .
Connect solid wall pipe to the subsoil drain pipe for the disposal of collected water .
10.10.5 Laying and Backfilling – Hold Point Fit the upper end of pipelines with inspection openings and caps supported in a concrete collar .
Hold Point - Obtain Superintendent 's approval of the pipe installation before backfilling .
Place filter material around the barrel of the pipe and to a height of 200 mm above the pipe .
Compact with a vibrating plate compactor or similar .
Place and compact remaining layers of the filter in layers not exceeding 300 mm .
Prevent contamination of the filter .
Place and compact basecourse gravel , as specified in PAVEMENTS AND SHOULDERS in the top 300 mm of trench .
Place the material in two equal layers compacted to 95 % relative compaction .
Where trench excavated through pavement compact upper layer of basecourse gravel to 100 % relative compaction and reinstate surface .
Backfill above solid wall pipes as specified in 10.5.10 Backfill – Witness Point – Hold Point for trench conditions .
10.10.6 End Walls – Witness Point Construct end walls at the outlet of subsoil drains as specified .
Secure 19 mm galvanised wire mesh over the opening .
Mark end walls with guide posts .
Clean out new work and existing work affected by the new work .
Witness Point – Advise superintendent within two days when clean out is completed DRAINAGE MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 90 CONFORMANCE 10.11 Conform to Table 10.3 – Conformance – Drainage Maintenance .
Table 10.3 – Conformance – Drainage Maintenance Application Requirement/Tolerance Invert level and grade line : No ponding of water .
Open unlined drains : + or - 50 mm .
Culverts or lined drains : + or - 20 mm .
Plan position : + or - 200 mm .
Culverts parallel to kerbs : + or - 50 mm .
Concrete structure dimension : + or - 5 mm .
Concrete thickness : Not less than specified .
Subsoil drain slope : 25 mm maximum sag in 8 m. OTHER REQUIREMENTS 10.12 ( If applicable ) Refer to PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS section of Request for Tender .
Table 10.4 - Minimum Required Cover Thickness in Metres Maximum Construction Vehicle Axle Load ( tonne ) Type , size and class of culvert Concrete Pipes , By Pipe Class Corrugated Metal Pipes Boxes Less than 1200 mm Nominal Diameter 1200 mm Nominal Diameter or more Internal Diameter or Span up to 3600 mm Less than 1200 mm Span , 1200 mm Height and 1600 mm Final Fill Height Concrete Pipe Class Min .
cover ( m ) Min .
cover ( m ) X ( 2 ) Y ( 3 ) Z ( 4 ) X ( 2 ) Y ( 3 ) Z ( 4 ) 9 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.6 0.1 20 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.5 0.4 0.4 1.2 0.6 35 1.3 0.8 0.6 1.3 0.4 0.4 1.5 0.9 50 1.0 0.8 - 1.0 0.4 - 1.8 1.2 PROTECTION WORKS MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 91 PROTECTION WORKS MAINTENANCE 11 .
STANDARDS 11.1 Comply with the Acts , Regulations , Guidelines and Codes applicable to the works .
Comply with the requirements of Authorities with jurisdiction over the works .
Conform to the Standards and Publications quoted throughout this document unless specified otherwise .
Refer to REFERENCED DOCUMENTS .
Refer to Waste Disposal clause in MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS section .
Specification Reference Refer to the Northern Territory Government Standard Specification for Environmental Management and to the RFT .
FOUNDATIONS 11.2 Excavate , fill and trim the site to the required shape prior to commencing the protection works .
Compact the top 150 mm of earthworks , on which protection works are to be laid to 90 % relative compaction .
GEOTEXTILE GRADES 11.3 Unless specified elsewhere in the contract , use : non-woven , Strength Grade B .
All strength grades , where specified , based on a Characteristic Values ( Q ) , to conform to Table 11.1 – Geotextile Strength Grade Properties .
Notes to table : ( 1 ) % Elongation corresponding to max CBR burst strength as per AS 3706.4 .
Generally < 30 % for wovens , > 30 % for non-wovens .
( 2 ) Property value is 80th percentile characteristic value ( mean strength – 0.83 x standard deviation ) , as per relevant AS test .
Filtration properties relevant to each grade to be certified as part of Product Certification clause requirements .
Table 11.1 – Geotextile Strength Grade Properties Geo textile Strength Grade Elongation ( 1 ) Grade Stren- gth ( N ) ( 2 ) Tear ( N ) ( 2 ) G Rating ( 2 ) A > 30 % < 30 % 500 800 180 300 900 1350 B > 30 % < 30 % 700 1100 250 400 1350 2000 C > 30 % < 30 % 900 1400 350 500 2000 3000 D > 30 % < 30 % 1200 1900 450 700 3000 4500 E > 30 % 1600 650 4500 CONFORMANCE TESTING 11.4 Where project requirement is less than 15,000m2 , sampling and testing is not required .
Provide samples to independent , NATA accredited testing laboratory when project exceeds 15,000m2 , to Table 11.2 – Test Frequencies Table 11.2 – Test Frequencies Description Units Test Method Test Frequency Tensile Strength kN/m AS 3706.2 1 per 15,000 m2 Tear Strength N AS 3706.3 1 per 15,000 m2 CBR Burst Strength N AS 3706.4 1 per 15,000 m2 Grade Tensile Strength N AS 2001.2 .
3.2 1 per 15,000 m2 Flow Rate l/m2/s AS 3706.9 1 per 90,000 m2 Samples to be 15m2 in size cut across full width of the roll , not within 2m of the end of a roll , to AS 2001.2.3.2 .
PROTECTION WORKS MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 92 ROCK PROPERTIES 11.5 The rock properties specified in this clause apply to the rock , stone , aggregate and boulders specified in the following clauses in this section ; − Stone Pitching − Dumped Rock − Quarter Tonne Dumped Rock − Rubble − Gabion Rock − Reno Mattresses REQUIREMENTS ; Clean , dry , durable crushed stone of uniform quality , free from declared weeds and their seeds , vegetable matter and other deleterious materials .
Particles must have at least 2 crushed faces and conform to AS 1141.25.1 , AS 1141.26 and AS 1141.29 .
STONE PITCHING 11.6 Stone Pitching 11.6.1 The stone to be spalls of hard durable rock complying with the Rock Properties clause and with no dimension less than 200 mm .
Hand place the stones so that they are firmly bedded in layers .
The average plane of the exposed face to be within 100 mm of the specified plane and all exposed faces of stones to be within 50 mm of the average plane .
Grouted Stone Pitching – Hold Point 11.6.2 Place stones as specified in the Stone Pitching Clause .
Hold Point - Obtain Superintendent 's approval before grouting .
Grout stone pitching with cement mortar .
Cement mortar to consist of one part cement to three parts of clean sand mixed with potable water to form a workable mixture .
Work the mortar into the interstices of the stone pitching to a depth of at least 100 mm from the surface .
Work from the base upwards .
Cure the mortar for at least 48 hours .
Remove defective mortar and re-grout any loose stones .
Provide 75 mm diameter weep holes penetrating the full thickness of the grout at the rate of one every 5 square metres .
DUMPED ROCK PROTECTION 11.7 Large spalls or boulders complying with the Rock Properties clause and having a least dimension of that specified in the PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS section of the RFT .
Dump into the specified area .
Protect adjacent areas from damage due to dumping .
The average plane of the exposed rock face to be within 100 mm of the specified position .
QUARTER TONNE CLASS DUMPED 11.8 ROCK PROTECTION Large spalls or boulders complying with the Rock Properties clause and having the following grading .
Table 11.3 – Rock grading Rock Size Minimum % Larger Than 35 kg 90 250 kg 50 500 kg 0 Dump into the specified area .
Protect adjacent areas from damage due to dumping .
The average plane of the exposed rock face to be within 100 mm of the specified position .
RUBBLE 11.9 Broken rock complying with the Rock Properties clause .
Maximum size of rubble to be 200 mm .
At least 30 % by mass to have a nominal size of 100 mm or greater .
No more than 20 % by mass to pass the 2.36 mm sieve .
Dump rubble without segregation onto the prepared area .
Compact rubble to a tight finish .
The average plane of the exposed face to be within 100 mm of that specified .
The exposed face to be within 100 mm of the average plane .
GABIONS 11.10 General 11.10.1 A flexible , hexagonal woven steel wire mesh box , filled with packed stone conforming to the Rock Properties clause , and securely laced with steel wire .
Steel Wire Mesh 11.10.2 Use galvanized steel wire , Grade W15Z380 to AS 2423 .
Zinc coating ; 250 g/m2 Galvanization to be carried out prior to weaving of the mesh .
Minimum tensile strength of wire : 380 MPa .
PROTECTION WORKS MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 93 Mesh openings to be 80 mm x 100 mm maximum , hexagonal in shape with flexible joints consisting of not less than two full turns .
All wire to be coated with average thickness of 0.55 mm extruded grey PVC firmly attached to the wire .
The minimum thickness of coating to be 0.40 mm in accordance with AS 2423 .
At the discretion of the Superintendent , the PVC wire coating may be omitted where abrasion of wire is not likely to be of concern or where deleterious effects on the wire of ground water , soil salinity , natural weather exposure and water emersion is not significant .
Check PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS section of the RFT .
Conform to wire sizes and galvanizing weights in Table 11.4 – Wire properties - Gabions .
Table 11.4 – Wire properties - Gabions Wire Type Minimum Diameter ( mm ) Body wire 2.7 Binding and lacing wire 2.2 Selvedge wire 3.4 Selvedge wire shall be woven integrally along all edges of the mesh , in accordance with the manufacturer 's instructions , and such that the mesh shall not unravel .
The steel wire mesh shall be sized so that it can be folded into regular boxes , complete with diaphragms , having dimensions specified .
Diaphragms to be at 1,000 mm spacing .
Construction 11.10.3 Assemble and erect in accordance with the manufacturer 's instructions .
Pretension the wire framework against a firm anchor or adjacent units .
Retain the shape of the wire framework with spreaders .
Fill with hard durable stone , complying with the Rock Properties clause and placed in stages to achieve the tightest packing of stone .
Maximum stone dimension : 250 mm .
Minimum stone dimension : 100 mm .
Overfill the framework by 20 mm to 50 mm to allow for subsequent movement of the stone .
Perform lacing operations using specified lacing wire .
Wire to pass round the edges being joined using alternative single and double loops through each mesh in turn .
Tightness of the mesh and wiring is essential .
Ensure a tightly packed , neat and uniform construction .
RENO MATTRESSES 11.11 General 11.11.1 A flexible , hexagonal woven steel wire mesh box , filled with packed stone conforming to the Rock Properties clause , and securely laced with steel wire .
Steel Wire Mesh 11.11.2 Use galvanized steel wire , Grade W15Z380 to AS 2423 .
Zinc coating ; 250 g/m2 .
Galvanization to be carried out prior to the weaving of the mesh .
Minimum tensile strength of wire : 380 MPa .
Mesh openings to be 60 mm x 80 mm maximum , hexagonal in shape with flexible joints consisting of not less than two full turns .
All wire to be coated with average thickness of 0.55 mm extruded grey PVC firmly attached to the wire .
The minimum thickness of coating to be 0.40 mm in accordance with AS 2423 .
At the discretion of the Superintendent , the PVC wire coating may be omitted where abrasion of wire is not likely to be of concern or where deleterious effects on the wire of ground water , soil salinity , natural weather exposure and water emersion is not significant .
Check PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS section of the RFT .
Conform to the wire sizes and galvanizing weights shown in Table 11.5 – Wire properties – Reno Mattresses .
Table 11.5 – Wire properties – Reno Mattresses Wire Type Minimum Diameter ( mm ) Body wire 2.0 Binding and lacing wire 2.2 Selvedge wire 2.4 Selvedge wire to be woven integrally along all edges of the mesh , in accordance with the manufacturer 's instructions .
Cut to shape where necessary .
Mattress Panels Bottom panel : Includes both sides and both end panels .
PROTECTION WORKS MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 94 Top panel : Shall have the same dimension as the bottom , without the sides and ends , and be supplied separately .
Diaphragms : Extend over the full width of the mattress from top to bottom at maximum intervals of 1 m. Construction 11.11.3 Assemble and erect in accordance with the manufacturer 's instructions .
Align diaphragms perpendicular to the direction of flow unless otherwise specified .
Pretension the wire framework against a firm anchor or adjacent units .
Retain the shape of the wire framework with spreaders .
Fill with hard durable stone complying with the Rock Properties clause in this section and placed in stages to achieve the tightest packing of stone .
Maximum stone dimension : 120 mm when mattress depth 170 mm .
150 mm when mattress depth 230 mm .
200 mm when mattress depth 300 mm or greater .
Minimum least stone dimension 80 mm .
Overfill the framework by 20 to 50 mm to allow for subsequent movement of the stone .
Perform lacing operations using specified lacing wire .
Wire to pass round the edges being joined using alternative single and double loops through each mesh in turn .
Tightness of the mesh and wiring is essential .
Last panel on downstream side , or at base of slope , shall be a whole unit ( i.e .
not cut ) .
Ensure a tightly packed , neat and uniform construction .
REVETMENT MATTRESSES 11.12 General 11.12.1 A nylon fabric material filled with mortar with filter points for the relief of hydrostatic uplift pressure .
Conform to the manufacturer 's instructions .
Materials 11.12.2 Mortar mix proportions to Table 11.6 – Mortar mix proportions .
Table 11.6 – Mortar mix proportions Cement Type GP or GB Fine Sand Coarse Sand Water 1 ( 500 kg ) 1.2 ( 600 kg ) 2.2 ( 1,100 kg ) 450 L/m 3 Adjust fine sand/coarse sand proportions if required to provide workable mix .
Construction 11.12.3 Toe-in to provide cut-off walls minimum 300 mm deep and width not less than maximum thickness of mattress .
Lay , cut and stitch mattress on prepared surface .
Make allowance for take up of fabric resulting from filling mattress with mortar .
All stitching and seams to be neat in appearance and strength to withstand filling pressure .
Ensure mattress is anchored prior to mortar pumping to prevent creep during placement of mortar .
Provide openings in fabric at a maximum of one every 50 m2 for placement of mortar .
Opening to match size of pumping hose .
Make good openings on completion of mortar pumping .
All areas of mattress to be hard filled with mortar with smooth surface .
Do not permit any loading on the mattress until one hour after mortar pumping has been completed .
Remove spilt mortar from surface of mattress by hand only .
Do not use water to wash spilt mortar .
Make good any defective areas .
EMBANKMENT PROTECTION - 11.13 CONCRETE Construct embankment protection from concrete reinforced with a single layer of centrally located SL62 mesh .
Overlap the mesh by 200 mm at joints .
Make construction joints in the vertical plane , at 2 m maximum spacing .
Continue reinforcement mesh across construction joints .
Where margins are required , construct the embankment protection and the margins as an integral unit .
Where there are adjacent protection works , construct the toe of the embankment protection and the protection work as an integral unit .
Drainage holes to be 75 mm diameter penetrating the full thickness of the protection works .
Install the drainage holes at 3 m intervals just above the toe .
PROTECTION WORKS MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 95 Install additional rows of drainage holes parallel to the first , and at 3 m intervals and spacings , where the scope of work requires it .
The exposed surface to be within 50 mm of the specified position .
MARGINS 11.14 Construct margins with reinforced concrete .
Conforming to the requirements of the CONCRETE MAINTENANCE Section .
Make construction joints at 3 m maximum spacing .
Form the top 75 mm of the vertical face nearer the pavement , and any exposed outer face , true to line and level .
Wood float and broom finish the upper surface of the margin .
Finish flush with the top of the pavement .
Where adjacent pavement is sealed , overlap the bituminous seal on the margins by not less than 100 mm .
Tolerances Width : Not less than specified .
Level : + or - 10 mm of top of adjacent pavement .
OTHER REQUIREMENTS 11.15 ( If applicable ) Refer to PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS section of Request for Tender .
ROAD FURNITURE MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 96 ROAD FURNITURE MAINTENANCE 12 .
OUTLINE DESCRIPTION 12.1 This section specifies the maintenance requirement for regular maintenance of road furniture .
Maintenance operations are specifically ordered as required by the Superintendent , and includes new installation ( where missing ) , repairs to , removal and replacement of , any of the following : − Fencing − Guideposts − Road Signs − Raised Retroreflective Pavement Markers ( RRPMs ) − Flood Gauge Posts − Cattle Grids − Steel Beam Guardrail STANDARDS 12.2 Comply with the Acts , Regulations , Guidelines and Codes applicable to the works .
Comply with the requirements of Authorities with jurisdiction over the works .
Conform to the Standards and Publications quoted throughout this document unless specified otherwise .
Refer to REFERENCED DOCUMENTS .
DEFINITIONS 12.3 Traffic Control Device Any sign , signal , pavement marking or other installation placed or erected for the purpose of regulating , warning , guiding or providing for the safety of road users .
It does not include temporary warning devices and control measures erected only for the construction period .
STANDARD DRAWINGS 12.4 The most recent issue of the following standard drawings form part of the contract as applicable .
Table 12.1 - Standard Drawings for Road Furniture Maintenance Drawing No .
Subject CS 0016 Culvert Crossing Guard Rail Footings CS 1204 Cyclists ’ Hold Rail CS 1300 Flexible Guide Posts CS 1301 Flood Gauge Posts CS 1303 Standard Security Fence CS 1306 Stock Fence Design and Details CS 1310 Steel Beam Guard Rail CS 1313 Standard Cattle Grid Plan and Sections with Approach Slab CS 1314 Standard Cattle Grid Plan and Sections without Approach Slab CS 1315 Standard Cattle Grid Details CS 1316 Vehicle Movement Barriers EXTENT OF WORK 12.5 12.5.1 Scheduled Work Undertake scheduled works ordered by Superintendent .
12.5.2 Unscheduled Work Undertake unscheduled works when directed .
Payment will be at scheduled rates if available , or be paid at a fair and reasonable rate negotiated between the Contractor and Superintendent .
Unscheduled works may include new installations or repairs , removal , replacement of items identified whilst undertaking scheduled works .
Be familiar with road furniture installations along the routes under the contract and be vigilant and attentive to any unscheduled works requirements .
Log all unscheduled work in a logbook detailing as a minimum : − Start date , start time − Road name , and location measured by distance − Work performed , i.e .
: sign type , guidepost , etc .
removed , or replaced − Completion date , completion time − Provide electronic copies of before and after digital photos in jpeg format , clearly showing work undertaken .
Refer to each section for lists of materials to be carried on the service vehicle .
The Contractor will inform the Superintendent within 24 hours where unscheduled works can not be carried out due to lack of particular materials .
ROAD FURNITURE MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 97 FENCING 12.6 12.6.1 General Clearing fence lines includes the removal of trees , shrubs , vegetable matter and debris .
Grub out all roots that interfere with the placement of posts .
Refer to Clearing and Mulching clauses in Formation Width Clearing in EARTHWORKS AND DRAINAGE .
Erect fences so that the line of the tops of the posts is uniform .
Adjust the position of posts to compensate for the irregularities of the ground .
Provide gates where ordered and across existing access tracks or roads .
12.6.2 Existing Fences Install a post at the intersection of any new fence with the existing fence and fix the wiring of both fences to that post .
Complete the necessary sections of new or replacement fencing before removing existing fencing .
Obtain the owner ’ s agreement to the proposed fence removal and advise the owner or occupier in writing of the date that the fence will be removed .
Erect gates or grids at fence openings as ordered .
12.6.3 Materials Barbed wire : 1.57 mm diameter minimum , high tensile .
Plain wire : 2.50 mm diameter minimum , high tensile .
Wire mesh : Galvanized 3.15 mm diameter x 50 mm chain mesh .
12.6.4 Stock Fence Stock fencing to consist of tubular steel strainer assemblies with star pickets and galvanized wire .
Construct as specified on standard drawing CS 1306 .
Include the crossing of gullies , watercourses and hollows on the ground .
12.6.5 Security Fence Security fencing to consist of tubular steel posts complete with post caps , cable straining wires , chainwire mesh and three barbed wires .
Construct as specified on standard drawing CS 1303 .
12.6.6 Safety Fence Safety fence to consist of '' HUMEARC '' type SWP HRI x 3 m panels or similar .
Erect the fence in accordance with manufacturer 's specifications .
VEHICLE MOVEMENT 12.7 BARRIERS/FENCES As per Standard Drawing CS 1316 .
Supply stock & half stock length pipe barriers .
Erect fences as ordered , so that the line of the tops of the posts is uniform .
Make allowance for excavation and concreting of anchor/footings .
Adjust the position of posts to compensate for the irregularities of the ground .
Minor clearing fence lines may include the removal of trees , shrubs , vegetable matter and debris .
Grub out all roots that interfere with the placement of posts .
CYCLE HOLDING RAILS 12.8 Supply and erect new cycle grab rails and delineators as per drawing number CS 1204 Or Remove damaged rail and replace with new rail as per drawing .
Make allowance for excavation and concreting of anchor/footings .
Make allowance for minor clearing of fence lines CULVERT CROSSING GUARD RAIL 12.9 Supply and erect Culvert Crossing Guard Rail rails and delineators as per drawing .
Make allowance for Hot Dip galvanising and masonry chemical anchorage to headwalls .
Make allowance for excavation and concreting of anchor/footings .
Refer to drawing CS 0016 .
Make allowance for minor clearing of fence lines .
Or Remove damaged Culvert Crossing Guard Rail and replace with new rail as per drawing .
Make allowance for excavation , removal and rehabilitation of anchor/footings .
LOG BARRIER FENCE 12.10 Refer to Recycled Plastic Bollards clause .
Provide log barrier fencing consisting of close spaced vertical bollards .
Use recycled plastic bollards or Stringybark , Woollybutt or Pine timber , pressure impregnated with ACQ preservative formulation , copper oxide ( CuO ) and quaternary ammonium compound ( DDAC ) to Category H4 of AS 1604 .
Do not use preservative treatments that contain arsenic or chromium .
RECYCLED PLASTIC BOLLARDS 12.11 Supply round pre-moulded recycled plastic bollards , 1.5 m length x 150 mm dia with built in colours and UV stabilised , resistant to termites , microorganisms and moisture .
Install and ensure security of recycled plastic bollards as per manufacturer ’ s recommendations .
Make allowance for excavation and concreting of anchor/footings .
Make allowance for minor clearing of fence lines .
ROAD FURNITURE MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 98 GUIDE POSTS 12.12 12.12.1 Posts Use Thermoplastic guide posts manufactured from plastic alloy ASA/PC or similar .
Refer to standard drawing CS 1300 .
REQUIREMENTS Posts to conform to the following : Colour : Opaque white .
Finish : Smooth , glossy .
Length : 1380 mm . .
Installation tolerance - height to be 1100mm to 900mm above finished surface .
Width : 95 mm minimum , 105 mm maximum , width to be constant to within 1 mm .
Web thickness : 3 mm minimum , 5 mm maximum .
12.12.2 Certification of Guide Posts – Hold Point Hold point - Provide certification that guide posts conform to the following : − Where installed in normal working conditions , guide posts are capable of self-erecting after 10 impacts head on , from an average sedan travelling at 60 km/h .
− After 2,000 hours of exposure in an Atlas Weatherometer the guide posts do not change colour by more than 10 points on a Delta E colour chart .
− The guide post material has a minimum Vicat softening point of 120ºC .
− Physical testing as specified .
− Resistant to termites .
12.12.3 Guide Post Characteristics – Hold Point Provide guide posts which have the following : − An anti-withdrawal device which will prevent the guide post from being withdrawn without dislodgement of the compacted backfill .
Anti- withdrawal devices must be engaged on each and every guide post prior to installation of guide posts .
− Legible and indelible markings similar to those used to mark or uPVC sewer and water pipes , in letters no less than 5 mm high , showing month and year of manufacture and located approximately 400 mm from the top of the post .
Stick-on labels are not permitted .
− Legible and indelible marking 380 mm from the bottom of the guide post , to indicate depth for installation .
Stick-on labels are not permitted .
Hold point - Provide a sample guide post from each batch purchased for this contract for approval before installing any guide posts .
DELINEATORS 12.13 RECTANGULAR RETROREFLECTORS To be of Class 1A retroreflective material .
Size to be 200 mm x 50 mm for red delineators ; and for white delineators .
Area minimum 100 cm2 ( 10,000 mm2 ) .
DISCRETE DEVICE TYPE RETROREFLECTORS Maximum projected face area for red delineator devices and white delineator devices to be 100 cm2 ( 10,000 mm2 ) .
Minimum length of shortest projected dimension to be 60 mm .
12.13.1 Installation of Delineators Attach one red and one white delineator to each guide post , 50 mm from the top of the post .
The red delineator to be attached to the convex side of curved guide posts .
Attach any discrete device type retroreflectors required as specified Red delineators to be on the left and white delineators to be on the right when viewed in the direction of travel .
12.13.2 Unscheduled Guide Post Materials 20 additional guide posts will be carried on the service vehicle when leaving the contractors premises to perform scheduled works , for the purpose of carrying out unscheduled works .
WORK ZONE PRODUCTS AND 12.14 ACCESSORIES 12.14.1 General Conform to AS 1742.3 unless otherwise specified .
Items required under this section will include , but not limited to the following .
- Traffic Cones 450 , 700mm high .
reflective - Traffic Cones ( Reflectorised ) 700mm high .
- Plastic Barrier Boards ( CL1 ) and Stands .
- Amber Flashing Lights .
- Delineators ( CL1 ) , Red/Yellow 200mm x 50mm , White 200mm x 50mm .
- Class 1 Overlays and Sheeting Material in all colours .
Colour and sizes will be as ordered .
Various associated items as per the schedule of rates .
ROAD SIGNS – MANUFACTURE , 12.15 SUPPLY AND DELIVERY This subsection specifies the manufacture , supply and delivery of road signs .
12.15.1 Materials – Hold Point NON-REFLECTIVE MATERIALS In accordance with AS 1743 .
ROAD FURNITURE MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 99 REFLECTIVE MATERIAL Use high intensity Class 1 to AS/NZS 1906.1 for all signs and hazard markers with the exception that all black legends are to be non-reflective .
BLANKS Use aluminium marine grade alloy designation 5052 - H38 .
Thickness 1.6 mm .
Steel sheets may only be used for temporary signs .
ANTI-GRAFFITI COATING Hold Point - Obtain Superintendent ’ s approval for the use of the anti-graffiti films or coating products .
Apply anti-graffiti products only to the new road signs specified by the Superintendent .
12.15.2 Manufacture Chemically clean aluminium blanks before painting or bonding of reflective material .
Stamp the month and year of manufacture and the symbol DIPL on the backs of all signs .
12.15.3 Delivery Supply sign including all brackets , bolts , nuts and bracings .
Fix bracings to the signs prior to delivery .
Package and handle all items to ensure delivery in an undamaged condition .
Protect signs with an approved slip sheeting and if required by the retroreflective sheeting manufacturer be padded with microfoam sheeting between the faces .
The sheeting is to cover the entire sign .
Store signs on their edge at all times and do not allow to become wet at any stage .
Signs are deemed delivered on being received into Sign Stores at Regional Centres .
Signs received in a damaged condition will not be accepted .
The Sign Supply Period Contractor is responsible for unloading .
Contact DIPL Regional Office to confirm the delivery location and make allowance .
Regional Centre Sign Stores are located at the following locations : DARWIN DIPL Road Projects Depot , Yarrawonga Road , Palmerston , and/or Period Contractor for Signage Installation , Darwin .
Note : make allowance for delivery to a single location within a 40-kilometre radius of the Darwin General Post Office .
TENNANT CREEK DIPL Road Projects Depot , Leichhardt Street , Tennant Creek .
ALICE SPRINGS Period Contractor for Signage Installation , Alice Springs .
EAST ARNHEM DIPL Road Projects Depot , John Flynn Drive , Nhulunbuy .
DELIVERY TIMES – NORMAL 12.16 REQUIREMENTS Delivery times are measured from the time of ordering .
Requirements are ; Table 12.2 – Sign delivery times Sign Type Quantity Delivery Time Regulatory Signs ( ‘ R ’ -series ) Up to 20 each 1 Week Warning Signs ( ‘ W ’ -series ) Up to 20 each 1 Week Guide Signs ( ‘ G ’ -series ) Up to 10 signs 2 Weeks Temporary Signs ( ‘ T ’ -series ) Up to 10 each 1 Week Associated Hardware Any Quantity 1 Week Where delivery is not achieved within the times listed a penalty of 15 % of the value of the order per week or part thereof will be applied at the discretion of the Superintendent .
For orders in excess of the quantities listed , delivery time will be as agreed between the Superintendent and the Contractor .
ROAD SIGNS – INSTALLATION AND 12.17 MAINTENANCE 12.17.1 General This subsection specifies the erection or replacement of road signs and posts including supply of posts .
12.17.2 Posts Post sizes to conform to Table 12.5 - Roadside Signs - Mounting Selection unless specified otherwise .
Posts to be medium grade galvanized pipe with plain ends and constructed from a single length of pipe .
Cap each post with a galvanized cap .
Do not use “ Ingal ” posts .
Conform to AS 1074 .
12.17.3 Location Signs to be located clear of vegetation and be clearly visible under headlight illumination .
12.17.4 Lateral Placement Lateral placement to be measured to the edge of the sign nearest the road .
ROAD FURNITURE MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 100 Lateral placement to be as follows : Unkerbed roads : 2 to 4 m clear from the edge of the traffic lane , and 600 mm minimum clear from the outer edge of the road shoulder .
Kerbed roads : 500 mm to 1000 mm from the front face of the kerb .
12.17.5 Height Height to be measured as the clearance to the lowest edge of the lowest sign in an assembly .
Heights for signs to be as follows : Table 12.3 – Heights for signs Unkerbed Roads : Fingerboard ( G3 ) and street name signs ( G5 ) : 2 m above the near edge of the pavement .
Other signs : 1 to 1.5 m above the near edge of the pavement .
Kerbed Roads : Signs overhanging a footway : 2.5 m minimum above footway .
Signs not overhanging a footway : 1 to 1.5 m clearance except for those specific signs on medians and islands given below .
Heights for specific signs on medians and islands : The following signs , when used on medians and islands , to have a clearance 150 mm above the kerb : − D4-1-2 Hazard Marker − D4-2-2 Hazard Marker − D4-3 Hazard Marker − R2-3 ( Keep Left ) ( Keep Right ) − R2-5 ( No U Turn ) − R2-6 ( No Right Turn ) ( No Left Turn ) − R2-15 ( U Turn Permitted ) .
12.17.6 Installation of Posts and Signs Conform to Table 12.5 - Roadside Signs - Mounting Selection .
Posts to be vertical .
Sleeves , when specified , to be 50 mm longer than the specified ground anchor depth and extend 50 mm above the finished surface level .
Secure the post to the sleeve with a galvanised locking wedge .
Encase the post , or sleeve when used , in a footing of 20 MPa concrete .
Conform to Table 12.4 - Orientation of signs .
Table 12.4 - Orientation of signs Face : Vertical , and turned 3 degrees to 5 degrees horizontally from oncoming traffic on straight sections .
On curves , at right angles to centre line of road .
Exception : Parking signs to be oriented 5 degrees from parallel to the kerb to face oncoming traffic .
12.17.7 Remove and Replace Existing Posts and Signs Dismantle damaged posts and signs .
Backfill the hole left by the post and its footing and compact the fill to the same density as the surrounding area .
Erect replacement posts and signs in newly augered holes in accordance with Installation of Posts and Signs section above .
12.17.8 Reinstatement and Relocation of Existing Signs Dismantle existing post and signs carefully .
Store in a manner to prevent damage .
Backfill the hole left by the post and its footing and compact the fill to the same density as the surrounding area .
Erect posts and signs in newly augered holes in accordance with Installation of Posts and Signs clause above .
Refer to Table 12.5 - Roadside Signs - Mounting Selection .
Refer to Clause 12.30 for Tables 12.17.9 General Requirements Spacing between posts to be : − 2 post signs - 0.6 times sign width .
− 3 post signs - 0.4 times sign width .
− 4 post signs - 0.3 times sign width .
− Brace spacing to be 380 mm maximum .
− Adopt the nearest size in the list for intermediate sizes .
− Post sizes for galvanized pipe posts are for sign clearance of less than 2 m above the pavement .
For sign clearances greater than 2 m , increase the nominal diameter of the pipe size by a percentage equal to the percentage increase in height above 2 m. − Where signs are erected in groups treat the overall dimensions of the group as one sign size to determine the post requirement from the Table 12.5 - Roadside Signs - Mounting Selection .
ROAD FURNITURE MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 101 Unscheduled Sign Materials 12.17.10 Carry additional sign materials on the service vehicle for the purpose of carrying out unscheduled repair and replacement works at various sites .
These items are additional to those required for scheduled works .
− 3 x 60 km/h − 3 x 80 km/h − 3 x 100 km/h − 3 x Give Way − 3 x Stop Signs − 3 x Keep Left − 3 x D4-2-2 Hazard Signs − Ample spare sign posts , caps , brackets , bolts , nuts and bracings − Concrete materials including cement , sand , and aggregate Receipt , Storage , Inventory and 12.17.11 Control of Signs Make provision for the receipt , storage , inventory and control of existing and replacement stock of Departmental signs , fittings and other associated items for use in the contract works .
Provide a secure and weatherproof storage facility at the Contractors premises .
The facility is to be approximately 150 m2 to accommodate an existing stock of signs , posts and fixtures made available to the Contractor by the Superintendent for use in the contract works .
Three large sign racks will also be provided with the signs .
Keep stock records up to date and regularly advise the Superintendent of item usage .
The Superintendent will supply replacement items as required .
Such replacement items will be at no cost to the Contractor , however costs associated with receipt , storage , inventory and control will be paid at the rate for Establishment as defined in the Schedule of Rates .
Transportation 12.17.12 Transport all items with care to ensure installation in an undamaged condition .
Signs are to be secured , supported and braced vertically to prevent damage due to scuffing , abrasion or load shifting .
Adequately brace large signs to prevent buckling or rivet popping .
Signs installed in a damaged condition will not be accepted .
Daily Log – Hold Point 12.17.13 Keep a daily log of works which at a minimum identifies road name , chainage , work performed , completion date , equipment down time and unusual happenings .
Submit daily log book sheets with each completed Contractor Service Request ( CSR ) .
Hold Point - Submit for Superintendent approval a suitably designed format for daily log books prior to commencing works under the Contract .
REMOVAL OF GRAFFITI .
12.18 Remove the Graffiti using the nominated graffiti remover in accordance with the manufacturer 's instructions .
Rinse panel free of remover/graffiti residues with water , wipe dry and assess for clean ability/removal it shall exhibit complete removal of the graffiti and show no discernible effect on the graffiti barrier or retro-reflective or non-reflective sheeting of the sign or other painted surfaces CLEANING OF SIGNS .
12.19 When cleaning a sign a non-abrasive cleaner free of damaging solvents should be applied with a sponge or soft bristle brush .
Pressure sprayers may be used if not sprayed so close to the sign that it would damage the sheeting face .
Whatever procedure is followed , it is best to first check with the product supplier and test out any chemical cleaner on a sign in the maintenance yard before use in the field .
CLEANING OF TOURIST 12.20 INTERPRETIVE SIGNAGE Tourist Interpretive signs in various locations are required to be kept clean at all times and especially during the “ tourist season. ” The signs are to be cleaned in such a manner as to remove all graffiti , dirt and other deleterious material , leaving the signs fit for purpose , clean and readable .
ROAD ASSET INFORMATION 12.21 The Superintendent will provide a current Road Information Management System ( RIMS ) data sheet listing when the Contract is awarded and provide regular updates , as required , throughout the Contract .
The data sheet listing will include the following ; − Each road under the Contract − The respective identification number − The respective Permanent Reference Points ( PRPs ) and chainages .
Work will be located by reference to the information contained on the data sheet listings .
MATERIAL SUPPLIED BY THE 12.22 PRINCIPAL On termination of the Contract , undertake a stock inventory of all signs , posts and fixtures and provide the inventory to the Superintendent .
All discrepancies deficient from the stock at the onset of the Contract will be charged to the Contractor .
Give access to the Superintendent or his Representative in order to remove or relocate the signs at the termination of the contract .
The cost of removal or relocation of the signs , posts and fittings will be borne by the Superintendent .
ROAD FURNITURE MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 102 FLOOD GAUGE POSTS 12.23 Posts and Gauges Use a standard flood gauge refer to standard drawing CS 1301 .
Use galvanized posts , single length , 150 x 50 x 3mm RHS with a 3mm end cap welded to the top .
Paint welds with a zinc rich organic paint to APAS specification 2916 .
Installation Erect the post vertically at the outer edge of the road shoulder or margin , on the left hand side when viewed in the direction of travel .
Install a concrete anchor , of 20 MPa concrete , with a depth of 600 mm and a diameter of 300 mm .
Cast a suitable galvanized sleeve , 650 mm in length , in the anchor so that the sleeve extends 50 mm above the finished surface level .
Attach post to sleeve with a galvanized M10 bolt 25 mm from the top of the sleeve .
Secure gauge to post with galvanized bolts and nuts , and galvanized brackets as appropriate .
Position gauge zero to comply with lowest spot on floodway along the centre line .
CATTLE GRIDS 12.24 Repair and maintain each required section of the cattle grid or assembly as shown on the Standard Drawings and details below : - Grid centre line are placed on the centre line of the road pavement .
- Grid grade and levels are to conform to the grade and levels of the adjacent road pavement .
- Place and compact select fill behind the abutments of the grid , up to the base of the pavement .
- Reinstate pavement layers with base material .
- Reinstate surface .
- Tighten all hold down bolts as specified .
- Paint the portion of guardrails above ground with one coat zinc phosphate primer and two coats of white alkyd paint .
- Fix width markers with epoxy adhesive to each guardrail .
- Construct strainer post assemblies .
- Fix the stock fence to the strainer assembly .
- Supply and install a gate in the fencing adjacent to the grid as specified .
Refer to PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS section of Request for Tender .
12.24.1 Grid Maintenance Refer to Standard Drawings CS 1314 , CS 1315 and CS 1316 .
This section of work for the repairs and maintenance of grids , include the welding to damage members of a grid , remove and replacement of damaged parts of a grid and cleaning and painting of parts of a grid All repairs to grid steel welding will be carried out by a certified tradesman or a person with demonstrated ability to perform the works within the limits of the specification Carry sufficient spare bolts , nuts , plates and tradesman equipment when carrying out routine maintenance for repairs that were not obvious at the time of original inspection .
STEEL BEAM GUARDRAIL 12.25 Repair and maintain each section of the steel beam guardrails requiring repair and/or maintenance to reinstate them to an as new condition as shown on CS 1310 and as detailed below .
Refer to Civil Standard DRAWINGS .
12.25.1 Materials RAILS Use W-beam guardrail to AS/NZS 3845.1 of nominal 300 mm width formed from HA 350 steel to AS/NZS 1594 .
Rails to be capable of withstanding a cold bend of 180 deg .
around a diameter 2.5 times its own thickness without cracking .
Base metal thickness to be 2.7 mm minimum .
TERMINAL SECTIONS Form from HA 350 steel having the same properties and thickness as the rails .
POSTS Fabricate posts and block outs from steel channel section in accordance with standard drawings .
BOLTS AND NUTS Shape bolt shoulders and holes in rail elements to prevent the bolts from turning .
Length of bolts to be sufficient to extend 6 mm to 12 mm beyond the nuts .
GALVANIZING Galvanize all components by hot dip galvanizing , after fabrication , to AS/NZS 4680 .
Where the galvanising on guard rail or associated fittings has been damaged , the coating shall be repaired by regalvanising or by painting with a minimum of two coats of a zinc-rich inorganic paint in accordance with AS/NZS 3750.9 and one coat of aluminium paint .
COMPLIANCE Marking of materials - AS/NZS 1594 Each coil or shipping unit shall be clearly and durably marked or tagged to indicate the following : ROAD FURNITURE MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 103 ( a ) Steel grade designation .
( b ) Dimensions .
( c ) Name or registered trade name or mark of the manufacturer .
( d ) Batch identification .
If the marked portion of the material is subsequently removed then these markings are to be transferred to each remaining portion of the material .
Traceability of components To AS/NZS 3845.1 ( a ) All steel rails , posts and other critical components shall be permanently marked in lettering at least 10 mm high with the name of System Manufacturer , the date and month of manufacture the grade of steel and base metal thickness ( BMT ) to allow the product to be traced .
( b ) Where plastic components make up a key element of the system , they shall be permanently marked clearly indicating the month and year of manufacture in a location that can be easily inspected .
( c ) Bolts shall be marked in accordance with AS 1111.1 or AS/NZS 1252 .
Certificate ( s ) of compliance - AS/NZS 1594 Provide certificate ( s ) of compliance from the manufacturer that the steel used in the manufacture of the steel beam guardrails is of structural grade HA 350 .
Certificate ( s ) of compliance - AS/NZS 4680 Provide certificate ( s ) of compliance from the galvanizer that the galvanizing complies with AS/NZS 4680 .
INSTALLATION Erect the rail in a manner that produces a smooth , continuous , taut rail closely conforming to the line and grade of the roadway .
Lap rails so that the ends of rails do not face oncoming traffic in the adjacent lane .
Attach reflective delineators to the guardrail in accordance with the manufacturer 's specification .
Delineator heights to match heights of delineators on guide posts .
Delineator dimensions shown in the Delineators clause in this work section .
Refer to CIVIL STANDARD DRAWINGS .
12.25.2 Steel Beam Guardrail Maintenance Repairs to , and maintenance of , damaged sections of steel beam guardrail include removal and replacement of damaged sections of rail , posts and terminal sections in a manner that produces a smooth , continuous , taut rail closely conforming to the line and grade of the roadway .
Attach reflective delineators to the guardrail in accordance with the manufacturer ’ s specification .
ADVERSE CONDITION REPORT 12.26 Submit to the Superintendent a Road Furniture Adverse Condition Report when condition of road furniture is adverse due to factors not covered by this specification .
Carry out the works in accordance with ordered Contractor Service Request ( CSR ) and as per unscheduled work conditions of this specification , however , submit this report if works are to be interrupted due to external or unforeseen circumstances .
LIAISON WITH THE SUPERINTENDENT 12.27 Refer all matters relating to difficulties or problems experienced in carrying out the requirements of the Contract to the Superintendent .
CONTRACTOR ’ S PERSONNEL 12.28 Provide one service vehicle with a minimum of two personnel to undertake the works under the contract .
The Superintendent may at times require the services of additional vehicles and labour to perform Unscheduled Works .
Additional vehicles and labour will be paid at the tendered rates defined in the Schedule of Rates .
12.28.1 Personnel in Crews Personnel undertaking contractual works as defined in this specification will be required to work with minimum supervision .
Nominate one of the personnel familiar with the requirements of contract to attend all operations in each area of work to ensure full compliance .
Nominate an individual or provide a roster of individuals that are contactable and available at all times , 24 hrs a day 7 days a week including Public Holidays .
Refer to Table 12.6 - Personnel in Crews .
Refer to Clause 12.30 for Tables 12.28.2 Plant and Equipment Supply a service vehicle readily available and equipped with all the necessary tools and equipment to perform the works .
Refer to Table 12.7 - Plant and Equipment .
Refer to Clause 12.30 for Tables OTHER REQUIREMENTS 12.29 ( If applicable ) Refer to PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS section of Request for Tender .
ROAD FURNITURE MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 104 TABLES 12.30 Table 12.5 - Roadside Signs - Mounting Selection Sign Size W X D No .
and NB gal .
pipe posts Sign attachment brackets ( or M8 bolts ) per post Bracing Anchor Depth ( mm ) Dia .
( mm ) 300 x 300 1 x 50 2 No 600 300 300 x 450 1 x 50 2 No 600 300 450 x 450 1 x 50 2 No 600 300 450 x 300 1 x 50 2 No 600 300 450 x 600 1 x 50 2 No 600 300 450 x 750 1 x 50 2 No 600 300 450 x 900 1 x 50 2 No 600 300 600 x 450 1 x 50 2 No 600 300 600 x 600 1 x 50 2 No 600 300 600 x 750 1 x 50 2 No 600 300 600 x 900 1 x 50 3 No 600 300 600 x 1050 1 x 50 3 No 600 300 750 x 450 1 x 50 2 No 600 300 750 x 600 1 x 50 2 No 600 300 750 x 750 1 x 50 2 No 600 300 750 x 1200 1 x 50 3 No 1000 300 900 x 300 1 x 50 2 Yes 600 300 900 x 600 1 x 50 2 Yes 600 300 900 x 900 1 x 50 3 Yes 600 300 900 x 1350 1 x 50 4 Yes 1000 300 1050 x 600 1 x 50 2 Yes 1000 300 1050 x 900 1 x 50 3 Yes 1000 300 1200 x 600 2 x 50 2 Yes 600 300 1800 x 600 2 x 50 2 Yes 1000 300 1800 x 1200 2 x 80 4 Yes 1000 300 2400 x 1200 2 x 80 4 Yes 1200 450 2400 x 1800 2 x 100 5 Yes 1200 450 3000 x 600 2 x 50 2 Yes 1000 300 3000 x 1200 2 x 80 4 Yes 1200 450 3000 x 1800 2 x 100 5 Yes 1500 450 3700 x 600 2 x 80 2 Yes 1000 300 3700 x 1200 3 x 80 4 Yes 1200 450 3700 x 1800 3 x 100 5 Yes 1500 450 3700 x 2400 4 x 100 7 Yes 1500 450 ROAD FURNITURE MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 105 Table 12.5 - Roadside Signs - Mounting Selection Sign Size W X D No .
and NB gal .
pipe posts Sign attachment brackets ( or M8 bolts ) per post Bracing Anchor Depth ( mm ) Dia .
( mm ) 4300 x 600 2 x 80 2 Yes 1000 300 4300 x 1200 3 x 80 4 Yes 1200 450 4300 x 1800 3 x 100 5 Yes 1500 450 4900 x 600 3 x 80 2 Yes 1000 300 4900 x 1200 3 x 100 4 Yes 1200 450 4900 x 1800 3 x 100 5 Yes 1500 450 5500 x 600 3 x 80 2 Yes 1000 300 5500 x 1200 3 x 100 4 Yes 1200 450 5500 x 1800 4 x 100 5 Yes 1500 450 6100 x 600 3 x 80 2 Yes 1000 300 6100 x 1200 3 x 100 4 Yes 1200 450 6100 x 1800 4 x 100 5 Yes 1500 450 Table 12.6 - Personnel in Crews At least one person shall have the following : Qualifications : A current Accreditation Certificate in Work-zone Traffic Control , and prior experience in traffic management .
An ability to understand and apply the requirements of AS 1742.3 Possess a current NT driver ’ s licence appropriate for the Contractors service vehicle .
Experience : Relevant experience in the construction industry including safe operation of equipment for welding , cutting , grinding , concreting , and other hand tools .
Attributes : Good oral and written communication skills , and able to liaise well with Departmental staff .
Knowledge : Knowledge of the road network .
ROAD FURNITURE MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 106 Table 12.7 - Plant and Equipment The service vehicle will provide effective and efficient service response , and will contain but not be limited to the following items : Communication : Hands free mobile phone .
Access to a satellite phone for remote locations would be advantageous , however not essential .
Fittings : Post and sign racks , concrete pre-mix material bins , water tank with potable water supply sufficient to mix concrete as required , and storage boxes for brackets , fitting , bolts and nuts etc .
Equipment : Mechanical and hand augers , oxy-acetylene set , portable welder/generator set , small electric breaker , ladders , wheelbarrow , lifting equipment , dumpy level and staff .
Hand Tools : Hand tools for fencing , concreting , digging , shovelling , compacting , fixing , screwing , dismantling , riveting , driving , breaking , and levelling .
Electric hand tools and accessories for the grinding , cutting and drilling of steel , aluminium and wood , banding tools .
Camera : Digital camera to record evidence of damage for unscheduled works and other occurrences .
PAVEMENT MARKING MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 107 PAVEMENT MARKING MAINTENANCE 13 .
OUTLINE DESCRIPTION 13.1 This section specifies the materials , testing and standards of workmanship for marking and re- marking of pavements with road marking paint and/or long life material .
STANDARDS 13.2 Comply with the Acts , Regulations , Guidelines and Codes applicable to the works .
Comply with the requirements of Authorities with jurisdiction over the works .
Conform to the Standards and Publications quoted throughout this document unless specified otherwise .
Refer to REFERENCED DOCUMENTS .
DEFINITIONS 13.3 CSR Contractor Service Request .
A formal request issued by the Superintendent for works to be undertaken .
Longlife Materials Longlife marking materials generally consist of either thermoplastic , cold applied plastic or pliant polymer materials .
These materials have lifespans of between 2 and 5 times that of water-borne paint .
Longitudinal Lines Any line which runs parallel to the road centre line , e.g .
broken line , edge line , separation line , barrier line .
NTTM NT Test Methods , found in NT Materials Testing Manual .
Other Markings All diagonal lines , chevron markings and messages on the pavement , including symbols , words , numerals , arrows and kerb markings .
PCCP Painting Contractors Certification Program Retroreflectivity A term used to indicate the reflectivity provided by glass beads and is expressed as minicandela per lux per square metre ( mcd/lx/m2 ) as measured by a reflectometer approved by the Superintendent .
Traffic Control Device Any sign , signal , pavement marking or other installation placed or erected for the purpose of regulating , warning , guiding or providing for the safety of road users .
It does not include temporary warning devices and control measures erected only for the construction period .
Transverse Markings Any line which is at right angles to the centre line of the road , e.g .
stop line , hold line , and pedestrian cross walk .
CONTRACTOR ACCREDITATION 13.4 All pavement marking work must be carried out by a contractor accredited to the “ Painting Contractor Certification Program ” ( PCCP ) in a class or category applicable to the work .
The PCCP is administered by the CSIRO .
Information regarding the PCCP can be obtained at http : //apas.gov.au/pccp/index.htm .
CONTRACTOR ’ S MATERIALS AND 13.5 EQUIPMENT – WITNESS POINT Provide all general and specialised equipment , tools and materials to carry out and test the work .
Be fully equipped on each attendance call .
Equipment used shall produce markings of uniform quality which conform to the requirements of this specification .
Witness Point - Provide documented evidence to show that spraying equipment has been calibrated in accordance with NTTM 405.1 .
Specifically , provide at least the following ; − One or more self -propelled line marking units with an operating paint capacity of > 600 litres and equipped with appropriate glass bead capacity , a minimum rear wheel track of 1400 mm and a wheel base of 2800 mm with rear operator .
These machines are to be equipped with data logging and application monitoring equipment .
− One or more self-propelled line marking units suited to short run urban line marking , intersections and areas requiring greater manoeuvrability .
These machines shall have a minimum GVM of 1 tonne and have a paint capacity of not less than 200 litres and have appropriate glass bead capacity .
These machines are to be equipped with data logging and application monitoring equipment .
− One or more hand cart line marking units including self-propelled machines with an operating capacity of 20 litres − Pilot vehicles equipped with required work zone traffic control signage for works on the road network conforming to the requirements of AS 1742 .
Refer to PROVISION FOR TRAFFIC .
− Skilled labour resources to crew a minimum of one line marking unit .
Crews to have gained accreditation from nationally recognised and Department approved Work Zone Traffic Management courses and obtained the appropriate accreditation cards with photographic identification issued by Motor Vehicle Registry .
Crews to also be conversant with Work Health and Safety requirements .
− Schedule of local NT suppliers intended to be utilized for the supply of materials .
PAVEMENT MARKING MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 108 PAVEMENT MARKING 13.6 13.6.1 General – Witness Point Pavement Markings at new works to be installed within 3 days of sealing unless otherwise specified by the Superintendent .
Paint application will also be at the same rate as specified unless otherwise directed by the Superintendent .
Witness Point - Obtain approval from the Superintendent for the type of equipment to be used for applying marking materials .
13.6.2 Road Marking Paint Australian Paint Approvals Scheme ( APAS ) Specifications : For paint types identified by an APAS specification code , conform to the specification represented by that code .
Road marking paint to conform to APAS 0041/5 and suitable for application by spray equipment in accordance with Test Method AS /NZS 1580.205.4 .
Paint to be suitable for asphalt , bituminous seal and concrete road surfaces and for use with Intermix BS 6088 glass beads .
Retain a 'Certificate of Compliance ' with the relevant Australian Standards or APAS specification in respect to the paint and glass beads .
13.6.3 Glass Beads Use Type C glass beads conforming to AS/NZS 2009 with the exception of size .
Conform to the size distribution requirements in Table 13.1 – Glass Beads Size Distribution .
Table 13.1 – Glass Beads Size Distribution Sieve Size ( Microns ) % Retained % Passing 1180 0 – 3 97 – 100 850 5 – 20 80 – 95 425 65 – 95 5 – 35 PAN 0 - 10 - 13.6.4 Long Life Marking Materials Use a product approved and recommended by the manufacturer for the purpose and conforming to the requirements of AS 4049 .
Retain a 'Certificate of Compliance ' with the relevant Australian Standards in respect to the material .
Type C glass beads conforming to AS/NZS 2009 .
13.6.5 Setting Out Surface to be marked must be free from dirt , loose detritus , mud and other extraneous matter , and dry before and after painting operations .
The location of all pavement markings on new surfaces , including reflective raised pavement markers , shall be set out by spotting with paint or other approved method prior to application of the markings .
The location of all pavement markings over existing markings shall match the existing except where directed otherwise .
Setting out will be negotiated with each CSR as an item for new work only .
Setting out will be to a level of service satisfactory to the Superintendent .
Set out markings so that they are straight , with smooth even curves where necessary .
Remove any marking material beyond the defined marking leaving a neat and smooth marking on the pavement .
New Work : Set out line marking in accordance with the standard drawings for line marking , CS 1520 and CS 1521 and in accordance with AS 1742 including the setting out of arrows , letters , numerals and chevrons .
Remarking : Remark along the line of the existing line marking and to the tolerances specified for new work .
13.6.6 Application Apply paint evenly to the road surface at the specified film thicknesses ( Tolerance + 0.04 mm ) and not more than five seconds after spraying apply Intermix beads On all work , apply one coat of paint and glass beads to the road .
Apply in the direction of traffic flow where possible .
Transverse and Other Marking Applications : Apply paint evenly to the road surface to the specified film thickness and immediately after apply an even application of Intermix glass beads at the specified rates .
Protect all applications from traffic until the binder has hardened sufficiently to retain the glass beads .
Reinstate pavement markings that are damaged by traffic during paint drying time and remove all tyre pickup marks as per Removal Of Markings clause .
Markings must be free from ghosting and raggedness on the sides and ends and parallel with the general alignment of the carriageway .
Lines must be level , uniform and free from streaks .
Conform to Table 13.2 – Line Marking Application Rates .
PAVEMENT MARKING MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 109 Table 13.2 – Line Marking Application Rates Material Thickness/rate Waterborne Paint dry film thickness ( excluding surface applied beads ) > 0.250 mm Water borne Paint Wet film thickness ( excluding surface applied beads ) > 0.400 mm Surface applied glass beads ( rate retained in the paint surface ) Intermix glass beads > 300 g/m2 13.6.7 Tolerance The distance between the centre line of the marking and the centre line of the set out mark is to be less than 30 mm .
The apparent line of the markings is to be a smooth continuous alignment when viewed in the direction of the line .
Permitted tolerance for the length , width and spacing of all pavement markings : + or - 10 mm .
Removal of Markings – Hold Point 13.6.8 Hold Point – Obtain approval from the Superintendent on the method used for line marking removal .
Removal of pavement marking must not adversely affect the integrity of the road surface .
When arrows , letters or figures are to be removed or temporarily blacked out , the removal pattern must be in the shape of a rectangle or square to minimise confusion to the motorist , particularly in wet weather or poor lighting conditions .
Remove all materials and debris from removal operations .
The following methods may be considered and will be dependent on the type of surface , extent and application .
Machine Grinding This method may be considered for use on smaller removal jobs where surface finish is not a concern .
Can be used on most asphalt and concrete surfaces .
Sandblasting Sandblasting is the preferred method for marking removal on asphalt and concrete surfaces .
Use a skirt or guard around the blaster to minimise the spraying of material away from the immediate work area .
Remove waste material before it can be transported by rain , wind or traffic .
This will generally require the use of a vacuum attachment operating concurrently with the blasting operation or alternative method approved by the Superintendent .
Sealing Spray sealing is the preferred method for sprayed seal surfaces .
Conform to SPRAY SEALING FOR MAINTENANCE .
Paint Blackout Paint blackout may be considered as a temporary measure only as markings retain a high reflection and possess low skid resistance .
Other Methods Other methods such as water blasting , heat lance or paint stripping may also be considered by the Superintendent .
13.6.9 Field Testing Wet Film Thickness Comb : Check the thickness of the wet film applied to the road pavement by the method of procedure for Operation of Wet Film Thickness Comb ( NTTM 401.1 ) Glass Bead Application : Check the application rate of glass beads to the surface of the marked line by the method of Field Procedure for Measurement of the Rate of Application of Spherical Glass Beads ( NTTM 402.1 ) Wear assessment : The degree of wear is defined as the area of pavement marking remaining after a period of time , relative to the initial area of the pavement marking .
Degree of wear : At the Superintendent ’ s discretion , determine the degree of wear using Image Analysis in accordance with AS 4049.1 Paints and related materials – Pavement marking materials or by using Image Analysis in accordance with AS 4049.3 Appendix K , Method A , Photographic Method .
Wear limits for pavement marking : 95 % intact area after six months .
Remark pavement marking that does not conform to the specified limits at the Contractor ’ s expense including the costs of all testing .
COLD APPLIED PLASTIC MATERIALS 13.7 13.7.1 Standards AS 4049.2 Paints and related materials— Pavement marking materials - Part 2 : Thermoplastic pavement marking materials—For use with surface applied glass beads AS 4049.4 Paints and related materials— Pavement marking materials – Part 4 : High performance pavement marking systems AP-S0041/3 Pavement marking materials – cold applied plastic AP-S0042 Glass beads for use in pavement marking paints PAVEMENT MARKING MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 110 13.7.2 Materials – Witness Point Generally : A two part Poly Methyl Methacrylate resin based pavement marking material that complies with the requirements for colour , luminance and bead content of AS 4049.2 , and which complies with AS 4049.4 , sprayed or screeded onto the pavement , containing pre- mixed glass beads conforming to AS/NZS 2009 , with additional drop-on beads being added during application , conforming with the following requirements of AS 4049.2 : Clause 5.1 – Colour , Clause 5.2 - Luminance and Clause 7 - Field Testing .
The material shall have a maximum no- pick-up time of 60 minutes .
Witness Point - Provide evidence that all proprietary products such as epoxy or plastic products have demonstrated satisfactory field performance for a period of at least three years .
13.7.3 Application – Witness Point Application is to be in accordance with the Manufacturer ’ s Specification .
Witness Point - Provide evidence that it has been applied in accordance with the Manufacturer ’ s instructions .
The area to be marked is to be dry and free of dirt , gravel , oil and other loose or foreign material to ensure the best possible adhesion of new material .
Remove existing paint or other material which is flaking or chipped .
Cleaning may be carried out by brooming , blowing or washing .
Use a tack coat or primer material for surface or other conditions requiring it in accordance with the Manufacturer ’ s Specification .
Apply by spraying , screeding , trowelling or extrusion methods , including application of glass beads and anti-skid material , in a single uniform layer .
For longitudinal lines and transverse markings , apply material at a rate to achieve a minimum final thickness of 2.5 mm ± 0.5 mm for application by screeding , trowelling or extrusion methods .
Glass beads are to be Class C ( intermix 20 to 30 % by mass ) and Class D ( AS/NZS 2009 ) .
As well as the “ mixed in ” glass beads additional Class D beads shall be uniformly applied to the surface of thermoplastic at the rate of 0.40 kg/m2 as part of the application process and before the material has commenced to set .
The marking produced shall be uniform in texture , width and thickness and the surface substantially free from blisters , streaks , lumps and other defects .
Remove any occurrence of overspray and gun dribble .
13.7.4 Setting out For continuous thermoplastic pavement marking , 50 mm drainage gaps shall be provided , at a maximum spacing of 6m +1m , to allow adequate drainage of the pavement surface .
Nominate in the Contract Management Plan the method of identifying the location and spacing for these gaps .
RAISED RETROREFLECTIVE 13.8 PAVEMENT MARKERS ( RRPMS ) 13.8.1 Materials Use STIMSONITE 953 markers fixed to the road surface as recommended by the manufacturer of the marker .
Raised Retroreflective Pavement Markers to conform AS 1906.3 .
Fix to the road surface as recommended by the manufacturer .
Use adhesives as recommended by the manufacturer .
Use adhesives within the time recommended by the adhesive manufacturer .
13.8.2 Pavement Preparation Ensure each RRPM site is free of dirt , oil , grease , paint and any other material which would affect the bond of adhesive to the pavement .
Abrasive blast , chip , or burn pavements that can not be cleaned by sweeping .
Check the moisture content of the surface immediately before application by the polyethylene film moisture test .
Do not place markers if the film moisture test indicates the presence of moisture .
13.8.3 Placing Markers Place markers in accordance with the manufacturer 's recommendations .
Use marker types as follows : − Centre line : White , two way reflectors , − Lane line : White , one way reflectors , − Left edge line : Red , one way reflectors , − Right edge line adjacent to medians on dual carriageway : Red , one way reflectors , − Chevron Areas : Yellow one way reflectors , or yellow two way reflectors .
Face reflectors to oncoming traffic .
Do not obscure the reflective faces by adhesive .
Surface finish to be smooth .
Discard markers which are not positioned correctly within the time recommended by the manufacturer for use of the adhesive .
Remove adhesive from the road surface .
Do not place markers over joints in concrete pavement .
PAVEMENT MARKING MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 111 Where the existing seal has excess binder , or where Gilsabind has recently been used , include the following for adhesion of RRPMs : − Clean the road surface to expose the aggregate prior to installation , − Protect the RRPMs from traffic until the adhesive is fully set , − Locate the RRPMs to the outside of edge lines .
13.8.4 Raised Reflective Pavement Marker Removal Where required , remove raised pavement markers by breaking the bond between the adhesive , the road surface and the base of the raised pavement marker .
Repair all divots caused by the removal of raised pavement markers with hot melt adhesive or epoxy adhesive to the level of the surrounding pavement .
AUDIO TACTILE LINE MARKING 13.9 ( ATLM ) 13.9.1 Site Preparation Immediately prior to marking application , remove all extraneous or loose material from areas where the thermoplastic material is to be applied .
Prepare and prime areas as recommended by the manufacturer to ensure satisfactory adhesion of thermoplastic material .
13.9.2 Application Apply ATLM directly on to the road surface on existing painted edge lines or centre double barrier lines .
Apply markings within the tolerances specified in Table 13.3 – Audio Tactile Line Marking Tolerances .
The height of the thermoplastic raised ribs is measured from the planed surface formed by the tops of the aggregate .
13.9.3 Retro-reflectivity Apply glass beads in accordance with AS/NZS 2009 Type B immediately to the surface of the molten thermoplastic material .
The minimum rate to be retained on the thermoplastic material is 200g/m2 .
Marking must achieve a minimum level of reflectivity of 350 mcd/lux/m2 at time of application when tested in accordance with AS 4049.2 Appendix K - Field tests for thermoplastic pavement marking material – and Appendix M – Determination of retroreflectivity .
Table 13.3 – Audio Tactile Line Marking Tolerances Aspect Dimension Tolerance ( mm ) Height of raised rib 8mm +2mm or -1mm Spacing of raised rib 250mm ± 10mm Length of raised rib 50mm ± 2mm Slope of raised rib 45 degrees ± 10 degrees Width of raised rib ( edge line ) .
As shown on project drawings .
Otherwise 100mm ± 2mm Width of raised rib ( centre barrier line ) 80mm ± 2mm 13.9.4 Audio tactile markings Thermoplastic used for audio tactile pavement markings must comply with AS 4049.2 but modified as follows : − Softening Point : When determined in accordance with AS 2341.18 the softening point shall be not less than 95°C .
− Cold Flow : When determined in accordance with AS 4049.2 Appendix I – Determination of flow resistance - the cold flow shall be no more than 5 % at 40°C .
− Skid Resistance : When tested in accordance with AS 4049.2 Appendix K – Field tests for thermoplastic pavement marking material – and Appendix L – Field determination of skid resistance ( wet pendulum method ) - at any time up to 3,000,000 vehicle passes , the skid resistance value of beaded unprofiled base material must be not less than 50 .
− Retro-reflectivity : Mix glass beads in accordance with AS 2009 Type C into the thermoplastic material at a rate of not less than 30 % by mass prior to application .
OTHER REQUIREMENTS 13.10 ( If applicable ) Refer to PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS section of Request for Tender .
LANDSCAPE MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 112 LANDSCAPE MAINTENANCE 14 .
OUTLINE DESCRIPTION 14.1 This section specifies the maintenance requirement for control of vegetation and litter by use of mechanical means and/or chemicals , and the maintenance requirement for irrigation systems , in an urban road verge environment .
STANDARDS 14.2 Comply with the Acts , Regulations , Guidelines and Codes applicable to the works .
Comply with the requirements of Authorities with jurisdiction over the works .
Conform to the Standards and Publications quoted throughout this document unless specified otherwise .
Refer to REFERENCED DOCUMENTS .
Comply with conditions included in any AAPA clearances or approvals applying to the site of the works .
Observe the restrictions imposed by any Restricted Works Areas conditions applying to the site of the works .
Refer to Work Involving Chemicals clause in MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS section .
Refer to Waste Disposal clause in MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS section .
Refer to Vegetation Control in SLASHING AND WEED CONTROL .
Specification Reference Refer to the Northern Territory Government Standard Specification for Environmental Management and to the RFT .
DEFINITIONS 14.3 Certified Seed Seed by record of origin , purity , and strain and conforming in character to the parent stock .
Exotic Plants Any plants not native to Australia .
Fine Tilth The friable soil resulting from cultivation .
Germination Percentage The proportion of pure seed germinating in a fixed time under standard laboratory conditions .
Grass Grass includes clumps or tufts of grass growing on scalded areas , grass species that grow faster than other species and includes the whole of the plant , including leaves , seeds , stems and seed heads .
Mulch Material spread as a surface treatment to reduce soil erosion , water loss , and weed invasion .
Native Plants Plants which are natural to Australia .
NPK Ratio The ratio of Nitrogen ( N ) , Phosphorus ( P ) , and Potassium ( K ) in a fertiliser compound .
Root Ball The finely bound fibrous root and soil removed intact from the container with the plant .
RWA Restricted Work Area Soil Binding Agent Material which stabilises and conditions soil and aids moisture retention .
Weeding The removal of unwanted plant or grass species by mechanical , manual or chemical means .
EXTENT OF WORK 14.4 Maintain the full extent of the road reserve for each road and length identified in the RFT and/or in the PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS section and the Schedule of Rates .
Identify and undertake the works required to maintain each road within the specified service levels .
Service levels are clearly defined outcomes specified for all the landscape maintenance works specified herein .
Failure to adhere to the response times for attendance and completion of work , including after hour call-outs , may result in the Superintendent engaging a third party to attend to and complete the work at the Contractor ’ s expense .
At intersections with Local Council Roads , maintain to the end of the curve at the truncation .
Where there is a discernible property boundary or fence line , maintain beyond the end of the curve at the truncation to the extended property boundary line .
The relevant Local Councils are responsible for maintenance beyond that point .
Refer to Figure 14.1 Extent of Work Area at Intersections with Local Council Roads .
LANDSCAPE MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 113 Figure 14.1 Extent of Work Area at Intersections with Local Council Roads Road verges within the road reserve may on occasion be maintained by other land holders or residents , however they are not exempt from the specified service levels .
INTERSECTION SIGHT LINES 14.5 Maintain intersection sight lines to minimum sight distances corresponding to the relevant vehicle speed as per Figure 14.2 Intersection Sight Lines and Table 14.4 - Sight Line Distances .
Refer Clause 14.31 for Figure and Table CONTRACTOR ’ S PERSONNEL 14.6 14.6.1 Horticulturist Employ or have access to a qualified Horticulturist for the total period of the Contract .
The Horticulturist shall have attained a minimum qualification of Certificate III in Horticulture ( Floriculture ) or equivalent accredited training course .
The Horticulturist is to continually monitor and advise the Contractor daily on appropriate horticultural requirements with a view to best practices and will play a major part in maintaining the health of all vegetation over the period of the contract .
A Horticulturist ’ s report is to accompany the monthly claim for payment and is to include mention of all observations or occurrences of note related to vegetative issues observed over the period .
Make available the time and expertise of the Horticulturist at no additional cost to the Superintendent in relation to any plant health related query that may arise within the road reserve associated with the contract on an “ as and when required ” basis .
14.6.2 Certified Irrigation Specialist Employ or otherwise engage a certified irrigation designer and tradesperson with appropriate qualifications to undertake design , installation and maintenance of irrigation systems .
Certification to be recognised by the Irrigation Association of Australia .
Make available the time and expertise of the certified irrigation specialist at no additional cost to the Superintendent in relation to any irrigation related query that may arise regarding issues associated with the contract on an “ as and when required ” basis .
The certified irrigation specialist is to continually monitor works and advise the Contractor on appropriate irrigation requirements with a view to best practices and will play a major part in maintaining the irrigation systems over the period of the contract .
14.6.3 Arborist Include at least one qualified arborist in the tree pruning team .
The Arborist shall be a person with a minimum qualification of Certificate III in Horticulture ( Arboriculture ) RTF30203 , from the Amenity Horticulture Training Package RTF03 or equivalent accredited training course .
14.6.4 Supervisors Employ sufficient supervisors familiar with the requirements of the contract to attend all operations in each area of work to ensure full compliance with specified service levels .
Nominate an individual or provide a roster of individuals including their contact phone numbers who will be available at all times , including nights , weekends and Public Holidays during the period of the Contract .
14.6.5 Personnel Handling Chemicals Be registered for business as weed control operators , or engage subcontractors registered for business as weed control operators .
The Contractor and Sub-contractors must have a Ground Spraying Business Licence and operators must have a Ground Spraying Applicators Licence .
Provide copies of these licences .
Nominate one of the personnel familiar with the requirements of contract to supervise all operations to ensure full compliance with statutory requirements .
Do not allow spray drift .
Operators must be competent in their understanding of how to prevent spray drift .
Keep a copy of the Safety Data Sheet on site for each type of chemical used Handle all chemicals as specified in product SDS .
Wear as a minimum the protective clothing as specified in product SDS .
Refer to the Spraying clause in SLASHING AND WEED CONTROL .
PROGRAM OF WORKS 14.7 Submit a 12 month Landscape Maintenance Program within 2 weeks of award of contract in the first year , and 2 weeks prior to the commencement of a subsequent 12 month period .
LANDSCAPE MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 114 Identify the type , frequency and timing for each service associated with the contract .
However , achieve the specified service levels regardless of frequency of treatment .
The Superintendent will use the 12 month landscape maintenance program to measure progress of the works .
There may occasionally be a reduction in the area of service under the contract due to new works being carried out within the road reserve .
Negotiate with the Superintendent any variation to the contract should these works result in a changed maintenance requirement both during construction and after completion .
Any reduction in the area of service under the contract as a result of asset transfer to another owner will be varied out of the contract .
PROGRESS REPORTS 14.8 14.8.1 Weekly Report Submit to the Superintendent via email no later than close of business each Thursday a detailed Weekly Report advising the location and nature of works programmed to be carried out over the following week .
Include information about any chemical spills and the remedial action taken .
Carry out the works in accordance with the Weekly Report , however submit a modified version if works are to be interrupted due to external or unforeseen circumstances .
Irrespective of external or unforeseen circumstances continue to maintain the asset within the service levels specified .
Number each Weekly Report from 1 to 52 , and identify as a Revision if that is the case .
14.8.2 Monthly Report Submit a Monthly Maintenance Report attached to the monthly claim for payment .
The report shall provide the following information : − a summary of the activities carried out during the month of the report − a Horticulturist ’ s report mentioning all observations or occurrences of note related to vegetative issues observed over the period − a schedule of trees , plants and shrubs that have died , are dying , or are approaching the end of their expected life in the road reserve during the month of the report .
− a schedule of any vegetation that for any reason is unstable or represents a safety hazard to pedestrians , cyclists , motorists or any other user of the road reserve .
− summary of observations or occurrences of note related to irrigation issues .
− summary of spraying operations for herbicides and pesticides undertaken in the period of the report .
Copies of daily log book sheets for spray treatments shall accompany the monthly report .
− summary of fertilising undertaken in accordance with the Annual Maintenance Plan .
− estimate of quantity , including location , of mulch held in stockpile that is the property of the Principal .
− details of complaints received from members of the public , and actions taken .
− information about any chemical spills and the remedial action taken .
− Details on how compliance with any AAPA conditions or RWAs was achieved .
− a record of details of all dead domestic animals that are disposed of under the contract .
LIAISON WITH THE SUPERINTENDENT 14.9 Refer all matters relating to difficulties or problems experienced in carrying out the requirements of the Contract to the Superintendent .
SAFETY MATERIALS EQUIPMENT 14.10 AND SIGNAGE Carry out all work within the road reserve in accordance with the PROVISION FOR TRAFFIC section and the approved traffic management plan .
Include in the traffic management plan requirements specified herein .
Supply all materials and equipment used under the Contract .
Ensure the safe and proper use and maintenance of all tools , plant , equipment and materials .
Fit appropriate guards on cutting equipment and high mounted orange coloured hazard lights on all plant , equipment and vehicles being utilized under the contract .
Fit all plant , equipment and vehicles with signs or signwriting which identifies the primary contractor and advises users of the road reserve the primary contractor ’ s contact phone number .
Erect chemical spraying advice signs within 200 m of the work zone when spraying chemicals , and relocate as works progresses .
Spray only between the signs .
Erect signs and park plant equipment and vehicles within the road reserve so that they do not interfere with or restrict sight lines , particularly at intersections .
MATERIALS 14.11 14.11.1 Trees Provide trees , shrubs and ground covers with the following characteristics : LANDSCAPE MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 115 − Trunks and stems to be sturdy and well hardened .
− A well-developed vigorous root system .
− A minimum of three months in their container .
− Be sound , healthy , vigorous , and free from insect pests , plant diseases , sun scalds , fresh abrasions of the bark , or other disfigurements .
14.11.2 Fertiliser Store fertilisers in waterproof sealed bags under shelter away from water and direct sunlight .
Supply fertilisers conforming to Table 14.2 - Fertilisers .
Refer Clause 14.31 for Table 14.11.3 Imported Soils - Hold Point - Witness Point Provide imported topsoil conforming to AS 4419 and the following requirements : − Be free draining .
− Be red-brown or black sandy loam .
− Contains no grass or declared weeds and their seeds .
− Maximum stone size of 6 mm .
Hold Point - Advise the name of the proposed supplier .
Do not order soils without Superintendent ’ s approval of the supplier .
Witness Point - Provide a 5kg sample of topsoil proposed for the works .
Do not order soils without Superintendent ’ s approval of the sample .
Provide copies of delivery dockets for the topsoil delivered to site for the works .
14.11.4 Mulch - Hold Point - Witness Point Organic Mulch − Material free from impurity and sufficiently heavy to prevent dispersal by wind .
− Shredded bark , wood chips , hay or similar .
− Wood chips of a maximum size of 50 mm , inert , and free of resinous toxins and termites .
− Shall conform generally to AS 4454 .
Hold Point - Advise the name of the proposed supplier .
Do not order mulch without Superintendent ’ s approval of the supplier .
Witness Point - Provide a 5kg sample of mulch proposed for the works .
Do not order mulch without Superintendent ’ s approval of the sample .
Provide copies of delivery dockets for the mulch delivered to site for the works .
Inorganic Mulch − Washed and screened lateritic gravel , crushed aggregate or brick chips with particle sizes in the range 6 mm minimum to 25 mm maximum .
GRASS CUTTING 14.12 14.12.1 Service Levels Cut grass on medians , verges and islands within the road reserve to Table 14.1 – Grass cutting service levels .
Table 14.1 – Grass cutting service levels Maximum cut : 50 mm from the ground .
Height not to exceed : As specified for the particular road in the PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS section Or Refer to Table 19.1 – Grass Height Specification in ROAD AMENITY MAINTENANCE 14.12.2 Grass cutting operations Collect litter as part of and prior to grass cutting operations .
Cut grass to between 50 mm and 150 mm of ground level at time of service .
Cut grass from the edge of seal to the extent of the road reserve or to the cleared tree line within the road reserve , including cuttings , batters , inlets and outlets of culverts , protection works , and around road furniture .
Cut grass to clean cut , not broken or ripped , using equipment capable of maintaining the health and appearance of the grass and ground cover .
Do not cut shrubs and trees with a calliper size at base greater than 50 mm diameter , planted vegetation , or vegetation regardless of size that has been pegged and directed by the Superintendent to be retained .
Remove cut material or other detritus from the grass cutting process from gutters , cycle paths , walk tracks and road pavements as the work proceeds .
Use this material for mulching if suitable , or remove from site .
Make adjustments to cutting methods and frequency as required to maintain the specified service levels during the wet season .
14.12.3 Plant and Equipment Anticipated plant requirements are push , front deck and batter mowers and slashers .
Suitable guards are to be in place on all machinery to prevent material being sprayed onto the road surface and endanger vehicles , persons or property .
GRASS TRIMMING 14.13 14.13.1 Service Levels Trim grass using hand held equipment on medians , verges and islands within the road reserve that can not be addressed by cutting grass by mowing or slashing .
LANDSCAPE MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 116 Trim grass at joints on concrete , seal and paving and any other hard surfaces occurring within the road reserve before it reaches 50 mm in height and/or 10 mm in diameter .
Trim grass at top of kerbing before it overhangs the roadside edge .
14.13.2 Grass Trimming Operations Trim grass in conjunction with grass cutting service .
Use mechanical or manually operated hand held equipment that has no detrimental effect to the landscape or road asset .
Trim grass for the purposes of aesthetics , integrity of asset , functionality , public safety , including vegetation protruding from adjoining properties that interferes with footpath traffic .
Trim grass at back of kerbs , around drainage inlets and outlets , drainage lines and culverts , edges and surfaces of footpaths and cycle paths , access ramps , drive ways , any form of infrastructure , utility , furniture , signs , on in or around road medians and splitter islands , traffic control devices , fence lines , barriers , trees , concrete or paving .
Trim grass on concrete , paved or bituminous surfaces to ground or surface level .
Use of super- heated steam for longer term treatment is permitted here , as is herbicide in accordance with the Herbicide clause .
Fit vehicular trimmer and edge machines with arrow boards and crash attenuators ( cushions ) to AS 1742.3 Vehicle-mounted signs and devices sub-clause , Truck-mounted crash attenuators sub-sub-clause .
Do not trim grass with vehicular trimmer and edge machines on the carriageways between 6 am and 6 pm Monday to Friday excluding Public Holidays .
WEEDING 14.14 14.14.1 Service Levels Remove unwanted plant and grass species in accordance with the Weeds Management Act .
Do not allow weeds to exceed the allowable grass height on medians , verges and islands within the road reserve .
Remove weeds from joints on concrete , seal and paving and any other hard surfaces occurring within the road reserve before it reaches 50 mm in height and/or 10 mm in diameter .
Remove or treat with herbicide all weeds prior to them seeding .
14.14.2 Weeding Operations Weed any areas and at road pavement and kerb junctions , within garden beds and within or around any other structure or feature occurring within the road reserve which can not be controlled by slashing , mowing or trimming .
Carry out weeding for the purposes of addressing issues related to aesthetics , integrity of asset , functionality or public safety .
Carry out weeding by mechanical , manual or chemical means .
Refer to Treatment Of Pest And Weed Species section for clauses regarding the latter .
Do not re-use removed weed matter as mulch within the road reserve .
Dispose of all removed weed matter at a Community or Council Waste Disposal Site .
Dispose of declared weeds and their seeds in a manner consistent with the requirements of the Weeds Management Act .
Do not allow weed control activities to impinge on the health of other desirable plant species , or result in damage to any part of the road reserve asset .
PRUNING 14.15 14.15.1 Service Levels Prune trees , shrubs , and other plants so that no part of any plant extends over paved or sealed surfaces up to a height of 3 m over cycle and walk paths or 5.5 m over road pavements .
Prune so that vegetation does not obscure sun light to solar collectors .
Prune so that vegetation does not obscure road signs and sight lines for motorists or other road users .
14.15.2 Pruning Operations – Hold Point Carry out tree pruning operations in accordance with AS 4373 .
Include at least one qualified arborist in each tree pruning team .
Qualified Arborist : A person with a minimum qualification of Level 3 Horticulture , specialising in Arboriculture , from the National Horticulture Training Package or equivalent accredited course .
Do not carry out tree lopping or heavy pruning practices , except on the written recommendation of the qualified arborist .
Prune plants for the purposes of addressing issues related to plant health , aesthetics , integrity of asset , functionality or public safety .
Prune plants in response to a need arising from vandalism , vehicle accident , age of plant , unwanted growth , damage or death by fire , insect , fungal or other attack , and any form of weather occurrence excluding cyclones , which are referred to in the Cyclone Event Damage clause .
Hold Point – Do not prune branches exceeding a calliper size of 75 mm at trunk which overhang the road pavement without the approval of the Superintendent .
Mulch and re-use pruned matter as mulch on previously mulched garden beds within the road reserve .
Do not apply freshly mulched material LANDSCAPE MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 117 directly onto bare or grassed soils , but allow to age for a minimum of 6 weeks prior to application , stored at an approved location .
Dispose of all removed pruned matter not used as mulch at a Community or Council Waste Disposal Site .
Do not leave on site overnight .
REMOVAL OF VEGETATION 14.16 14.16.1 Service Levels Remove dead , fallen or dangerous plants , trees and stumps from within the road reserve within 24 hours of observation or notification .
Remove vegetation as necessary for safety reasons within 1 hour of observation or notice to do so .
14.16.2 Horticulturist Identification of Dead Plants Engage the Horticulturist to identify any plants that die within the road reserve , including all desirable flora regardless of species or size .
The Horticulturist is to identify dead or sickly vegetation and authorise the removal of any vegetation that is dead or is approaching the end of its expected life .
The Horticulturist may also authorise removal of any vegetation that for any reason is unstable or represents a safety hazard to pedestrians , cyclists , motorists or any other user of the road reserve .
Submit details of the Horticulturists findings and recommendations in the Monthly Report .
14.16.3 Vegetation Removal Operations Remove trees and shrubs of all species and size that have died or fallen , or may represent a hazard to any person within the road reserve as identified by the horticulturist for whatever reason except in the case of a cyclone .
Grind stumps and roots to a depth of not less than 150 mm below ground level or in the case of smaller species grub , pull and remove roots and stem base .
Do not elevate or reduce ground levels within the immediate area because of vegetation removal .
Refer to Cyclone Event Damage clauses for the removal of vegetation debris necessary as a result of a cyclone event .
REPLACEMENT OF PLANTS 14.17 14.17.1 Service Levels Replace plants which have died within irrigated areas of the road reserve within 7 days of observation .
Replace plants which have died within non- irrigated areas of the road reserve with native species during the month of December each year of the contract .
14.17.2 Horticulturist - Replacement of Plants – Hold Point The Horticulturist is to identify all dead plants and note the loss in the monthly Horticulturist Report , including all trees , shrubs and ornamental species of flora that occur within the road reserve .
The Horticulturist is to select replacement plants which are healthy and well formed .
Hold Point - If the same species of plant is not available the Horticulturist shall recommend a suitable replacement species with similar characteristics that is available , and submit to the Superintendent for approval .
14.17.3 Plant Replacement Operations Use a water retentive medium such as “ Hortex Rain Saver ” or similar product with equivalent or better water absorption and release characteristics in the planting process .
Apply according to the manufacturer ’ s recommended rates .
Replace dead plants in irrigated areas with plants of a similar size up to a 45 litre bag size .
Exceptions are Eucalyptus , Acacia , Melaleuca , Calytrix , Grevillea or other savanna species .
Replace these with tube stock .
Stake all replacement plants within non irrigated areas .
Do not plant vegetation likely to exceed a mature height of 4 m below or within 4 m of power lines .
14.17.4 Planting Plant trees , shrubs and ground cover only when temperature is below 32 ºC .
Maintain the integrity of the plant root zone and the surrounding earth mould .
Place fertiliser in the hole adjacent to , but not in contact with , the root zone of the plant .
Use fertiliser in accordance with Table 14.2 - Fertilisers , with application rates in accordance with Table 14.3 – Fertilisers Application Rates .
Refer Clause 14.31 for Tables LITTER COLLECTION 14.18 14.18.1 Service Levels Maintain the area so that there is no more than ten items of litter within any 100 m section of the full width of the road reserve at any time , and that no litter remains within the road reserve for a period exceeding 72 hours .
14.18.2 Litter Collection Operations Collect litter and remove from the road reserve to comply with the service level requirements , and prior to grass cutting operations .
Dispose of at a Community or Council Waste Disposal Site , or by acceptable re-cycling methods .
Do not store litter for later retrieval anywhere within the road reserve or adjoining properties .
LANDSCAPE MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 118 Litter is defined as any loose unattached inanimate item or any other object that does not form part of the road reserve asset occurring within the road reserve , generally deposited illegally .
Litter includes but is not limited to any forms of : − goods packaging , − paper product , − plastic product , − rubberised product , − glass product , − metal / alloy product , − stone or masonry product or item including spilt concrete .
Litter also includes but is not limited to : − any material excluding liquids resultant from a vehicle accident , − any vegetative item , − any mechanical item or part that is not related to intact mechanical , electrical or service- related infrastructure occurring within the road reserve , − any loose , unattached inanimate item that the Superintendent deems is not required , wanted or expected to occur within the road reserve .
Report to the Superintendent any occurrences of concrete , gravel , sand or soil on any trafficable surface .
These are not litter under the terms and conditions of the contract and will be removed by other means at the Principal ’ s cost .
Litter does not include illegal signage or abandoned vehicles or equipment Litter resulting from a significant spill event that can not reasonably be removed within thirty minutes of commencement of work will be paid at a fair and reasonable rate negotiated between the Contractor and Superintendent .
Any single item of litter with a weight greater than 50 kg will be paid at a fair and reasonable rate negotiated between the Contractor and Superintendent .
REMOVAL OF DEAD ANIMALS 14.19 Keep a record of details of all dead domestic animals that are disposed of under the contract , noting the following : − Animal type , − Breed of animal , if possible , − Description of size and colour , − Registration or identification numbers , − Special identifying features , such as brands , ear tags , collars etc. , − Submit details to the Superintendent as part of the Monthly Report , − Collars are to be removed and retained for 30 days before disposal .
14.19.1 Service Levels Remove any carcass from within the road reserve within two hours of observation or notice .
Remove any carcass from the road pavement and shoulders within one hour of observation or notice .
14.19.2 Carcass Removal Operations Remove and dispose of dead animals from within the road reserve irrespective of reason or event resulting in the demise of the animal .
Dead animals include native and exotic species of vertebrate including but not limited to dogs , cats , kangaroos , wallabies , turtles , fish , birds , lizards , pigs and any other form of mammal , reptile , macropod , marsupial , amphibian , or aquatic species .
Remove and dispose of multiple or singular carcasses occurring anywhere within the road reserve with a weight per carcass not greater than 50 kg .
Removing a carcass with a weight greater than 50 kg will be paid at a fair and reasonable rate negotiated between the Contractor and Superintendent .
The time period for removal of carcasses will commence from time of observation by the Superintendent or the Contractor , whichever is earlier .
The Superintendent is under no obligation to advise the Contractor of this observation .
Quantities of carcasses resulting from a significant spillage or killing event that can not reasonably be removed within 1 hour of commencement of work will be paid at a fair and reasonable rate negotiated between the Contractor and Superintendent .
This payment will be for time expended in excess of 1 hour .
CONTROL OF PEST AND WEED 14.20 SPECIES 14.20.1 Service Levels Treat any pest species , including weed , fungal , insect and animal occurring within the road reserve within 7 days of observation or notice .
14.20.2 Operations for Control of Weeds Control declared weeds in accordance with the requirements of the NT Weeds Management Act .
Control other weeds in accordance with this specification .
Control methods include mowing , trimming , hand weeding , or by spraying herbicide or other suitable chemicals , or by other manual means .
Treat all declared weeds listed in the NT Weeds Management Act and all other weeds perceived to represent a hazard or impediment to the public , plant growth , the road reserve asset , or which effect the aesthetics of the area .
LANDSCAPE MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 119 The chosen methods must not impinge on the health of all desirable species of plants .
Control weeds in the following areas as a minimum : − along road reserve boundaries , − along fence lines , − around the base of trees , − along pipelines , − in mulch beds , − at joints contained within concrete slabs , − at junctions of road pavement and concrete kerb .
14.20.3 Operations for Treatment of Fungal or other Organic Pests Control or eradicate any form of fungal or other organic pest that may be , or is , affecting the health or integrity of any plant or any other aspect of the road reserve asset , by spraying pest specific fungicides , or by manual means .
14.20.4 Operations for the Treatment of Insect and Animal Pests Control or eradicate insects including termites , ants , aphids , mealybug or arachnids ( invertebrate ) and any other form of animal pests ( vertebrates ) that could be , or are , affecting the health or integrity of any plant or any other aspect of the road reserve asset , by spraying pest specific pesticides , or by manual means .
Relocate protected vertebrate species .
14.20.5 Insecticide Use insecticide strictly as specified in product SDS .
Use only Fipronil as an insecticide for termite control .
14.20.6 Log Books Comply with the requirements of the Agricultural and Veterinary Chemicals ( Control of Use ) Act .
Further to any other reporting and log book requirements under the contract , maintain daily log books for spray treatment works undertaken .
The following information must be collected and recorded : − Detailed location of work ( place name and GPS coordinates ) , − Date and time of spray application , − Product used ( generic label name , active ingredient name and % or proportion of active ingredient ) , − Expiry date of product and withholding period ( if applicable ) , − Chemical mixture ( e.g .
% or litres per 100 litres of water ) , − Rate of application ( e.g .
litres per ha , or kg per km sprayed ) , − Type of spray equipment used ( e.g .
hand spray , vehicle mounted spray ) , − Type of transport equipment used ( Mounted spray Ute , Truck , quad , by hand ) , − Names of target pest species , − Weather conditions ( e.g .
rainfall , temp , wind speed and direction ) , − Name of applicator , − Any unusual happenings on the site , − Results of application : Include date this information is added .
− Add additional items .
Submit daily log book sheets with monthly invoice for payment .
Retain copies as per statutory requirements .
Include a digital copy in MS Excel spread sheet format .
14.20.7 Herbicide - Hold Point Hold Point - Submit a Weeds Management Plan for assessment and approval .
Herbicide treatment of weeds in the urban environment must be controlled and proposed in the Weeds Management Plan for approval by the Superintendent .
Apply herbicide in accordance with manufacturer ’ s specification .
Do not use dyes in the application of herbicides .
For chemical weed control in urban areas use only Glyphosate .
Use according to manufacturer ’ s directions for use .
Do not use Glyphosate in the following areas : - At drainage lines , - On top of kerbs not associated with concrete slabs or paving , - Around signage , utilities , roadside furniture , culverts , irrigation systems or any other road related infrastructure , - Beyond 500mm from the vertical trunk at the base of any tree .
14.20.8 Chemicals For weed control in areas outside of urban areas submit to the Superintendent the list of chemicals intended for use during the contract .
Include information in the Weeds Management Plan .
Use chemicals that are approved by the Australian Pesticides and Veterinary Medicines Authority ( APVMA ) .
Find all information pertaining to the use requirements of chemicals on the Authority ’ s web site .
Only use the chemicals on plant species listed in the product information .
Use herbicides , fungicides , pesticides that are biodegradable and do not contain lead arsenates or other substance or salts dangerous to humans or animals .
LANDSCAPE MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 120 Handle , transport , spray , store and dispose of chemicals and their containers in accordance with the product SDS .
Ensure that personal protective equipment ( PPE ) including protective clothing is worn by all personnel handling or applying chemicals .
Use PPE in accordance with the product SDS .
14.20.9 Spraying Do not spray on days where wind velocity exceeds 15km/hr or if it poses a risk of spray drift .
Prevent misting in breeze conditions by spraying at a lower pressure or adjusting spray nozzles to increase droplet size .
Do not spray near schools during school hours , or during outdoor activities at the school at any time .
Spray only when wind is blowing away from the school .
Refer to Spraying in SLASHING AND WEED CONTROL .
FERTILISING 14.21 14.21.1 Service Levels Apply fertiliser to promote the development and ongoing health of all vegetation within the road reserve in accordance with the Fertiliser Proposal Document submitted with the tender and approved by the Superintendent .
14.21.2 Fertilising Operations Apply fertiliser as specified in the approved Fertiliser Proposal Document including : − proposed method to confirm proof of each treatment , − description of proposed fertilisers , product name , N : P : K Ratio , and application rate if such rate is not to be applied at manufacturers specifications , − description of fertiliser locations such as grassed areas , trees , under mulch , under ground covers etc. , − what is to be fertilised , − time of fertilising as shown in the Program Of Works , indicating week and month .
DRAINAGE LINES 14.22 14.22.1 Service Levels Maintain all drainage lines including inlets and outlets to Side Entry Pits ( SEPs ) and Letterbox Pits in a debris free state .
Re-fit dislodged lids to stormwater pits within 48 hours of observation .
Make safe stormwater pits with missing or broken lids immediately upon observation or within one hour of notification .
Notify the Superintendent of any observation .
14.22.2 Re-fitting Dislodged Stormwater Pits Re-fit dislodged SEP and Letterbox Pit lids .
Advise the Superintendent of any damaged lids which can not simply be re-fitted .
14.22.3 Drainage Line Maintenance Operations De-silting drainage lines , and the internal cleaning and clearing of SEPs , drainage culverts and Letterbox Pits is not included in the contract .
Remove all litter and/or debris from open drainage lines including inlets and outlets to SEPs and Letterbox Pits to ensure free drainage .
Do not force litter or debris into inlets of SEPs or Letterbox Pits but collect and remove from site .
REPLENISHMENT OF MULCH 14.23 14.23.1 Service Levels Maintain 75 mm thick consolidated layer of mulch within all mulched areas including garden beds , other plantings or medians within the road reserve .
14.23.2 Mulch Replenishment Operations The Horticulturist will advise the Contractor on the status of organic mulch .
Replace or replenish mulch with material of similar characteristics to the existing mulch .
Replenish mulch sufficient for the purposes of aesthetics , retaining moisture , insulating the soil and ongoing soil improvement resultant from the decaying matter .
Supply mulch that is free from weeds , seeds , sticks , stones , insects , diseases and other deleterious matter .
Provide organic mulch for a 500 mm radius from the main stem , but ensure a gap of 50 mm is retained between the main stem and the mulch .
DISPOSAL OF CUT MATERIALS 14.24 14.24.1 Service Levels Remove and dispose of all non-mulched cut or waste materials daily at a Community or Council Waste Disposal Site , do not leave on site overnight .
14.24.2 Disposal Operations Dispose of any materials in accordance with relevant environmental protection legislation .
Apply mulched material from cuttings suitable for use only on previously mulched areas , not on bare or previously non-mulched areas .
Do not use weeds as mulch .
IRRIGATION OPERATION AND 14.25 MAINTENANCE This section outlines the requirements for the repair , operation and maintenance of existing irrigation systems .
LANDSCAPE MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 121 14.25.1 Service Levels Maximise efficiency of landscape irrigation systems .
Manage and maintain irrigation systems to maintain a functional and healthy landscape with the minimum required amount of water for the designated purpose .
Do not allow irrigation water , other than that carried by wind , to flow onto the road pavement .
Repair broken or vandalised sprinkler or spray heads within 12 hours of observation or notification by the Superintendent .
14.25.2 Monthly Irrigation Report Provide an Irrigation Report attached to the monthly claim for payment .
Report all observations or occurrences of note related to irrigation issues over the period being claimed .
14.25.3 Telemetric Control ( Darwin Region ) The superintendent will arrange for supply and installation of the telemetry irrigation control base station at the Contractors premises .
This supply will not include basic office requirements such as power sockets , office furniture etc .
Irrigation systems will be periodically upgraded to Telemetric Control .
Do not maintain newly upgraded systems until the completion of the defects liability period for that upgrade contract , with the date as advised by the Superintendent .
14.25.4 Irrigation Systems Maintenance Operations Maintain and adjust in sound and serviceable condition all controllers , control cables , housings , meters , meter protection , valves , back flow prevention , drippers , sprays or conduits used in the delivery of water to all plant species including grass .
Engage and disengage manually controlled irrigation systems .
Maintain all irrigation supply and main lines in a water tight condition .
Maintain all adjustable sprinkler heads within their adjustment requirements at all times .
Repair or adjust daily as required to prevent over watering of vegetation and grass , and to prevent wastage through overflow of irrigation water onto the road surface .
14.25.5 System Shutdown – Witness Point NORTHERN REGIONS Shut down irrigation systems at the start of the wet season each year for the duration of the wetter months .
Re-activate the irrigation systems towards the end of the wet season .
Time the start of shut down and re-activation operations according to the weather conditions apparent at the time .
Witness Point - Advise the Superintendent of the full shut down and re-activation of irrigation systems .
14.25.6 Irrigation Day and Night Cycle Late in Dry Season – Witness Point NORTHERN REGIONS Ensure areas receive sufficient quantities of water during the hotter part of the dry season , i.e .
September to early October .
This may be achieved by running selected systems twice a day .
Witness Point - Advise the Superintendent of altered irrigation cycle times .
14.25.7 Reset Irrigation Timers During School Holidays – Witness Point Reset pop up irrigation systems for day light watering the week preceding school holidays on road reserves that pass through high density residential areas .
Reset back to night watering within seven days of the new school term commencing .
Witness Point - Advise the Superintendent of such action taken .
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION 14.26 14.26.1 Duty of Care Refer to the Northern Territory Government Standard Specification for Environmental Management and to the RFT .
Comply with the following additional requirements included under the contract and allow for any associated costs .
14.26.2 Litter Prevent any form of littering by all Contractor ’ s personnel , including sub-contract personnel , during the course of the work .
Remove all debris , surplus material , waste material or any form of spoil related to works from the site .
Prevent materials from falling or being blown from vehicles .
Leave the work site clean and tidy at the completion of each day ’ s work .
Do not allow refuse of any type to remain on site overnight .
14.26.3 Noise Comply with the relevant sections of the Local Government Act , Waste Management and Pollution Control Act and the Work Health and Safety ( NUL ) Act and Regulations with regard to noise pollution .
Ensure all plant and equipment complies with statutory regulations , and is designed , installed , operated and maintained to minimise noise disturbance to residents and the general public .
14.26.4 Protection of Waterways Comply with all regulatory guidelines and legislation including the Water Act .
LANDSCAPE MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 122 Ensure no materials enter any waterways , including stormwater and sewerage systems .
14.26.5 Protection of Flora and Fauna Ensure best practice protection to any flora and fauna that may be affected by the works , particularly those which : − have particular botanical , historical or cultural significance , − have outstanding aesthetic or ecological significance , − provide habitat for rare or endangered species , − have cultural and archaeological heritage .
Refer to Acts , Regulations And Codes Applicable To The Works And Authorities With Jurisdiction Over The Works in REFERENCED DOCUMENTS .
DAMAGE TO PROPERTY 14.27 Ensure that the works proceed with all due care in order to avoid damage to property , utility installations , vehicles , or the environment .
Without limiting the Contractor 's obligations under the General Conditions of Contract , promptly repair or have repaired any damage to property , utility installations or environment resulting from the implementation of the works associated with the contract .
Immediately notify the Superintendent of any such damage advising proposal for repairs at no cost to the Principal .
Ascertain the owner 's wishes as to the timing of the repairs .
Engage appropriately qualified trades- persons to carry out repairs to the satisfaction of the property owner and the Superintendent .
After providing seven days notice to the Contractor , the Superintendent reserves the right to settle any claims arising from the damage .
Settlement of damages by the Superintendent will not relieve the Contractor of any responsibility under this clause .
The Superintendent will deduct any costs incurred in settling these claims from the Contractor ’ s monthly progress invoice .
STORM DAMAGE 14.28 In the event of a tropical or severe storm , immediately mobilise and supply sufficient staff and resources to locate and make safe storm damage which has occurred within the site of works .
The Superintendent will assist in identifying immediate safety concerns where and whenever possible .
Make trafficable surfaces i.e .
roads , cycle and footpaths , safe as quickly as possible .
Clean up storm damage as part of the contract to the specified service levels within 24 hours of the observation of damage , and where this is not possible , within a time line acceptable to the Superintendent .
Give priority to roadways , cycle and footpaths to make safely trafficable as soon as possible .
Access real time storm and weather information on the Internet at the Weather Bureau website at http : //mirror.bom.gov.au/weather/radar/ CYCLONE EVENT DAMAGE 14.29 A cyclone event does not include severe storms .
A cyclone event will be recognised as commencing when a cyclone has been declared and named and is effecting any location within the contract area .
The cyclone will be recognised as remaining current until such time as all warnings associated with the event have been cancelled for the area of the contract .
Immediately following the passing of a cyclone ; − Attend the site of works and identify all works required to clean up and reinstate , that which is attributable to cyclone damage , − quote a fair and reasonable price for such works in negotiation with the Superintendent , − quote a time line for implementation and completion of the works , − Removal of tree or vegetative debris as additional works as a result of a cyclone event will relate to green plant growth only , since removal of dead wood is a requirement of maintaining to specified service levels under the contract prior to the tropical cyclone , − Increase resources as necessary to ensure a rapid rectification and clean-up of site .
The Superintendent reserves the right to employ the services of additional Contractors when the need to expedite these works becomes necessary due to public health or safety concerns .
In the interests of safety , it is not a requirement under the contract to supply staff or resources beyond stage three of a cyclone .
The requirement resumes when cyclone danger has passed and the cyclone alert for the area of the contract has been cancelled .
OTHER REQUIREMENTS 14.30 ( If applicable ) Refer to PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS section of Request for Tender .
LANDSCAPE MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 123 TABLES 14.31 Table 14.2 - Fertilisers Use General Plant Category Where Used Component Requirements Planting Native Surface '' TROPIGRO Native Plant Feed Mix '' Exotic Surface '' TROPIGRO Exotic Planting and Feeding Mix '' or similar Native ) Exotic ) Hole Granular or Tablet Slow Release ( 6 month minimum ) 20:10:10 NPK ratio Feeding All existing plants Surface As for Planting - Surface Grassing All seeding , both new and existing Surface Fast Release 15:7:7 NPK ratio Trace Elements Do not apply fertiliser to Grevillia and Banksia plant varieties .
Table 14.3 – Fertilisers Application Rates Fertiliser Type Application Rate Native - Planting - Surface Tube stock 150 mm container 200 mm container 250 mm container 300 mm container 20 litre bag 10 g 30 g 80 g 100 g 150 g 300 g Exotic - Planting - Surface Plant height : 0.5 m 1.0 m 2.0 m 100 g 200 g 300 g Native - Planting - Hole ( Exotic ) Ground covers and shrubs 10 cm tall Ground covers and shrubs 20 cm tall 10 g 20 g Plants to 1 m Plants to 2 m Plants to 3 - 4 m 40 g 80 g 120 g Advanced trees and palms 2 m - Advanced trees and palms 3 m - Advanced trees and palms 4 m - 200 g 300 g 400 g These rates apply to both granular compound and equivalent tables .
Native - Feeding Ground covers : up to 300 mm wide 300 - 600 mm wide 600 - 900 mm wide 900 - 1000 mm wide Thereafter 100 g per metre 30 g 50 g 75 g 100 g LANDSCAPE MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 124 Table 14.3 – Fertilisers Application Rates Fertiliser Type Application Rate Native - Feeding Shrubs : up to 300 mm high/wide 300 - 600 mm high/wide 600 - 900 mm high/wide 900 - 1000 mm high/wide Thereafter use 200 g/m of height or width 50 g 75 g 100 g 150 g Native - Feeding Trees : 200 g/m of height Exotic - Feeding 250 g/m of plant height Figure 14.2 Intersection Sight Lines Table 14.4 - Sight Line Distances Posted Speed Limit ( km/h ) Sight Line Distance ( m ) 40 73 50 97 60 123 70 151 80 181 90 226 100 262 110 300 120 341 130 383 Sight line distances are based on Safe Intersection Sight Distance parameters defined by AGRD04A-10 Austroads Guide to Road Design , Part 4A : Unsignalised and Signalised Intersections , 2010 .
5 m Sight line distance Sight line distance SLASHING AND WEED CONTROL STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 125 SLASHING AND WEED CONTROL 15 .
OUTLINE DESCRIPTION 15.1 This section specifies the maintenance requirement for control of vegetation and litter on road verges , batters and medians , by use of mechanical or manual means and/or chemicals , and for the control of noxious weeds in the road reserve by use of herbicides .
STANDARDS 15.2 Comply with the following Acts and Regulations : − Work Health and Safety ( NUL ) Act and Regulations − Weeds Management Act − Dangerous Goods Act and Regulations − Poisons and Dangerous Drugs Act and Regulations − Agricultural and Veterinary Chemicals ( Control of Use ) Act Comply with the Acts , Regulations , Guidelines and Codes applicable to the works .
Comply with the requirements of Authorities with jurisdiction over the works .
Conform to the Standards and Publications quoted throughout this document unless specified otherwise .
Refer to REFERENCED DOCUMENTS .
Refer to Protection Of Culturally And Historically Significant Items in MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS .
Refer to Plant And Equipment clause in MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS .
Refer to Work Involving Chemicals in MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS .
Refer to LANDSCAPE MAINTENANCE .
Specification Reference Refer to the Northern Territory Government Standard Specification for Environmental Management and to the RFT .
DEFINITIONS 15.3 APVMA Australian Pesticides and Veterinary Medicines Authority .
Vegetation Refers to any grasses , shrubs or trees to be controlled .
Weeds Refers to undesirable vegetation in the area to be controlled , including declared and non- declared species .
Herbicide A chemical formulation for control and eradication of vegetation and weeds .
WEED SPREAD PREVENTION 15.4 Comply with the requirements of the Weeds Management Act .
Do not spread declared weeds by slashing .
For prevention of weed spread by machinery see the Standard Specification for Environmental Management .
While slashing does not kill weeds , if done at the right time it can be an effective measure to reduce seed production especially in infested areas .
Slashing must be planned in conjunction with chemical control .
To reduce flowering of grassy weeds , slash at end of rain season as stems are starting to elongate prior to seed maturity .
Slash from clean area to infested area Clean down slasher after working in infested area with leaf blower , compressed air or high pressure water It is best practice to control isolated individual plants or clumps in otherwise clean areas with herbicide Most herbicides are absorbed more effectively through green leaves .
Previously slashed weeds may need time to grow green leaves before spraying .
Machinery hygiene practices are detailed in the Department of Land Resource Management Weed Spread Prevention Strategy https : //nt.gov.au/environment/weeds/prevent- weed-spread-industry-and-recreation/corridor- maintenance .
REFERENCE STANDARD DRAWINGS 15.5 Refer to Standard Drawings listed in Table 15.1 - Civil Standard CS for reference for terminology for typical cross section profiles and terminology used throughout this section .
Table 15.1 - Civil Standard CS for reference for terminology CS 2100 CS 2105 CS 2101 CS 2106 CS 2102 CS 2107 CS 2103 CS 2108 CS 2104 CS 2109 SLASHING AND WEED CONTROL STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 126 Table 15.2 - Road classification and indicative road reserve widths Road Class Reserve Width National Highway 200m Arterial - Urban 80m Arterial - Rural 150m Sub-arterial/Distributor - Urban Industrial 22m Sub-arterial/Distributor - Urban Residential ( See Note ) Sub-arterial/Distributor - Rural Industrial 100m Rural Secondary Road 100m Pastoral 3 100m Collector - Urban Industrial 20m Collector - Urban Residential ( See Note ) Collector - Rural Industrial 40m Collector - Rural 40m Local - Urban Industrial 20m Local - Urban Residential ( See Note ) Local - Rural Industrial 30m Local - Rural 30m Pastoral 1 and 2 100m Do not take dimensions as being correct for all road types and classifications .
Note : Road reserve for this and any other roads not in this list refer to the relevant local authority .
Excerpt from ; Department of Transport Policy , Performance And Design Standards For Northern Territory Government Roads , April 2015 Version 1.0 .
SLASHING 15.6 15.6.1 Slashing Operations Slash all grass and vegetation including shrubs and trees with a butt size up to 100 mm diameter .
Trim vegetation to a height of 100 mm or less above the ground .
Collect litter prior to slashing .
Slash steep batters or areas inaccessible to conventional slashers with hydraulically operated boom mounted slashing equipment .
Trim growth that can not be slashed with tractor mounted slashers with hand held equipment .
Include around road furniture , culvert headwalls , bridges , grids , floodways , drains and drainage structures .
Trim overhead vegetation to minimum clearance height of 5.5 m above the carriageway .
At bridges trim vegetation to a minimum of 2 m behind bridge rails .
Re-slash any area which is not slashed to the specified height above the ground .
Remove stones , grass or other debris from the sealed pavement following slashing operations .
15.6.2 Plant Provide sufficient plant to achieve the minimum specified rate of progress , using the following plant configurations to complete all slashing operations simultaneously : − Tractors and Slashers , − Tractor and Batter / Reach Mower , − Hand held equipment including chainsaws and brushcutters .
Suitable guards are to be in place on all machinery to prevent material being “ sprayed ” onto the road surface and endanger vehicles , persons or property .
15.6.3 Opening Slash Slash both sides of roadway from edge of seal for 3.6 m or as specified Project Specific Requirements , i.e .
nominal two cut width .
Slash other areas as directed .
Provide sufficient plant , labour and resources in order for two separate crews to each complete 15 km per day , both sides of the road .
15.6.4 Full Slash DARWIN , EAST ARNHEM AND KATHERINE REGIONS Normally undertake between November and March depending on the severity of the wet season .
Slash both sides of roadway from the edge of pavement , sealed or unsealed , to the cleared tree line including cuttings , tops of batters at cuttings , fill batters , inlets and outlets of culverts , protection works , and around road furniture .
At intersections slash triangular areas joining points of sight distance lines given in Figure 14.2 Intersection Sight Lines and Table 14.4 - Sight Line Distances .
Slash other areas as directed .
Provide sufficient plant , labour and resources in order for two separate crews to each complete 20 km per day , both sides of the road .
ALICE SPRINGS AND TENNANT CREEK REGIONS : Slash both sides of roadway from the edge of pavement to the outer edge of formation including cuttings , fill batters , inlets and outlets of culverts , protection works , and around road furniture .
SLASHING AND WEED CONTROL STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 127 Slash other areas as directed .
Provide sufficient plant , labour and resources in order for two separate crews to each complete 15 km per day , both sides of the road .
15.6.5 Slash Table Drain Offlets Specification Reference Refer to the Northern Territory Government Standard Specification for Environmental Management and to the RFT .
Slash each side of invert of trapezoidal shaped table drain offlet for 1.8 m width , i.e .
total width of cut 3.6 m , nominally two cuts .
Slash each side and invert base of trapezoidal shaped table drain , i.e .
total width of cut 5.4 m , nominally three cuts .
Table drain offlets are generally at intervals not exceeding 150 m and have a minimum length of 50 m. 15.6.6 Slash Firebreaks Slash firebreaks within the road reserve for 3.6 m width , i.e .
nominal two cut width , or 7.2 m , i.e .
nominal four cut width or as specified or directed otherwise .
15.6.7 Slash and Rake Firebreaks Slash firebreaks within the road reserve .
Rake slashed material and windrow to one side .
15.6.8 Litter Collection and Disposal Include litter collection and disposal as a part of slashing operations .
Undertake collection of litter on area to be slashed prior to slashing .
Litter collection and disposal may also be ordered separately , and shall include full road reserve width .
Collect litter including but not limited to : − Tyres & tubes , − Drink or food packages , − Rocks larger than 100mm , − Fallen trees , branches or timber , − Ant beds , − Any other materials or rubbish which is 100 mm or more higher than natural surface .
Litter collection does not include abandoned vehicles or car bodies , or dead animals .
Advise the Superintendent of the location of such items and they shall be collected and disposed of separately .
Dispose of all litter legally , at Community or Council Waste Disposal Site .
15.6.9 Replacement of Damaged Roadside Furniture and Structures Repair or replace guide posts , signs , culverts or any roadside furniture or structure damaged by slashing operations at no cost to the Principal .
The Principal reserves the right to affect repairs by any means and recover the costs from the contractor .
BUSHFIRE PREVENTION 15.7 15.7.1 Requirement Advise Bushfires NT for the region and adjacent property owners of slashing program prior to commencement of slashing in the area .
Adhere to bushfire prevention requirements during slashing operations when there is a fire warning rating of moderate or higher .
15.7.2 Plant Provide plant and equipment for fire-fighting .
The following are minimum requirements : − 1 x 500 litre water tank with an attached pump , − 2 x 9 litre air expelled water fire extinguishers , or 1 x 20 litre knapsack spray , as appropriate to the slashing equipment being used .
− Carry the equipment in a 4 wheel drive back up utility travelling behind the tractor slasher operations at all times .
Maintain two-way radio communication between the utility and the tractor slasher .
15.7.3 Conditions Preventing Slashing Avoid roadside slashing when it is dry and windy , or when the bushfire warning is extremely high .
Cease slashing operations if weather conditions indicate an extreme fire danger .
If such a day is predicted , then start early and cease operations when the conditions reach a point that would indicate that if a fire started then it would be difficult to contain .
15.7.4 Response Procedures to Fire Starting Cease slashing operations immediately a slasher starts a fire , and assist with combating the fire .
To achieve this , the crew must be working in close proximity to each other at all times and be in radio contact .
Contain any fire which occurs due to slashing operations immediately to avoid the fire spreading .
If the crews are unable to contain and extinguish the fire , immediately notify the adjacent station/property owners/managers and Bushfires NT , Department of Land Resource Management .
Remain and provide assistance to the property owners/managers until the fire is contained , or until the owners/managers or Bushfires NT Officers no longer require your assistance .
Do not recommence slashing until the fire is contained and all crew are back on site with all equipment fully operational again , i.e .
water tanks refilled , pump motors refuelled , etc .
Do not undertake roadside slashing without the support backup .
SLASHING AND WEED CONTROL STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 128 15.7.5 Contractor Responsibility Accept responsibility for any damages , loss of pasture or stock that is a result of a fire started by slashing operations .
Exercise care in areas where the possibility of ignition is high .
An example is rocky outcrops where it may be necessary to raise the blades marginally higher to avoid sparks .
15.7.6 Fire Fighter Training – Hold Point At least one member of each slashing crew is to hold a current qualification of Fire Fighter 1 NT .
Training in this course is available from Bushfires NT , DENR , phone 8922 0844 .
Hold Point – Provide evidence of qualifications before commencing slashing operations .
VEGETATION CONTROL 15.8 15.8.1 Vegetation Control Operations Control or eradicate vegetation around road structures and furniture to ensure they are visible to motorists and to prevent damage by fire , by spraying herbicides and/or other suitable chemicals .
15.8.2 Log Books Maintain daily log books for works undertaken under the contract .
Include the following information : − Description , i.e .
category of work for measurement and payment , − Start/finish spray locations by PRP chainage and as GPS position , − Time of spray application , − Product used , − Chemical mixture ( e.g .
kg or litres per 100 litres of water ) , − Rate of application ( e.g .
kg per hectare , or Kg per kilometres sprayed ) , − Type of spray equipment used ( e.g .
hand spray , vehicle mounted spray ) .
− Type of transport equipment used ( Mounted spray Ute , Truck , quad , by hand ) , − Target weeds , − Weather conditions ( e.g .
rainfall , temperature , wind velocity and direction ) , − Name of applicator , − Any unusual happenings on the site , − Results of application : Include date this information is added .
Submit daily log book sheets with invoice for payment .
Include a digital copy in MS Excel spread sheet format .
15.8.3 Chemicals – Witness Point Witness Point - Submit to the Superintendent the list of herbicides and other chemicals intended for use during the contract , details of vegetation controlled by the herbicide , and duration of control per treatment .
Use chemicals that are approved by the APVMA .
Obtain copies of SDS pertaining to the use requirements of chemicals listed on the manufacturers ’ labels .
The APVMA web site http : //services.apvma.gov.au has information about SDS .
Use herbicides that are biodegradable and do not contain lead arsenates or other substance or salts dangerous to humans or animals .
Use spreading agents if and as recommended on the labels .
Obtain a permit from Parks Australia North for the use of any chemicals within Kakadu and Uluru – Kata Tjuta National Parks and up to 30 km from their boundaries , and from Parks and Wildlife Commission of the Northern Territory for the use of any chemicals within NT National Parks and Reserves and up to 30 km from their boundaries .
Witness Point - Provide copies of the permits .
15.8.4 Personnel Handling of Chemicals Be registered for business as weed control operators , or engage subcontractors registered for business as weed control operators .
Personnel carrying out spraying operations must have undertaken and passed a National Farm Chemical User Training Program .
Do not allow spray drift .
Operators must be competent in their understanding of how to prevent spray drift .
Keep a copy of the Safety Data Sheet on site for each type of chemical used Handle all chemicals as specified in product SDS .
Wear as a minimum the protective clothing as specified in product SDS .
15.8.5 Spraying Handle , transport , spray , store and dispose of chemicals and their containers in accordance with the manufacturer ’ s specifications and/or directions as written on the labels which appear on the APVMA web site , to avoid environmental and health risks .
Do not spray on days of wind velocity greater than 15 km/h mean value and gusts do not exceed 19 km/h because of risk of spray drift causing a hazard on adjoining properties .
Do not cause spray drift .
Prevent misting in breeze conditions by spraying at a lower pressure or adjusting spray nozzles to increase droplet particles , or other suitable means .
Do not spray near schools during school hours or during outdoor activities at the school at any time .
Spray only when wind is blowing away from the school .
Do not spray during rain or when vegetation is saturated .
SLASHING AND WEED CONTROL STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 129 15.8.6 Spray Equipment Use equipment calibrated to measure volume sprayed .
15.8.7 Around Guide Posts Spray a minimum triangular area around guide posts having as its base the sealed edge of the road .
The length of the base to be a minimum 8 m centred on the guide post .
The apex of the triangle to be 1 m beside the guide post on an imaginary line perpendicular to the road centreline and through the guide post .
Figure 15.1 Guide Posts Spray Area 15.8.8 Around Sign Posts Spray a minimum triangular area around sign posts having as its base the sealed edge of the road .
The length of the base to be a minimum 5m long and positioned to extend 4 m into the direction of the oncoming traffic and 1 m past the line of the sign post .
The apex of the triangle to be 1 m beside the sign post on an imaginary line perpendicular to the road centreline and through the sign post .
Figure 15.2 Sign Posts Spray Area 15.8.9 At Bridges and Guard Rails Spray area within 1 m of any part of the structure .
Spray area between the edge of the seal and a line 1 m behind any guard rail and extending 10 m beyond the guard rail at both ends .
15.8.10 At Flood-ways and Culverts Spray incorporated rock protection works .
Slash area within 1 m of the structure and protection works .
15.8.11 Rest Areas and Truck-bays Spray areas within 1 m of any part of furniture or structure .
Slash all other areas within the perimeter .
15.8.12 Aerodromes In accordance with the relevant requirements referred to in AERODROME MAINTENANCE , spray areas as follows : Fencelines 1 m either side of fence around aerodrome .
Signal Area Total signal area including 1 m outside of signal area perimeter .
Gable Boundary Markers An area 8 m by 3 m centred on , and oriented the same way , as the marker .
Cones , Runway Flares or Lights An area of 2 m around the structure .
Buildings or Other Structures An area 1 m wide around the edge .
WEED CONTROL 15.9 15.9.1 Operation Treat all weeds listed as Declared Weeds under the NT Weeds Management Act , and other nominated weeds and vegetation in the road reserve , by spraying herbicides and/or other suitable chemicals .
Refer to vegetation control clauses for specification requirements for Log Books , Chemicals , Personnel Handling Chemicals and Spraying .
There is a legal obligation to control all declared weeds under the Weeds Management Act ( see http : //www.lrm.nt.gov.au/weeds/find for list ) .
For Class A declared weeds it is necessary to eradicate them ; for Class B it is necessary to prevent them from growing and spreading .
15.9.2 Treatment Program – Hold Point Prepare a Weed Management Plan within 4 weeks of commencement of the contract ( outlined in the Standard Specification for Environmental Management ) .
The Weed Management Plan must be signed off by both the Superintendent and Contractor and must refer directly to the Response Schedule and the Request for Tender and this specification .
SLASHING AND WEED CONTROL STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 130 Hold Point - Submit a Weeds Management Plan for assessment and approval .
A Weed Management Plan is to set practical objectives for each road identified in the Response Schedule and/or the RFT and be based on detailed maps of declared weeds present , the scope of their infestations and the likelihood of seeds being spread ( e.g .
proximity to turn off areas ) .
For example , in a road section with isolated individuals the objective might be that all plants are chemically controlled , whereas in a core infestation slashing alone may be adequate to prevent weed spread and satisfy obligations under the Weeds Management Act .
Objectives need to be measurable so that effectiveness of control measures and spread prevention can be assessed .
Objectives should be discussed with the Superintendent in conjunction with DENR .
Address seasonal restrictions to weed reproductive cycles to prevent weed seeding .
DARWIN , EAST ARNHEM AND KATHERINE REGIONS Time the operations to follow the first storms of the wet season and/or before seeds are produced by the target plants .
Timing of seed production is variable depending on rainfall , however some wood species ( eg .
Neem ) flower and produce seed in the dry season .
ALICE SPRINGS AND TENNANT CREEK REGION Rain can fall in both winter and summer in arid Australia .
Operations should be timed about 3 weeks after a 25 mm rainfall event for broad leaf or grassy weeds .
Woody weeds can be controlled all year round but the herbicide works better after rain .
15.9.3 Herbicide Selection - Hold Point Hold Point - Provide a list of herbicides and chemicals intended for use during the contract to the Superintendent as part of the Weed Management Plan .
Control declared weeds in the road reserve by spraying herbicides and additives as prescribed such as diesel or wetting agents ( surfactants ) .
Different herbicides have different modes of action , which needs to be considered in selecting suitable herbicides and their application ( e.g .
foliar vs. basal bark ) .
Some disrupt the weed ’ s metabolic processes killing the plants , whereas others are residual in the soil and interfere with germinating seeds .
See the Department of Land Resource Management Weed Management Handbook https : //nt.gov.au/environment/weeds/weed- management-handbook for appropriate herbicides and application methods for most declared weeds .
For each declared weed species controlled , log book records of chemical use should be kept .
Refer to 15.8.2 Log Books and 14.20.6 Log Books .
Chemical control should be planned in co- ordination with slashing and burning requirements .
Provide an alternative suitable herbicide if during the course of the contract a chemical is withdrawn from the APVMA approved list .
15.9.4 Effectiveness of Control and Spread Prevention Effectiveness of control and spread prevention is assessed by : a ) Permanent Monitoring Sites ; these are established by the Superintendent ( or his agent ) in strategic locations known to contain weeds ( point data ) and those known to be free of weeds ( transects ) at the commencement of the contract .
These will : - identify changes in weed infestations annually and over the entire period of the contract - allow for verification against log books - evaluate efficacy of the treatment ( slashing and chemical control ) - help inform weed control priorities for the next season ( in conjunction with post- season review ) - include areas of known high density weed infestation and also areas known to be free from weeds at the commencement of the contract period .
- Provide incentive for the contractor as a result of improved control over the duration of the contract .
b ) Overall visual assessment of road verge for monitoring according to submission of the log books .
c ) Specific monitoring for gamba grass control and spread management may be conducted in strategic areas .
15.9.5 Determination for Key Performance Indicators Evaluation of the monitoring points will occur at the conclusion of the treatment period ( wet season ) annually .
Assessment will be consistent with the WMB data collection requirements ( http : //www.lrm.nt.gov.au/weeds/mapping ) , and will allow determination of a Key Performance Indicator ( KPI ) based on criteria listed below .
The KPI is linked to final payment schedule .
SLASHING AND WEED CONTROL STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 131 The KPI is calculated as the percentage of sites where values of 1 , or 100 % alive adult seeding gamba grass were recorded , indicating that weeds were not managed .
Refer to 15.11 KPI Example , Table 15.3 - KPI Criteria and KPI Value Codes and Table 15.4 – SAMPLE – Field data log - Assessment of sites by KPIs .
15.9.6 Induction for Declared Weed Management The contactor and personel shall attend a ½ day induction course prior to the commencement of the Contract to confirm ; - Correct weed identification and any new species declarations - Appropriate herbicides for specific weed situations , and old/new formulations - Appropriate methods of application , and application techniques - Understanding of required data collection and logbook guidelines 15.9.7 Post Season Review The contactor and/or his agent shall attend an annual post season review to conduct desk-top analysis of weed data and associated road maps.and to conduct site visits if necessary .
The primary purpose of the annual post-control review is to determine if contractor has maintained road reserve as per the contract and met objectives in the Weed Management Plan .
The focus of the review will be a dialogue between the Superintendent and the contractor to plan for better control in the following year .
Inspections will be undertaken jointly between the Superintendent ( or his agent ) and the contractor ( or his nominated subcontractor ) not longer than 4 weeks after the end of annual control operations .
At the conclusion of the post-season review meeting , final payment as a percentage of the scheduled rate will be determined .
OTHER REQUIREMENTS 15.10 ( If applicable ) Refer to PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS section of Request for Tender .
SLASHING AND WEED CONTROL STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 132 KPI EXAMPLE 15.11 Table 15.3 - KPI Criteria and KPI Value Codes Point data codes ( KPI value ) Transect data codes ( KPI value ) Gamba Age & Status Codes 1 = No evidence of effective treatment 2 = treated ( slashed or sprayed ) but not adequately effective 3 = effective treatment ( > 90 % total brown-out ) or slashed such that plants dead and did not produce seed 1 = weed present and not controlled 2 = weed present and evidence of effective control 3 = no weed present Age > 1yr Perennial plants < 1yr Germinated that season Status AS Alive and seeding ( post-feathering ) + % alive DS Dead but seeded + % dead but seeded D Dead + % dead Table 15.4 – SAMPLE – Field data log - Assessment of sites by KPIs Name of assessor - Date of assessment - Site No .
Road Name or Description Site Type ( Point or Transect ) Monitoring Site ID KPI value Gamba Age & Status Total number of sites assessed : # Total number of sites where value = 1 # sites ( # points , # transects ) Average KPI % across ALL sites ( average of all KPIs , divided by total number of sites assessed , expressed as a percentage ) # % TRAFFIC SIGNALS AND INTELLIGENT TRANSPORT SYSTEMS MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 133 TRAFFIC SIGNALS AND INTELLIGENT 16 .
TRANSPORT SYSTEMS MAINTENANCE DESCRIPTION OF THE WORKS 16.1 A general outline of the work to be carried out under the Contract comprises : Provide a twenty four hours a day , seven days a week service to safely and efficiently meet the requirements of this Request for Tender within specified timeframes for all ITS & related equipment within the area stipulated in the RFT/RFQ , associated with inspection , servicing , repairs and maintenance for : - Traffic Signal Controller ( TSC ) assets & associated hardware ; - Advanced Warning Signs ( AWS or Wig Wags ) ; - Variable Speed Limit Signs ( VSLS ) ; - Closed Circuit Television ( CCTV ) ; - Uninterruptible Power Supply ( UPS ) systems ; - Other Intelligent Transport Systems ( ITS ) ; and , - Associated communication equipment relating to the above items .
The contractor is required to ensure that all infrastructure as listed above and their components remain in good condition and operate as designed .
The majority of the equipment to be maintained includes , but is not limited to traffic signal controllers , detectors , detector loops , signal hardware ( including conduits , cables , footings , conduit junction pits , detector pits , signal posts , supports , wiring assemblies , lanterns , pedestrian buttons and traffic signal / pedestrian lanterns ) .
AWS , VSLS , CCTV , UPS and other ITS equipment including all IT and communication equipment , and equipment linking each asset to the Sydney Coordinated Adaptive Traffic System ( SCATS ) regional computer .
The minimum requirements for the maintenance of traffic signals are specified as three work types , these are ; - Fault Maintenance - Routine Maintenance - Specific Maintenance Other equipment which integrates into the traffic signal controller shall be included within this contract such as the Red Light Camera equipment which is housed within the TSC .
Other equipment which integrates to the TSC such as Emergency Services ‘ hurry call ’ equipment , or other equipment which uses the controller for information , power supply , or communications shall also be included .
Fault Maintenance 16.1.1 Fault Maintenance is the response to unscheduled maintenance .
Fault Maintenance can be identified by either the Contractor , Superintendent ’ s Representative , Traffic Section staff , or Department On-Call staff , but attendance on site and works must be authorised by the before mentioned Departmental staff ( except where the fault is of a nature that poses a significant risk to the public or the worker ) , and occur within specified response times provided in Table 16.12 - Response Times ( Refer to clause 16.32 ) .
Fault Maintenance includes the following faults for example : accidents , traffic signals flashing amber and other controller related faults , blacked out , non-operational , communications outages , aspects out of alignment , pedestrian hardware related faults , and all ITS related faults .
Routine Maintenance 16.1.2 Routine Maintenance is carried out to a specified level and within a broad timeframe .
Work is scheduled by the Contractor but must be completed within an allocated time as shown in Table 16.12 - Response Times .
Routine maintenance is generally follow up work to Fault Maintenance i.e .
reinstate pedestal and hardware , replace detectors , replace faulty signal component , replace UPS batteries or testing , CCTV repairs , cleaning or inspections .
Specific Maintenance 16.1.3 Specific Maintenance consists primarily of an audit of an individual traffic signal site , inclusive of all ITS related to that traffic signal asset .
A report is generated by the contractor identifying the condition and performance of the traffic signals and related ITS , if applicable .
The report , inclusive of any recommended repairs identified from the audit are scheduled by the Contractor and submitted to the Superintendent ’ s Representative in a program of works within 5 working days of the audit being completed as a basis for approval .
Any recommended repairs considered as urgent at the time of the audit being undertaken , the contractor shall contact the Superintendent ’ s Representative immediately for further direction regarding works to be undertaken .
Nominated repairs such as pole top replacements are undertaken in conjunction with the Audit .
TRAFFIC SIGNALS AND INTELLIGENT TRANSPORT SYSTEMS MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 134 STANDARDS 16.2 Conform to the following Standards and Publications unless specified otherwise : AS/NZS 1163 Cold-formed structural steel hollow sections AS 1231 Aluminium and aluminium alloys - Anodic oxidation coatings AS/NZS 1477 PVC pipes and fittings for pressure applications AS/NZS 1554 Structural steel welding - Welding of steel structures AS/NZS 1594 Hot-rolled steel flat products AS 1742.3 Manual of uniform traffic control devices - Traffic control for works on roads AS 1743 Road signs - Specifications AS/NZS 2053 Conduits and fittings for electrical installations AS 2144 Traffic Signal Lanterns AS/NZS 2276 Cables for traffic signal installations AS 2339 Traffic signal posts and attachments AS 2353 Pedestrian push-button assemblies AS 2700 Colour standards for general purposes AS 2703 Vehicle loop detector sensors AS 2979 Traffic signal mast arms AS/NZS 3000 Electrical Installations AS/NZS 3100 Approval and Test Specification – General Requirements for Electrical Equipment AS/NZS 3108 Approval and test specification - Particular requirements for isolating transformers and safety isolating transformers AS/NZS 3191 Electric flexible cords AS/NZS 3678 Structural steel - Hot-rolled plates , floorplates and slabs AS/NZS 3679.1 Structural steel - Hot-rolled bars and sections AS/NZS 4680 Hot-dip galvanized ( zinc ) coatings on fabricated ferrous articles AS/NZS 5000.1 Electric cables - Polymetric insulated - For working voltages up to and including 0.6/1 ( 1.2 ) kV CROSS REFERENCES 16.3 MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS PROVISION FOR TRAFFIC CONCRETE MAINTENANCE TRAFFIC SIGNALS AND INTELLIGENT TRANSPORT SYSTEMS MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 135 DEFINITIONS 16.4 In this contract , unless otherwise specified , the following words and expressions will have the following meanings ; Table 16.1 – Definitions – Traffic Signals and ITS Maintenance Advanced Warning Signs ( AWS ) : Large yellow and black signs approximately 150m advanced of some signalised intersections displaying alternating flashing yellow lights when the approaching signal group is in either yellow or red .
Also known as “ Wig wags ” .
After Hours : Any hours not between 0700hrs and 1700hrs Monday to Friday and all weekends and public holidays .
Audio Tactile Driver : An electronic device to activate the transducer within the associated push button assembly mounted on a traffic signal post .
Auxiliary Cabinet : An approved housing for ITS components which is often fitted to the top of a controller cabinet .
It may house Red Light Camera ( RLC ) equipment , CCTV equipment , and other ITS equipment and related components including routers , UPS , modems , fibre optic connections etc .
Business Hours : Between 0700hrs and 1700hrs Monday to Friday .
Closed Circuit Television ( CCTV ) : CCTV is the use of video cameras to transmit a signal to a specific place , on a set of monitors .
The cameras may be fixed , or PTZ ( pan , tilt , zoom ) and capable of being remotely controlled .
The CCTV for use in this contract may monitor traffic flow / congestion , incidents , or to observe events or works .
Control Relay : An electro-mechanical or solid state assembly within a controller cabinet for the purpose of switching signal lamps .
Controller : A complete electronic mechanism for controlling the operation of traffic signals and other ITS .
Controller Cabinet : An approved housing for a controller , control relays , auxiliary equipment , terminal blocks , sockets , flasher units , wiring , and other ITS components etc .
which may or may not include vehicle detectors and linking equipment .
CSR : Contractor Service Request/Report Day : Calendar business day unless otherwise stated .
Deficiency : The visible or measurable evidence of failure or other undesirable condition that is at or exceeding its intervention level or that is likely to become a Hazard ( as reasonably determined by the contractor or Superintendent ’ s Rep ) before the next scheduled or required inspection .
The deficiency may affect the safety , serviceability , structural capacity or appearance of the asset .
Detector Loop : An in-pavement wiring configuration ( including lead-in wires ) to detect or count vehicle movements , or both .
Detector Sensor : An electronic device , which may be post or controller mounted , used to count , classify , or detect vehicles or pedestrians , or both .
Fault : Any malfunction of equipment to be rectified within specified response time .
TRAFFIC SIGNALS AND INTELLIGENT TRANSPORT SYSTEMS MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 136 Table 16.1 – Definitions – Traffic Signals and ITS Maintenance Fault Maintenance : The repair and/or replacement of equipment damaged or defective through any cause and shall require : ( a ) A 24 hour , 7 days/week fault attendance service for the purpose of inspection , identification and repair of reported site malfunctions , with a fully equipped service vehicle and experienced technicians .
( b ) An adequate back-up service to enable permanent repairs and rectification of all site deficiencies .
( c ) A fully equipped workshop facility for the purpose of testing and repairing equipment removed from the maintenance site .
Footing and Post / Pedestal : A concrete base , including all conduit bends , ragbolt assemblies and reinforcement cages , and a post used primarily for the support of traffic signal lantern/s ( including mast arms and joint use poles ) .
Footings and posts maintained by other authorities are not included in this definition .
Intelligent Transportation Systems ( ITS ) : Intelligent Transportation Systems ( ITS ) can be defined as the application of advanced information and communications technology to surface transportation in order to achieve enhanced safety and mobility while reducing the environmental impact of transportation .
ITS in the NT may include CCTV , Red Light Cameras , UPS , VSLS , Radar or video detection , VMS ( mobile or fixed ) .
It may include vehicle to roadside , vehicle to vehicle , or vehicle to infrastructure technology .
Minor Repairs : The regular adjustment and minor servicing required to keep traffic signals in good , serviceable operating condition .
Pedestrian Detector : A push button device used to actuate the pedestrian walk phases which may or may not include audio-tactile devices and 'Wait ' indicators .
RFT/RFQ Request for Tender / Request for Quotation .
Provisions in this specification applicable to one are equally applicable to the other .
Routine Maintenance : Repairs identified during fault maintenance or otherwise directed by the Superintendent ’ s Representative or Traffic Section staff .
Work to be completed within a specified timeframe .
Sydney Coordinated Adaptive Traffic Management System ( SCATS ) : SCATS® is an adaptive urban traffic management system that synchronises traffic signals to optimise traffic flow across a whole city , region or corridor .
It ’ s highly configurable , dynamically responding to the demands of the network in real time .
SCATS is used throughout the NT to control the traffic signals .
Shall Is indicative of a mandatory requirement unless the context clearly indicates otherwise .
Supports : All structural components , brackets , post top assemblies , clamps , straps and parts thereof , used to support traffic signal equipment .
Specific Maintenance : Scheduled inspection of all asset based on-site equipment compiled in report form to identify condition and performance of traffic signal hardware and related ITS .
Recommended repairs scheduled in program as provided by contractor and agreed to by Superintendents Representative .
TRAFFIC SIGNALS AND INTELLIGENT TRANSPORT SYSTEMS MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 137 Table 16.1 – Definitions – Traffic Signals and ITS Maintenance TCD Traffic Control Diagram – TCDs are part of TMP TMP : Traffic Management Plan – includes TCDs Traffic Signal Aspect A single optical system ( circular , arrow or symbolic ) on a single face capable of been illuminated at a given time .
2 or more aspects in a common mount and operation are called a Lantern ( see Traffic signal lantern ) TSC Traffic Signal Controller Traffic Signal Lantern : A vehicular traffic control signal , pedestrian control signal , flashing signal or internally illuminated sign including all housings , visors , doors , lamp holders , reflectors , gaskets , target boards , lenses , wiring and cables and other related items .
The lantern may consist of Incandescent , Halogen , or Light Emitting Diode ( LED ) lamps to illuminate the traffic signal display .
Uninterruptable Power Supply ( UPS ) : An uninterruptible power supply , or battery backup , is an electrical apparatus that provides emergency power to a load when the input power source , typically mains power , fails .
The UPS continues to power the traffic signals and ITS until mains power can be restored .
Also may be termed as ICUPS ( Internal Controller UPS ) , or ECUPS ( External Controller UPS ) .
Variable Message Signs ( VMS ) : A VMS , is an electronic traffic sign often used on roadways to give travellers information about events related to the road reserve .
They warn motorists of road conditions , traffic management , accidents or incidents and may warn of traffic congestion .
They may direct vehicles to take alternative routes , limit travel speed , warn of duration and location of the incidents or just inform of the traffic conditions .
Variable Speed Limit Signs ( VSLS ) : A VSLS is an electronic sign that can display alternate speed/s by time of day remotely either automatically , or manually , for reasons such as school zones , busy areas , areas of high pedestrian numbers etc , where the lower speed limit is not warranted permanently .
Wig wags See Advanced Warning Signs TRAFFIC SIGNALS AND INTELLIGENT TRANSPORT SYSTEMS MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 138 SITE OF WORKS 16.5 There are various sites for these works .
Refer to the RFT .
The sites will include all traffic signalised intersections , pedestrian crossings AWS , CCTV , UPS , VSLS , and ITS applications within the areas stipulated in the RFT .
All traffic signals in the stipulated areas are included in this contract .
Maintenance for any newly constructed assets will be included within the maintenance list once a handover has been undertaken with the constructing contractor and the Project Manager for the governing agency and accepted by the Department ’ s Traffic Section .
All Closed Circuit Television ( CCTV ) cameras under the control of the Department are included in this contract .
Other selected NTG CCTV assets or future council CCTV may also be included .
The following points identify locations of these intersections and are shown in : Table 16.7 - NT Government Owned Traffic Signals – Darwin Region , Table 16.8 – Darwin City Council Owned Traffic Signals , Table 16.9 – Palmerston City Council Owned Traffic Signals , Table 16.10 – NT Government Owned Traffic Signals – Alice Springs and Table 16.11 – Alice Springs Council Owned Traffic Signals ( Refer clause 16.30 ) : - Department of Infrastructure managed traffic signal assets , and all other ITS assets ; - City of Darwin Council owned traffic signal assets & - City of Palmerston Council owned traffic signal assets & - Alice Springs Town Council owned traffic signal assets .
Where work is required to be carried out in easements or on land adjacent to the site for the purpose of connecting services or joining up of roads etc .
ensure that the appropriate licences and approvals are obtained for work in those particular areas .
Permits – City or Town Council permits are required to be obtained to undertake works for all non-fault maintenance activities .
As per Council direction , fees will be waived for all works within Darwin and Palmerston Council jurisdictions for works directly relating to traffic signal or ITS maintenance purposes executed under this contract .
Approved permits shall be forwarded on to the Traffic Section prior to proceeding with the works .
RESTRICTED WORKING HOURS 16.6 The work to be performed under the Contract shall be subject to execution within certain restricted working hours and the Contractor shall therefore accept that some Routine Maintenance works may not be able to be carried out within normal work hours due to the high risk nature of some environments , for example ; where traffic volumes are too high to allow works to be undertaken in accordance with PROVISION FOR TRAFFIC or Australian Standards for traffic management .
Therefore these works shall be rescheduled to a time when risk can be better managed i.e .
after hours or on weekends at the scheduled rates .
For the purpose of this contract working hours are : - Business Hours : Within 0700 – 1700 hours , - After Hours : Outside the above hours , weekends and Public Holidays .
See also PROVISION FOR TRAFFIC .
See also the clause titled ‘ Working Hours ’ in the Conditions of Contract .
See also the clause titled ‘ Routine Maintenance ’ for further clarification .
ACCESS TO SITE 16.7 Prior to entering the site of the Works , the Contractor shall contact the officer-in-charge of the site to explain the nature of the work to be carried out and for permission to enter to carry out the Works .
In the event of either , being unable to contact the officer-in-charge , or being refused permission to enter the premises the Contractor shall notify the Superintendent ’ s Representative .
Work shall not proceed in such areas until further advised by the Superintendent ’ s Representative .
Note : This clause applies where the contractor is required to access a site to undertake traffic signal , or ITS maintenance , that at the time , is under contractual possession of a third party i.e .
other contractor .
TRAFFIC SIGNALS AND INTELLIGENT TRANSPORT SYSTEMS MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 139 SCHEDULE OF DRAWINGS 16.8 INCLUDED IN CONTRACT The following drawings shall form part of the Contract : Table 16.2 – Schedule of Drawings Included in Contract DRAWING NO .
AMEND NO .
TITLE CS 1500 4 Signal Details – Ducting CS 1501 3 Signal Details – Pole Foundation CS 1502 2 Signal Details – Mast Arm Foundation CS 1503 3 Signal Details – Controller Foundation CS 1504 3 Signal Details – Communication Isolation Pillar CS 1505 2 Signal Details – Lantern Mounting Details CS 1506 1 Signal Details – Pedestrian Push Button CS 1507 5 Signal Details – Detector Installation CS 1557 2 Traffic Signal Advanced Warning Sign AVAILABILITY OF CONTRACTOR 16.9 The Contractor shall provide twenty-four hours a day , seven days a week telephone contact and availability of labour to deploy to the Works should the Superintendent ’ s Representative , Traffic Section or Departmental On-Call staff so direct .
The Principal shall have first call on the services of the Contractor .
The contractor shall ensure that there is always an appropriately delegated ‘ Contractor Representative ’ available to provide quotes , information on quotes , to make operational decisions and provide technical advice , escalation of works , to be available to resolve disputed invoices , and for other operational purposes .
If the nominated Contractor Representative is on leave , prior notice shall be given of the staff member who will be available for these duties in the Contractor Representative ’ s absence .
Alternately , a 2nd in charge may be appointed to make the same decisions and provide the same services with equivalent authority .
CONTRACTOR 'S ESTABLISHMENT 16.10 The Contractor shall provide and maintain an established office workshop facility .
The facility shall include the following : a ) An approved workshop with equipment and capabilities sufficient to carry out work as requested under the Contract .
b ) An approved office space with sufficient personnel necessary to take , record or pass on any emergency message that may be received , provide day to day information with regard to prices availability and delivery .
Be sufficiently qualified to process and forward invoices for work carried out .
c ) An approved storage facility that is secure and provides a weatherproof location for the storage of Department owned assets or hardware that are stored by the contractor under the requirements of this contract .
CONTRACTOR 'S EQUIPMENT AND 16.11 MATERIALS The Contractor shall provide all general and specialised equipment , tools and materials to carry out and test the Work ( except for equipment , tools and materials supplied by the Principal ) .
It shall be the responsibility of the Contractor to be fully equipped on each attendance call .
CO-ORDINATION OF WORK 16.12 The Contractor shall confer with any sub-contractors and persons engaged on separate orders in connection with the Works and with the Superintendent ’ s Representative , Traffic Section or Departmental On-Call staff for the purpose of co-ordination and execution for the various phases of the Works .
The Contractor shall be responsible for arranging that each shall attend upon and assist the other trades .
The Contractor shall ascertain from the sub-contractor and persons engaged on separate contracts the extent of all chasing , cutting and forming of all openings , holes , grooves and the like .
TRAFFIC SIGNALS AND INTELLIGENT TRANSPORT SYSTEMS MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 140 The Contractor shall ascertain the routes of all services and the position of all pits , conduits and the like in connection with the installation of plant and services and arrange for the construction of work accordingly .
The breaking and cutting of complete work must be avoided wherever possible .
MATERIAL AND SOFTWARE TO BE 16.13 SUPPLIED BY THE PRINCIPAL - DARWIN The following material and software will be supplied free by the Principal to the Contractor for use only in execution of the Works : Table 16.3 – Items supplied by Principal – Darwin ITEM QUANTITY CONTROLLERS PSC MK3 Cabinet & Test Controller ( with lamp load bank ) 1 Keyboard Display Units ( KDU ) 8 Eclipse Cabinet & Test Controller ( with lamp load bank ) 1 Eclipse Hand Held Terminal ( HHT ) 7 PSC Manuals and Eclipse Manuals 1 CCTV Cleaning Pole 1 SOFTWARE / SCATS / USER MANUALS Scats Access Program 1 SCATS Log 1 Loop Detector Analyser 1 Tyco Log Viewer 1 EUpdate 1 ATSUI 1 Microconnect LCM Management Tool 1 UPS Manuals 1 Table 16.3 – Items supplied by Principal – Darwin ITEM QUANTITY SIGNAGE ‘ Changed Traffic Conditions Ahead ’ Signs 4 ‘ Traffic Signals Under Repair ’ Signs 8 Collection of Hardware – Hold Point 16.13.1 Hold Point - Within 7 days of award of the Contract , the Contractor shall collect such materials and take delivery of the materials at the Department ’ s Yarrawonga shed / storage yard .
Before taking delivery of any material , the Contractor shall check that is in a satisfactory condition and in the quantity described .
No claim will be admitted for replacement of material alleged to be found defective or deficient in quantity after delivery .
The quantities stated are not necessarily adequate for the execution of the Works and supply of any additional quantities shall be arranged by the Contractor and at his own expense .
The maintenance and serviceability of all equipment provided by the Department and used for testing by the contractor , such as the KDUs , HHTs , test controller cabinets and associated load banks are the responsibility of the contractor to arrange and shall be at the contractor ’ s expense .
The equipment shall always be in a serviceable condition .
On completion of the contract , the contractor shall deliver the Principal supplied material back to the Traffic Section storage yard in serviceable condition .
MATERIAL TO BE SUPPLIED BY THE 16.14 PRINCIPAL – ALICE SPRINGS The following material will be supplied free by the Principal to the Contractor for use only in execution of the Works : TRAFFIC SIGNALS AND INTELLIGENT TRANSPORT SYSTEMS MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 141 Table 16.4 – Items Supplied by Principal – Alice Springs MATERIALS QUANTITY CONTROLLER : Keyboard Display Units ( KDU ) 3 PSC MK3 Cabinet Test Controller 1 Mother Board 1 PSC Processor Plus card 1 PSC Power Supply card 1 PSC Power Interface card 1 PSC PD212 Detector card 1 PSC PD216 Detector card 1 PSC Lamp Control Board cards ( low power ) 3 Memory Test Program ( from old L0101 ) 1 PSC Motherboard complete with : PSC Processor Plus Card , PSC Power Supply Card , PSC Power Interface Card , 2 x PSC PD216 Detector cards , 3 x PSC Lamp Control Board cards .
1 PSC Motherboard 1 PSC Processor Plus card 2 PSC Power Supply card 3 PSC Power Interface card 1 PSC PD212 Detector cards 1 PSC PD216 Detector cards 1 PSC Lamp Control Board cards ( low power ) 6 Table 16.4 – Items Supplied by Principal – Alice Springs MATERIALS QUANTITY PSC Flasher Units 1 PSC Manuals 2 Eclipse Controller EC1-69-16 3 Eclipse Controller EC1-69-08 1 Eclipse Hand Held Terminal ( HHT ) 3 Eclipse Manuals ( electronic copy ) 1 Eclipse Motherboard LM40-16- 16 complete with cards 2 Eclipse Motherboard LM40-08- 16 complete with cards 3 Eclipse CPM 1a card 2 Eclipse LDM 416 card 2 Eclipse LCM 8 card 4 Eclipse PSM card 1 Eclipse Flasher Unit 2 Eclipse Mains Filter Unit 2 Eclipse Assembly Site ID 1 PSTN Micro Connect Linking Control Modules for SCATS communication 1 SCATS Scats Access Program 1 SCATS Log 1 On award of the Contract , the Contractor shall submit a written request for such materials , and on receiving the Superintendent 's written authority , he shall take delivery of the materials at the Traffic Section storage location wherever it may be in Alice Springs ( Currently second floor of Greenwell Building ) TRAFFIC SIGNALS AND INTELLIGENT TRANSPORT SYSTEMS MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 142 Before taking delivery of any material , the Contractor shall check that is in a satisfactory condition and in the quantity described .
No claim will be admitted for replacement of material alleged to be found defective or deficient in quantity after delivery .
The quantities stated are not necessarily adequate for the execution of the Works and supply of any additional quantities shall be arranged by the Contractor and at his own expense .
16.14.1 Documents / items to be Submitted for this contract after award Table 16.5 – Documents / Items Contractor to Provide ITEM TIMEFRAME Project Control Plan 14 Days Document / Hardware Control 14 Days Contact numbers - during and after hours 24 Hours Site Log Template 7 Days Traffic Management Plan & TCDs 14 Days Test Controllers Installed 14 Days Test Traffic Signal Loop Installed 14 Days Contractors Nominated PIN Numbers 7 Days Contractor ’ s Personnel Accreditations / Qualifications 7 Days Company Workplace Health & Safety Plan 14 Days Table 16.6 – Documents / Items DIPL to Provide ITEM TIMEFRAME Material to be supplied to Contractor Upon Request ( within 7 days ) Callout Request Form 24 Hours Contact numbers - during and after hours 24 Hours Excel Spreadsheet Quote Sheet 7 days Note : The items listed above are required to be provided or undertaken within the nominated timeframes following commencement of the contract , however is not an exhaustive list .
Documents shall be updated and provided to the Superintendent ’ s Representative as soon as possible of any contents within the documents changing .
PROCEDURES , CALLS AND 16.15 PAYMENTS General 16.15.1 This section specifies the requirements for attending the work and the procedures for reporting and payment of work carried out .
NOTE : The Department ’ s Traffic Section are investigating the feasibility of implementing a maintenance management system for traffic signals and ITS in the NT .
It is anticipated that this system be capable of creating and forwarding works order directions , and allow responses for all maintenance tasks , tracking work orders and invoices , recording works completion times , and providing full reports .
It may also be able to attach photos to work orders , control stock and location .
If this system is implemented during the term of this contract , the contractor will be required to adopt the use of the system for the purpose of this contract .
Licenses , software and equipment ( mobile devices ) will be provided by the Department if required .
TRAFFIC SIGNALS AND INTELLIGENT TRANSPORT SYSTEMS MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 143 Abbreviations and Definitions 16.15.2 The following abbreviations and definitions are used in this specification section : - SCHEDULED WORK – Work for which a specific rate item is provided in the Schedule of Rates .
- UNSCHEDULED WORK – Work for which no specific rate item is provided in the Schedule of Rates .
- CSR – Contractor Service Report/Request .
- ITPC – Instruction to Period Contractor - WO – Works Order .
- RCTI – Recipient Created Tax Invoice Direction to work 16.15.3 A direction to work may be issued in the following forms : - Telephone call or facsimile .
A CSR will subsequently be issued by the Superintendent .
- Instruction to Period Contractor .
( ITPC ) A CSR will subsequently be issued by the Superintendent .
- Contractors Service Request/Report ( CSR ) Issued in its own right or subsequent to a telephone call or facsimile , an ITPC or an urgent call out .
- Service Order Issued in respect to a quotation for specific works not included in the Schedule of Rates .
- Urgent call out work outside of normal working hours .
- Urgent call out work outside of normal working hours may be communicated to the Contractor by the Department ’ s answering service contractor or the Superintendent ’ s Representative , Traffic Section or Departmental On-Call staff .
In the event of an urgent call out outside of normal working hours the Contractor shall on the first working day thereafter , complete a “ Call Out Request Form ” and email the same to Traffic Section as a prerequisite to the issue of a CSR or email work order .
If the Superintendent ’ s Representative , Traffic Section or Departmental On-Call staff considers any particular work requirement is urgent he shall so advise the Contractor and shall cause the CSR subsequently issued to be stamped “ URGENT ” .
The Contractor shall visit the office of the Superintendent as required to collect any hard copy directions to work .
For traffic signal maintenance works , an automatically generated CSR is issued monthly to the contractor for each traffic signal asset .
Traffic Section staff send email work orders to the contractor as a direction to work to initiate maintenance works to be completed at required assets .
The contractor then compiles the email work orders and evidence , and then invoices the Department monthly for each CSR .
Where works have not been undertaken at any particular asset for that month , the contractor will enter the words ‘ nil charges ’ on the relevant CSR and return with the other monthly invoices for that CSR to be cancelled .
For works where there is a recovery of costs initiated by the Department i.e .
where a traffic signal has been knocked over by a motorist , a separate CSR will be forwarded to the contractor to undertake the works in relation to the reinstatement of that asset .
Specific maintenance and other works may be initiated on a separate CSR .
Advance Direction 16.15.4 Notwithstanding the provisions of the Direction To Work clause the Contractor will receive an advance direction to carry out any required Scheduled Work up to a maximum of the monthly pro rata frequency of the respective Schedule of Rate Items .
Any advance direction issued may be revoked at the sole discretion of the Superintendent .
Authority to Undertake Work 16.15.5 The Contractor will not undertake any work unless specifically directed to do so by the Superintendent ’ s Representative , Traffic Section or Departmental On-Call staff , with the exception of : - Hazardous situations .
If there is obvious works required due to a hazardous situation that could endanger a worker or member of the public , the contractor shall attempt to contact the Superintendent ’ s Representative for permission to proceed with the work .
If the Superintendent ’ s Representative or other Traffic Section staff are not available , the contractor may proceed with the works if the works is of a nature that poses a risk to the public or workers .
TRAFFIC SIGNALS AND INTELLIGENT TRANSPORT SYSTEMS MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 144 In the above situations the contractor shall notify the Superintendent ’ s Representative as soon as practicable during or after the works , and provide supporting evidence ( photographic or other ) of the works that occurred .
16.15.6 Instruction To Period Contractor - CSR One copy of an ITPC or CSR will be issued to the Contractor .
The document will describe in brief detail , the location and a brief description of the work required .
When the works required by the CSR have been completed the Contractor shall insert , in the appropriate place on the CSR , brief work descriptions , item numbers , quantities , rates , extensions , additions , the total value and any other information required by the Superintendent to approve payment .
The CSR shall have the completion date of the works entered thereon and be signed off by the Contractor .
Time Limit for Attendance 16.15.7 The works must be attended within the time limits specified in Table 16.12 - Response Times .
Any inability to undertake the works during the allowable time limit shall be coordinated with the Superintendent ’ s Representative or Traffic Section staff , prior to the time or date due for completion with sufficient time to arrange a suitable alternative .
Variation Approval 16.15.8 Any variation from the extent of work ordered must be approved by the prior to the varied work being carried out .
Where an item of work is ordered pursuant to a Schedule of Rates item for Scheduled Work and the Contractor considers the item to be outside the scope of the Schedule of Rates item the Contractor shall obtain the approval of the Superintendent prior to carrying out the varied works unless the works is of a nature that poses a risk to the public or workers .
The Contractor shall in the case of any authorised variation insert on the CSR the approving officer ’ s name and the date of such approval .
COMMUNICATIONS 16.15.9 Provide field and after hours communication with the Department by mobile telephones connected either to a cell net system or a satellite system .
Provide the Department with a list of current contact numbers ( including mobile phones ) for all staff involved in the delivery and works within this contract , including the single after hours contact number within 24 hours of award of the contract .
Ensure that the telephones are switched on every day between the hours of 0700 and 1700 or at any other time when work is being carried out under the Contract .
Ensure that the after hours phone is manned at all times , twenty-four hours a day , seven days a week .
The use of answering machines or message banks as the primary form of communication is not appropriate and should only be used if the phone is engaged ( in use ) or if the user is unable to get to the phone in time to answer it .
The contractor shall ensure that if a call is not answered for any reason , a return phone call will be made within ten minutes from the original missed call .
Replace faulty telephones within 3 working days of the occurrence of the fault , and advise the Superintendent ’ s Representative in writing of any temporary arrangements .
All email work orders that are sent to the contractor with instruction to undertake works , shall be replied to ( reply to all ) by 1000 hrs ( 10am ) the following work day with details of the works that were undertaken , the fault/s that were fixed , scheduled and unscheduled items used , and any works outstanding or other non- urgent maintenance observed while on site .
Any work order written responses required due to urgent reasons on the day that works occurred will be marked as such on the work order , and shall be received by 1000 hrs that day or earlier , as otherwise directed .
Works will be checked against the time limit for repairs of the fault and SCATS Log .
DAILY LOG BOOKS – 16.15.10 APPROVAL – Witness Point Maintain daily log books for works undertaken under the contract .
Witness Point - Approval - Submit to the Superintendent ’ s Representative for approval , a suitably designed format for an individual Site Log template prior to commencing works under the Contract – to be provided within 7 days of award of contract .
A Site Log job sheet shall be filled in for each attendance regardless of the type of works being undertaken , and shall have all details completed including if a field is n/a .
TRAFFIC SIGNALS AND INTELLIGENT TRANSPORT SYSTEMS MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 145 Include in each individual site job sheet the following fields as a minimum : - The site asset number and location , i.e .
road name / intersection , - Date and time of each attendance - arrival , returns , and departure from site , - Confirmation that attendance was as per contract time limit for attendance – Yes/No , - Names of personnel who attended site , - Details of other site attendees ( Police , Power & Water , Worksafe , Sub- Contractors etc ) , - Name of Department officer that ordered the works ( business hours and after hours ) , - The type of work and details of the works undertaken , including controller faults and codes , test readings and results , - Scheduled and non-scheduled items , and the quantities used or completed , - Stock used ( whether or not the item used was from Department stock or provided as new from the contractor ) , - Details of significant changes in the operational state of the traffic signals such as disconnection of communications or power to the site , Flashing Amber , Blackout or similar .
Shall include approximate time of the change to operation , - Evidence of works , including date and time stamped photographic images of any damaged / replaced items , additional or outstanding works .
- Equipment or works down time , - Work Health & Safety incidents , near misses , or any unusual happenings , and any other requirements specified in the relevant Technical Section , - Any outstanding maintenance requirements or faults observed onsite but not corrected at the time of attendance , or adverse traffic signal operational observations .
So that the Superintendent ’ s Representative and Traffic Section staff can record the job as completed , all email work orders that are sent to the contractor with instruction to undertake works , shall be replied to ( reply to all ) by Close of Business the following work day with details of the works that were undertaken , the fault/s that were fixed , scheduled and unscheduled items used , and any works outstanding or other non-urgent maintenance observed while on site .
Works will be checked against the time limit for repairs of the fault .
Submit daily log book sheets with each completed CSR with the monthly or separate invoices .
Payments Generally 16.15.11 On completion of all work described on the CSR , endorse the CSR as required and return to the Superintendent no later than 14 days after completion of work .
When the Superintendent is satisfied the work has been completed in a satisfactory manner , and that the charges are in accordance with the Schedule of Rates , payment will be certified .
All orders for work not invoiced within 14 days of completion may be subject to valuation by the Superintendent and paid accordingly .
Fully detailed particulars , evidence of cost and acceptable reasons as to why the work was not invoiced within the 14 day period may be required as prerequisites to payment .
Tax Invoices 16.15.12 A GST compliant tax invoice which includes the order number of the work must be attached to the CSR when forwarding to the Superintendent for payment unless the contractor has entered an agreement with the Principal to receive Recipient Created Tax Invoices ( RCTI ) .
Where the Contractor has a written agreement with the Principal to receive Recipient Created Tax Invoices the Department , after receiving a completed CSR , will create a tax invoice on the Contractors behalf and issue it in parallel with the contract payment .
The Contractor will still be responsible for collecting the GST and remitting it to the Tax Office .
MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT 16.16 Refer to MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT Payment Generally 16.16.1 Payment for Scheduled Work will be made at the tendered rate .
Rates Generally 16.16.2 The rates tendered are deemed to represent the full value of the work inclusive of plant , labour , messing , clearances , transportation , fuel , oil , maintenance , tools , material procurement and delivery , all incidentals to complete the work , TRAFFIC SIGNALS AND INTELLIGENT TRANSPORT SYSTEMS MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 146 attendance , supervision and for overheads and profit .
Where a Schedule of Rate item for Scheduled Works is defined as “ Labour Only ” the rate tendered shall be inclusive of all of the above relating to the labour component .
CLAIMS UNDER THE INDIGENOUS 16.17 EMPLOYMENT PROVISIONAL SUM Claims under the Indigenous Employment Provisional Sum are to be submitted to the Principal within 14 days of the end of each calendar month and must be accompanied by an Indigenous Employment Report as required by the Conditions of Contract .
REVIEW MEETINGS 16.18 The nominated appropriately delegated Contractor Representative shall be available to attend fortnightly meetings at locations to be directed by the Superintendent ’ s Representative and at recurring times that are convenient to both the contractor and the Superintendent ’ s Representative .
The meetings will be held for the following purposes : - For the contractor to update the Superintendent ’ s Representative of the progress of ongoing and pre-programmed works , - For the Superintendent ’ s Representative to provide the contractor with future planned works , prioritise works and provide feedback , - For the Superintendent ’ s Representative and the contractor to confirm previous works have been completed adequately , discuss and resolve disputed invoices , non-conformances and general contractor co-ordination , - Discuss integration and / or impact of other traffic signal works or contracts on traffic signals not included within this maintenance contract but impacting on traffic signals under NTG control ( including other Traffic Section contracts , Departmental projects and external clients including councils ) , - Current Work Health & Safety concerns by the contractor , Traffic Section , Worksafe or any other stakeholder , and ; - Any other relevant issues or queries that relate to , or impact upon this maintenance contract .
QUOTING FOR UNSCHEDULED 16.19 WORKS The Contractor Representative is required to utilise the Quoting Form which will be supplied to the successful contractor within 7 days of the contract being awarded .
The Quoting Form is in an Excel Spreadsheet format .
The Quoting Form is required to be completed by the contractor for all unscheduled materials , negotiated rate items and to advise the Superintendent ’ s Representative of what quantities are required for works such as full pole replacements as a result of an accident , or other routine maintenance activities .
Quotes may be required for supply only items , labour items , or both .
Completed quote forms should be emailed to the Department ’ s Traffic Section so a CSR or email work order can be raised if the quote is accepted .
The email shall be accompanied by a description of what the quote includes , excludes , a breakdown of the negotiated rate items ( including personnel and materials ) , expected duration of works , and the date proposed to commence .
Quotes requested verbally or in writing by the Department shall be provided in detail with all of the required information within the following time limits : Standard Quote .
A standard quote shall be provided within 5 business days of the request for quote being issued .
A standard quote would include traffic signal and ITS works , repairs or reinstatement which is of a non-urgent nature as described by the Department ’ s Traffic Section , and other non-urgent requirements .
Urgent Quote .
An urgent quote shall be provided within 24 hours of the request for quote being issued .
An urgent quote would include traffic signal and ITS works , repairs or reinstatement which is of an urgent nature or any other urgent requirements as described by the Department ’ s Traffic Section .
Also refer to clause ‘ Availability of Contractor ’ .
FAULT MAINTENANCE 16.20 Provide a fault attendance service by appropriately qualified technicians on twenty- four hours per day , seven days per week basis for all traffic signal or ITS failures arising from any cause .
Typical causes of traffic signal faults include : - Signal controller or hardware malfunction including power outages , - Communications outage or malfunction , TRAFFIC SIGNALS AND INTELLIGENT TRANSPORT SYSTEMS MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 147 - Accident , vandalism or environmental damage .
E.g .
lightning , moisture , UV exposure , to any traffic signals or ITS hardware .
- Any other issue resulting in a signal controller , or other ITS equipment , to not operate as it is normally intended .
16.20.1 Service Vehicle/s , Equipment and Materials The vehicle/s used for all works under this contract shall at all times be equipped with sufficient materials to make a site safe , perform fault maintenance activities , and be fully equipped for all after hours call out duties on site .
As an absolute minimum the traffic equipped vehicle shall at all times , be equipped with : - Manuals , either electronic or hard copy , for : - Each type of Traffic Signal Controller ( TSC ) in use within the region of this contract , - Uninterruptible Power Supply ( UPS ) units currently in use within the region of this contract , - Microconnect communication equipment , - Variable Speed Limit Sign ( VSLS ) equipment , - Manuals for any other equipment worked on within the scope of this contract .
- Necessary fault finding tools , electrical testing equipment including - a multi-meter ( Low impedance solenoid meter , test lamp , “ Wiggy ” or similar meters capable of testing and displaying 240V over period of 0.5 sec ( flashing amber output cycle ) ) and - a KDU ( Keyboard Display Unit ) , - a HHT ( Hand Held Terminal ) and - ladder/s appropriate for accessing a standard traffic signal pole safely , - Telecommunications / PSTN testing equipment including but not limited to a butt phone , surge protection equipment , data cable / cat 5 cable tester , and a spare microconnect unit , - A generator , fully fuelled , and serviceable , which is suitable for an immediate connection to a TSC or UPS as required , - A gatic / pit lid lifter , other common tools including screwdrivers , pliers , side cutters , crimping tools etc .
- Basic replacement and repair hardware such as vehicle and pedestrian cowls , lenses , replacement lamps , pedestrian buttons , fuses , transformers , spare TSC modules and cards , and a green yellow and red roundels and arrows in both 200mm and 300mm .
- The minimum traffic management signage and TMP to carry out fault maintenance tasks in accordance with AS 1742.3 and PROVISION FOR TRAFFIC , - Flashing beacons or other vehicle mounted warning devices on the highest point of the cabin roof or superstructure of all plant and equipment and in accordance with AS/NZS 1742.3 where these are being used within the road reserve .
Fit beacons with a minimum of 75 watt globes .
Do not use strobe lights .
Ensure that the lights are operational whenever the plant or equipment is working within 9 metres of the road reserve and ensure that the light is visible from all approaches and not obscured by exhaust stacks , ladders , roof racks or are covered in dust .
Fault Maintenance Procedures 16.20.2 Fault Maintenance is unscheduled maintenance identified by the Contractor , the Superintendent ’ s Representative , Departmental Traffic staff , or Departmental On-Call staff .
Work must be carried out within a specified time .
Refer to Table 16.12 - Response Times in clause 16.32 Response Times .
Attendance on site is to be communicated to and / or approved by the Superintendent ’ s Representative , Departmental Traffic staff , or Departmental On-Call staff ( except where the fault is of a nature that poses a significant risk to the public or the worker ) .
On receiving confirmation of a fault , the Contractor shall dispatch appropriately qualified technician/s as required to attend the site within the times specified .
Upon initial attendance , the Contractor will identify the fault , ascertain the cause and rectify the fault as soon as practical .
The cost of the authorised repairs will be paid in TRAFFIC SIGNALS AND INTELLIGENT TRANSPORT SYSTEMS MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 148 accordance with the Contractors tendered schedule of routine maintenance rates .
Where full repairs can not be implemented immediately , the Contractor shall ensure that the site is made safe and report to the Superintendent ’ s Representative any further works required prior to departure from site .
In the event that a site can not be left with all lanterns functioning ( for example where a pedestal has been destroyed ) the Contractor shall seek advice from the Superintendent ’ s Representative as to an acceptable temporary arrangement .
For all attendances , prior to leaving the site the Contractor shall ensure that the traffic signals are intact , all functions and displays are as per normal operation , there are communications established from the TSC to SCATS , and that all pits and the controller door are safely secured .
The Superintendent ’ s Representative or Traffic Section staff member ’ s specific authorisation is required for all situations where rectification works will require : - A site being left in an operational mode other than its normal operational mode , - Additional scheduled items varied to the original CSR or email work order , - Any additional equipment other than that specified .
Upon satisfactory completion of repair works the Contractor will advise the Superintendent ’ s Representative or Traffic Section staff member of the site status and action taken prior to departing the site .
So that the Superintendent ’ s Representative and Traffic Section staff can record the job as completed , all email work orders that are sent to the contractor with instruction to undertake works , shall be replied to traffic.ntg @ nt.gov.au and all other nominated recipients by 1000hrs ( 10am ) the following work day with details of the works that were undertaken , the fault/s that were fixed , scheduled and unscheduled items used , and any works outstanding or other non- urgent maintenance observed while on site .
Works will be checked against the time limit for repairs of the fault and SCATS Log .
Submit daily log book sheets with each completed CSR with the monthly or separate invoices .
Initial attendance to any reported faults shall be performed in accordance with the prescribed attendance time criteria on a twenty-four ( 24 ) hour 7 day basis .
The Contractor shall apply the following priorities for actioning all site faults : 1 .
Make the site safe 2 .
Return the traffic signals to operational state 3 .
Establish communications to all equipment 4 .
Return any ITS to operational state 5 .
Optimise the operation and complete remedial works The Contractor shall ensure that all fault attendance work is performed with the deliberate intention of minimising inconvenience to road users including pedestrians and cyclists , while ensuring the safety of the workers and the public .
In accordance with the ‘ Provision for Traffic ’ clause in the standard specification , remedial works shall be performed so as not to interfere with traffic flows during the periods of 07.00 hours to 09.00 hours and from 15.30 hours to 17.30 hours Monday to Friday , excluding public holidays .
This exclusion period may be over- ridden by the Superintendent ’ s Representative , Traffic Section staff or the Department ’ s On-Call Officer in relation to emergency or critical works which require immediate attendance in the interest of public safety .
Response Times 16.20.3 Respond to all service calls during normal business hours , and call outs after business hours as per Table 16.12 - Response Times .
Maintain a 24 hour / seven ( 7 ) days a week service to attend works covered by this contract .
Respond only to service calls or call outs initiated or confirmed by the Superintendent ’ s Representative , Departmental Traffic staff , or Departmental On-Call staff .
Confirmation of service calls and call outs will be issued to the Contractor by CSR ( Contractor Service Report ) or Traffic Section email work order as soon as practicable following the work requested by Superintendent ’ s Representative , or the Department ’ s Traffic Section staff .
Maximum response times have been applied to various faults or maintenance activities based on their urgency and risk .
Considerations such as danger to the public , impact to the road network operation due to a traffic signal or ITS fault , realistic achievability , and other influences have been used to determine these response times .
Other variables such as time of day , or critical site/s affected may result in the maximum response times being reduced at the discretion of the Superintendent ’ s TRAFFIC SIGNALS AND INTELLIGENT TRANSPORT SYSTEMS MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 149 Representative , or the Department ’ s Traffic Section staff .
Failure to meet the maximum response times listed in Table 16.12 - Response Times may expose the contractor to external liabilities .
If the contractor fails to attend a site fully equipped to rectify a fault within the given time limit for attendance , and this failure is considered to have caused or contributed to an accident or injury , investigating authorities may consider further action regarding any negligence proven .
Any inability for the contractor to complete the works in accordance with the required maximum response time or other nominated time , shall be coordinated as soon as possible with the Superintendent ’ s Rep or Traffic Section staff , to agree to a suitable alternative time or time extension to complete the works , and shall be followed up in writing .
Temporary Repairs 16.20.4 Where it is not practical to immediately repair traffic signal equipment on site , the Contractor shall without delay provide a temporary arrangement as agreed to in consultation with the Superintendent and will maintain the asset including temporary repairs until permanent repairs are authorised and implemented .
In order to allow the installation to operate until permanent repairs can be undertaken , the Contractor may be required , when deemed necessary by the Superintendent ’ s Representative , or the Department , to modify the site , or install or relocate equipment to temporary locations .
Where there is provision for switching the signals from normal to flashing operation , the Contractor may do so while effecting repairs on the controller however the Contractor is advised that flashing operation is an emergency action only and will not be considered as a temporary repair .
Also refer to ‘ switching of traffic signal conditions ’ .
16.20.5 Switching State of Traffic Signal Conditions or Communications Where it is necessary to change the state of the traffic signal operation or the status of controller communications , the Department ’ s Traffic Section shall be consulted and provide approval prior to changing the state of the signals .
If its required to occur in the case of urgent works , or it has occurred unintentionally during maintenance activities , The Department ’ s Traffic Section shall be informed as soon as practically possible of this need or event .
Change of State is defined as : - Traffic Signals on to off or flashing amber , - Traffic Signals off to on or flashing amber , - Traffic Signals flashing amber to off or on , or ; - Turning communications on or off .
When signals are in flashing yellow mode or switched off during maintenance activities , ensure the attending works vehicle is parked in a prominent position with its high intensity flashing yellow hazard warning lights operating .
Ensure that the location of the works vehicle does not interfere with sight lines for motorists at intersections , and also pedestrian access is to be considered .
Works shall be scheduled so as to minimise disruption to motorists/pedestrians where the planned switching states of traffic signals is considered .
16.20.6 Temporary Shut Down to UPS , CCTV , or Other ITS Where it is necessary to shut down a UPS , CCTV , or other ITS , or if this equipment is unintentionally shut down , the Department ’ s Traffic Section shall be informed as soon as practically possible prior to this need or as soon as possible after the event .
16.20.7 Connection / Disconnection of a Generator Where there is any requirement for the connection of a generator to any traffic signal controller or UPS , Traffic Section staff shall be consulted and provide approval prior to the connection or disconnection of the generator .
If the connection is required to occur in the case of urgent works , or a fault has occurred unintentionally during maintenance activities , the Department ’ s Traffic Section shall be informed as soon as practically possible after the connection .
If the reason for the generator connection is a power outage , it may be requested that the contractor liaise with the power provider to ascertain when power is restored .
Any third party requests for generator connection to traffic signals or UPS through the maintenance contractor shall be forwarded to Traffic Section for consideration and approvals .
Full details including proposed date and timings , the reason for the request , the contact person and business name of the third party shall be provided .
TRAFFIC SIGNALS AND INTELLIGENT TRANSPORT SYSTEMS MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 150 ROUTINE MAINTENANCE 16.21 Routine maintenance repairs are identified by either the Superintendent ’ s Representative , Traffic Section staff or the Contractor .
Attendance on site is to be communicated to and approved by the Superintendent ’ s Representative or Traffic Section staff .
Routine Maintenance repairs are to be completed within a specified timeframe - Refer Table 16.12 - Response Times .
Routine maintenance includes follow up works such as replacing full detector loops , cables and pole tops , conduit junction and detector pit replacements , traffic signal pole and accident repairs , scheduled controller changeovers , and scheduled inspections and works .
Some Routine Maintenance activities may need to be rescheduled due to the high risk nature of the environment ( identified by the Contractors written and documented Risk Assessment ) so as to reduce risk to the Contractors personnel and so as not to affect the traffic flows in the area .
Some examples of situations such as this would be lamp changes or aspect repairs on narrow medians or high speed / high risk areas , or the recutting of traffic signal loops in dense trafficked areas .
The contractor shall endeavour to coordinate all routine maintenance tasks at one asset , at the same time within the time limits for attendance if possible , to reduce the impact on the road network , and reduce traffic management costs .
If this is not possible due to time limit for attendance , seek approval for an extension from the Superintendent ’ s Representative who may extend the time limit for attendance subject to the type of routine maintenance required .
These works identified as high risk shall be rescheduled to a time when risk can be better managed i.e .
after hours or on weekends at no additional cost to the Principal , unless specific direction to work outside of work hours has been given by Traffic Section staff for other reasons , otherwise whereby works could have been undertaken during normal work hours within the relevant standards and Provision for Traffic section .
Where direction to work outside of normal working hours has been made by Traffic Section , additional charges shall be by negotiated rate or hourly rate , as applicable according to the type of works undertaken , and with consideration of the labour component of the item of works involved if it were completed during normal work hours .
When a Routine Maintenance activity is considered ‘ High Risk ’ by the contractor , the Superintendent ’ s Representative or Traffic Section staff shall be informed as soon as possible in writing so that the Superintendent ’ s Representative can make an allowance for the contractor ’ s time to complete the works ( Table 16.12 - Response Times ) to a more appropriate time to alleviate the high risk .
Traffic volumes may be available for the contractor to assist to ascertain a more suitable time to undertake the works .
This maintenance will be programmed in accordance with identified performance levels of the traffic signal equipment covered in this contract .
Time Lines for Follow up Works 16.21.1 This requirement of the contract refers to works previously authorised by the Superintendent ’ s Representative and performed after initial reinstatement or repair works have been implemented and the site made safe or other maintenance tasks identified while on site .
To support the follow up works , a photo may be required to provide evidence and also to assist with the description of the maintenance works or follow up works identified .
Upon receipt of the Superintendent ’ s Representative or Traffic section staff approval to proceed with additional works the Contractor shall initiate the required works and ensure completion within the timelines identified in clause 16.32 Response Times , Table 16.12 - Response Times .
Advise the Superintendent ’ s Representative or Traffic section staff of any items temporarily repaired within the prescribed times and provide the Superintendent ’ s Representative or Traffic section staff with an estimate of the time required to complete the works .
This information must be forwarded to the Superintendent ’ s Representative or Traffic section staff as soon as a time line has been determined .
SPECIFIC MAINTENANCE – TRAFFIC 16.22 SIGNALS & ITS – HOLD POINT AND WITNESS POINT Specific maintenance includes the inspection and testing of all on-site equipment to identify its physical condition , operational performance and configuration of hardware .
Included in the audit is all components of the traffic signals and any associated ITS situated at the traffic signal intersection , or attached to the traffic signal controller .
Details of the inspection are to be recorded in report form .
The following functions are to be undertaken during specific maintenance of traffic signals : - Site / asset audit TRAFFIC SIGNALS AND INTELLIGENT TRANSPORT SYSTEMS MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 151 - minor repairs - Corresponding report & photos Site audit reports have been categorised to suit the expected work required to be undertaken for each type of audit .
Contractors shall appoint appropriate amount of resources in order to be able to complete the audit in one shift .
The categorised Site Audits are : - Site Audit & Report – Vehicle Signalised Intersection .
- Site Audit & Report – Pedestrian Signalised Intersection .
- UPS Maintenance and Report NT Government traffic signals are to be inspected on an ‘ as required ’ basis as directed by the Superintendent ’ s Representative .
It is desired that up to eight traffic signalised intersections are audited each year and all UPS in accordance with their maintenance schedule .
The Superintendent ’ s Representative reserves the right to include additional sites or assets , or exclude sites at any time if deemed necessary .
City of Darwin Council , City of Palmerston Council and Town of Alice Springs Council traffic signals may be included in the specific maintenance program as required and directed by the Superintendent ’ s Representative .
Witness Point - Audit Supervision .
Following Traffic Section ’ s direction to undertake a specific maintenance audit , the contractor shall coordinate with Traffic Section to arrange a suitable time to undertake the audit to allow supervision of the works to be scheduled if required by the Superintendent ’ s Representative .
Notify the Superintendent ’ s Representative of any variation to the program at least 5 working days prior to any scheduled audit , the commencement of any altered programmed work , or original work program .
Hold Point - Audit Report Review .
Within 5 days following the physical completion of a specific maintenance audit , the Contractor ’ s representative shall arrange a time with a Traffic Section staff member to review the quality and content of the completed report prior to formal submission , and review any recommended follow up works that may be required on site .
The meeting may include a site visit and time in the office .
Any changes required to the document shall be undertaken and submitted with the required timeframe .
Site Audit – Traffic Signals & ITS 16.22.1 Inspect , audit and report on each traffic signalised intersection site as directed by the Superintendent ’ s Representative .
The contractor should be prepared to undertake approximately eight ( 8 ) site audits annually .
A site audit consists of completing all items listed in clause 16.36 Figures and Tables Figure 16.3 - Sample Template Traffic Signal and ITS Audit Report Template , and marking up all details undertaken on the audit , outstanding works , and discrepancies between the site drawing and the site on a copy of the most current site drawing .
Each item in the checklist must be considered a specific maintenance function and all cleaning , adjustment , repair or replacement of such items shall be completed within seven ( 7 ) days of the CSR being issued .
If issues are considered complicated , by both parties , the completion date can be negotiated .
The contractor shall identify what traffic management is required to undertake the audit completely .
The traffic management scheduled items shall be nominated prior to the works commencing ; the Superintendent ’ s Representative will subsequently issue a CSR for the audit and traffic management items .
Details of minor repairs carried out during specific maintenance must be recorded in the site audit report .
Refer to clause 16.36 Figures and Tables Figure 16.3 - Sample Template Traffic Signal and ITS Audit Report Template .
The template shall be modified by the contractor to suit each site requirements .
Where any fault , damage or deficiency is detected during the site audit and can not be immediately rectified by the Contractor , or where items not required to be carried out during specific maintenance as a minor repair , the details must be included on the site audit report and site drawing .
The Superintendent ’ s Representative shall be provided the completed report and corresponding site drawing within 5 working days of completion of the physical audit , inclusive of any quotes for follow up works .
If the Superintendent ’ s Representative issues a direction to work covering authorisation , the works arising from such reports will be considered routine maintenance and itemised as per the schedule of rates .
TRAFFIC SIGNALS AND INTELLIGENT TRANSPORT SYSTEMS MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 152 16.22.2 Minor Repairs – Traffic Signals & ITS Minor repairs are to be carried out in conjunction with the site audit , and shall be approved by the Departmental representative if on site .
Refer to clause 16.33.1 Figures and Tables Figure 16.3 - Sample Template Traffic Signal and ITS Audit Report Template .
All service vehicles engaged in specific maintenance must carry , in addition to standard service equipment , a quantity of materials sufficient to undertake minor repairs suited to the particular site being audited , including but not limited to : - Replacement Lamps / LED arrays , - Transformers - Replacement Lenses , - Cowls for Vehicle Lanterns , - Pedestrian Cowls , - Pedestrian Buttons , - Complete Pole Top Assemblies , - Controller module and cards , - Spare fuses , - Spare flasher unit , - Cleaning equipment .
Due to traffic management being implemented for all audits and the site usually being shut down , priorities for minor repairs shall be pole top assembly replacements , followed by other tasks as directed by the Department ’ s site supervisor .
16.22.3 Site Audit Report – Traffic Signals & ITS Throughout the term of the Contract , keep and maintain accurate records of all replacements , alterations and repairs made to any equipment within the requirements of the Contract .
Keep all completed audit reports and make them available to the Superintendent ’ s Representative when requested .
Provide the Superintendent ’ s Representative with a Site Audit Report and corresponding marked up site drawing , no later than 5 working days following an audit being completed .
Refer to Figure 16.3 - Sample Template Traffic Signal and ITS Audit Report Template .
A site audit report will detail all minor repairs and routine maintenance carried out at that site .
It will also include specific maintenance required at the site as follow up works .
The purpose of this report is to build a record of maintenance carried out at the site .
SPECIFIC MAINTENANCE – 16.23 UNINTERRUPTABLE POWER SUPPLY ( UPS ) SYSTEMS Specific maintenance for UPS systems includes the inspection and testing of all on-site equipment to identify its physical condition , operational performance and configuration of hardware .
The UPS Maintenance and Battery Condition Report are completed at regular intervals for all UPS installed in the NTG road Network and any future council jurisdiction installations .
The intervals required , and brief description of tasks undertaken is : - At Installation .
Requires items 1 , 2 , 4 , 5 & 6 below to be undertaken and recorded .
- Quarterly .
Requires items 1 & 2 below to be undertaken and recorded .
- Half Yearly .
Requires items 2 , 3 & 4 below to be undertaken and recorded .
- Annually .
Requires items 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , & 6 below to be undertaken and recorded .
Inspections and tests required to be carried out as a part of the UPS Maintenance and Battery Condition Report are : 1 ) 15 minute discharge test .
2 ) Check battery terminal condition .
3 ) 2 hour discharge test ( to be undertaken by Traffic Section ) .
4 ) Apply battery terminal grease over terminals to prevent corrosion .
5 ) Re-torque battery terminals connections to 12.4 N.m ( 110 inch/pounds ) .
6 ) Test internal resistance disconnect - < 2Ω .
Included in the UPS Maintenance and Battery Condition Report shall be a general inspection of all components of the UPS including the housing and connection/s to the traffic signal controller .
Details of the inspection shall be recorded in the provided manufacturers report form Refer to Figure 16.4 – Sample Template UPS Maintenance and Battery Condition Report .
The following shall be provided upon completion of each UPS maintenance inspection interval , for each UPS ( by close of business the following work day ) : - Site where UPS maintenance was undertaken , TRAFFIC SIGNALS AND INTELLIGENT TRANSPORT SYSTEMS MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 153 - Copy of completed UPS Maintenance and Battery Condition Report ( see Figure 16.4 ) ( photocopy , or clear and legible photograph ) , in electronic format , - Any additional information , photos , or follow up works .
Notify the Superintendent ’ s Representative of any variation to the program at least 5 working days prior to any scheduled maintenance inspection , the commencement of any altered programmed work , or original work program .
TRAFFIC SIGNAL & OTHER ITS 16.24 SPECIFIED EQUIPMENT The Department of Infrastructure specifies that the contractor shall use equipment provided by the following suppliers : - Aldridge Traffic Systems – for all asset furniture equipment , - TYCO Traffic and Transportation – for all traffic controller equipment ( unless otherwise specified ) , - Aldridge Traffic Controllers ( ATC ) – for all UPS installations , parts and components .
- Microconnect Linking Control Modules ( LCM ) for TSC communication equipment , - Indigovision CCTV cameras and associated equipment and communications equipment .
Note 1 : The Department ’ s Traffic Section is currently preparing for testing of ATC traffic signal controllers and may be incorporated in the above specified equipment .
If accepted for use in the NT Government road reserve , the contractor will be required to utilise and maintain this equipment .
Note 2 : The Superintendent ’ s Representative reserves the right to add or remove use of specified suppliers or equipment within the traffic signals and ITS maintenance contract subject to testing , type approval ( local or interstate ) , or for other reasons at the Superintendent ’ s Representative ’ s discretion .
Whilst the Department of Infrastructure requires that all equipment used in this contract shall be provided by the nominated suppliers , the Department will consider alternate suppliers as proposed by prospective tenderers and / or maintenance contractor .
The proposed supplier ’ s equipment shall be provided to the Department of Infrastructure for inspection and testing , any type approvals shall be provided , and evidence that it meets the relevant standards .
On completion of the Department of Infrastructure inspections , testing and assessments of the equipment , the Superintendent ’ s Representative may give approval for the contractor to use the nominated supplier/s equipment throughout the contract subject to any conditions that may be applied .
Conditions may include the contractor to maintain minimum stock levels at their cost , and provide full warranty details and conditions .
MAINTENANCE AT LOCATION 16.25 UNDER POSSESSION OF OTHER CONTRACTORS Where there is traffic signal or ITS maintenance required at an asset which is under the possession of another contractor , Department staff will coordinate the maintenance between the project contractor and the maintenance contractor regarding timings , access and site contact .
When the traffic signal maintenance contractor arrives on site they shall liaise with the site project contractor prior to proceeding with the work .
If there is a fault that occurs on the site of an asset which is under the possession of another contractor , whether directly related to the works that the project contractor are undertaking or not , and the Superintendent ’ s Representative , Traffic Section staff , or the Department ’ s On- Call staff direct the traffic signal maintenance contractor to site , the maintenance contractor shall attend and carry out works as directed in the interest of public safety by returning the site to operational condition as soon as possible .
Departmental staff shall undertake the coordination role for urgent maintenance between the project contractor and the maintenance contractor regarding timings , access and site contact .
MAINTENANCE HANDOVER & 16.26 INSPECTIONS Traffic signals and ITS owned by the Department and Councils that are newly constructed , rebuilt or modified , and have not been done so within this traffic signals and ITS maintenance contract , are required to be handed over to Traffic Section in order to identify any defects or faults , and / or accept the completed condition as acceptable for ongoing maintenance purposes .
The Traffic Signals Maintenance Contractor will be invited to assist Traffic Section staff to attend the maintenance handover with the Project Contractor , and the Department or City Council Project Manager .
The Traffic Signal Maintenance Contractor will be given the opportunity to identify any concerns TRAFFIC SIGNALS AND INTELLIGENT TRANSPORT SYSTEMS MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 154 of their own , and to familiarise themselves with the asset , and / or modified asset .
No payment will be made for the attendance of the Contractor Representative to inspect the site at the handover inspection to the Department .
Ultimate acceptance of the site or asset for maintenance purposes under this contract shall be the Superintendent .
SUPPLY & MANAGEMENT OF 16.27 MATERIALS & EQUIPMENT Materials 16.27.1 Materials to be supplied by the Contractor will be paid at the tendered amount , wholly inclusive of mark up and/or freight charges .
16.27.2 Non Specified Materials / Unscheduled Items Non specified materials , or unscheduled items are materials or items which may be required on one or more occasions over the contract period but which the Superintendent ’ s Representative has been unable to predict the requirement for , or quantity of .
Any use of non-specified materials , or unscheduled items shall be approved by the Superintendent ’ s Representative or Traffic Section staff member prior to use of any item .
Non specified materials , or unscheduled items will be new materials or items , hired equipment which is not included in another labour item , or sub-contractor services supplied for use in the performance of this contract and be priced at invoiced cost to contractor inclusive of freight and 10 % mark up .
Invoices from the supplier or sub-contractor showing cost of the material or service and all freight charges shall be attached to the CSR , before payment will be processed .
In the case of a single invoice and multiple assets or CSR ’ s , the invoice shall be copied and marked as a ‘ copy ’ and the proportion of the item/s highlighted and allocated to the specific CSR .
16.27.3 Minimum Stock to be Held by Traffic Signal Maintenance Contractor The Contractor is to obtain and maintain the following quantities of stock as a minimum and is to store it at the location approved by the Superintendent .
The stock listed below shall be recorded on the Stock Database ( see ‘ Stock Control ’ ) .
The stock to be held is ; - 5 traffic signal poles complete with base plates , - 10 complete pole top assemblies , - 4 complete units of 3 x 200mm LED Aspects including target boards & cowls , - 4 complete units of 3 x 200mm LED Turn Arrow Aspects including target boards & cowls , - 4 complete units of 3 x 300mm LED Aspects including target boards & cowls , - 4 complete units of 3 x 300mm LED Turn Arrow Aspects including target boards & cowls , - 6 LED pedestrian aspects & cowls complete , - 5 sets of LED arrays ( 5 x 300mm & 5 x 200mm ) * , - 3 sets LED Turn Arrow arrays ( 3 x 300mm & 3 x 200mm ) * , - 8 pedestrian buttons complete , - 6 audio tactile units , including audio tactile cards and housing , - 5 full brackets and 5 half brackets for mounting aspects , - 500m Detector Feeder Cable , - 500m Multicore Traffic Signal Cable , * One set consisting of 1 green , 1 yellow and 1 red .
Upon completion of the contract , and if a different contractor has been awarded the contract , the minimum stock to be held by the contractor may be purchased by the Principal from the contractor .
Items may be purchased off the contractor in accordance with the ‘ Negotiated Rate ’ clause , providing that the item/s or materials are of relevant use to the Department and a reasonable price is offered in consideration to their age and condition .
Repairs to Electrical Components 16.27.4 Traffic signal circuit boards that become faulty or require upgrade shall be forwarded to a Superintendent approved service agent for repair .
Items shall be clearly marked with ‘ unserviceable ’ and details of the specific fault or upgrade required and the asset number from which the component came from and the date removed .
The labelling of the circuit boards shall be done immediately when removed from site to ensure it is not mixed with serviceable equipment .
TRAFFIC SIGNALS AND INTELLIGENT TRANSPORT SYSTEMS MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 155 The site / asset number of the controller that the component was removed from , shall be identified for each component repair claimed .
The cost of the repair shall be charged at invoiced cost to contractor inclusive of freight and 10 % mark up .
Invoices from the repair agent showing cost and details of the material / repairs and all freight charges shall be attached to the CSR before payment will be processed .
In the case of a single invoice and multiple CSR ’ s , the invoice shall be copied and marked as a ‘ copy ’ and the proportion of the item/s highlighted and allocated to the specific CSR .
Repaired circuit boards returned in full working order from the authorised service agent shall be returned to the stock of specified materials and tracking of the item shall be maintained within the stock list .
Generally , equipment will require forwarding interstate for component repairs .
The Contractor will be required to isolate faulty boards by use of the Test Controller provided and will forward on advice of any failure identified to the repairing agent .
If a component is assessed by the contractor or approved repair agent as unrepairable , the Superintendent ’ s Representative shall be contacted and approval be obtained to purchase a replacement component and/or deletion of the component from the stock control database .
Any item confirmed unrepairable and approved by the Superintendent ’ s Representative , shall be disposed of following the item being completely destroyed .
16.27.5 Stock & Equipment Control & Disposal ( Stock List ) The Contractor shall maintain a database list of all Department owned items , and also stock that the contractor has available for use under the maintenance contract .
The Stock Database will be recorded on monthly tabs on an Excel Spreadsheet , which will be available to the contractor on award of the contract ( See Figure 16.5 for template current Stock List for the Darwin Region ) .The Stock List may have line items added or removed as required .
The Stock List shall include as a minimum : - Items that have been recovered from accidents , or removal of other equipment that is to be held in stock for use or re-use under this contract , and marked as ‘ second hand ’ , - All Department owned traffic signal controller cards , - Items that have been purchased by the Department ’ s Traffic Section ( whether through the maintenance contractor or otherwise ) but stored by the contractor such as any controllers , UPS , auxiliary cabinets , cable , aspects , comms pillars , Microconnect units , signage etc .
- Principal owned items handed over to the contractor as a condition of this contract as stated in ‘ Material & Software to be Supplied by the Principal ’ , and ; - All available contractors stock for use within the contract , including the items required as a condition of contract in ‘ Minimum Stock to be Held by Traffic Signal Maintenance Contractor ’ .
- Any hardware that has been removed from site in a damaged or inoperable state , or that has been approved or directed by Traffic Section to be disposed of shall be recorded with detail of reasons for disposal .
The Stock List shall be maintained and kept up to date at all times , and shall be available to Traffic Section staff electronically and completely updated within 5 business days of request .
The contractor shall supply the Superintendent ’ s Representative with an updated electronic copy of the list in conjunction with the monthly CSR ’ s and will have all previous month ’ s details on other tabs within the spreadsheet .
The list shall contain , but not be limited to : - Type of Item , listed as individual components , both new or second hand , - Scheduled item number ( if applicable ) , - Quantity of the item held , - Serial No of Item ( if applicable ) .
- Date removed from site , and the asset and location of origin , - Status / Serviceability of Item , and the date tested , - Date Received / Sent ( i.e .
to Traffic Section shed , or to nominated repairers ) , - Current location ( eg : in stock , out for repair ) - Any hardware that has been removed from site in a damaged or inoperable state , or that has been approved or directed by Traffic Section to be TRAFFIC SIGNALS AND INTELLIGENT TRANSPORT SYSTEMS MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 156 disposed of shall be recorded with detail of reasons for disposal The Contractor shall use the Department owned stock listed in this stock control list in the first instance unless directed otherwise by the Superintendent ’ s Representative .
Any Department stock used shall also be reported on site logs / job sheets and submitted with any CSR invoices .
Stock List Quarterly Audit 16.27.6 A Stock List audit will be undertaken on a quarterly basis at the contractor ’ s nominated establishment .
The contractor ’ s nominated Contractor Representative shall ensure that they are available to attend and coordinate each audit , and will identify in the workshop all items for inspection that are listed on the most current stock list .
Salvaged Items – Witness Point 16.27.7 All items or parts thereof that are re-usable shall be salvaged for re-use within the traffic signal maintenance contract , other NTG contract , or as otherwise directed by the Superintendent ’ s Representative or other Traffic Section staff member .
Items to be salvaged may be obtained due to any upgrade works , damage to hardware and equipment , or any other maintenance activity .
Within the appropriate scheduled item rates , make allowance for salvage and testing of the equipment and entry into the stock database .
Witness Point - Following an incident where traffic signal equipment or ITS such as a signal pole and hardware , signal controller or CCTV camera has been severely damaged , provide adequate notice to allow for Superintendent ’ s Representative to arrange inspection of the equipment prior to dismantling .
If this is not possible due to the urgent nature of the situation , take photos of the equipment in its existing location , then relocate back to the contractor ’ s storage yard without causing further damage , for inspection .
Test Controller – Witness Point 16.27.8 As per clause ‘ Material and Software to be supplied by the Principal ’ , The Superintendent will provide the Contractor with 2 test controllers for the purpose of testing control modules and other equipment .
It is entirely the Contractors responsibility to ensure that these devices are maintained in a functional and serviceable condition suitable for their purpose at all times .
The devices shall be available for use in conjunction with this contract twenty four ( 24 ) hours per day .
Witness Point .
Test Controllers to be displayed in working operation to the Superintendent ’ s Representative within 14 days of the contract being awarded .
Both traffic signal controllers require a suitable load bank for testing purposes .
The load banks shall be provided by the contractor and may be purchased by the Department off the contractor at the completion of the contract at a negotiated rate if the contractor wishes for this to occur .
The Test Controllers will not be used for any purpose other than that identified in this document .
16.27.9 Test Traffic Signal Loop – Witness Point Witness Point .
The Contractor shall provide and install a testing loop at the approved workshop within 14 days of this contract being awarded , for the purpose of testing detector cards .
The test loop shall be installed in accordance with the most current relevant standard drawing for detector installation and connected to the test controller and be used for testing the operation of controller detector cards ( it is recommended that a switching device be installed to aid in testing detector channels ) .
It is entirely the Contractors responsibility to ensure that this device is maintained in a functional and serviceable condition suitable for its purpose at all times .
The device shall be available for use in conjunction with this contract twenty four ( 24 ) hours per day .
TECHNICAL DIRECTIONS 16.28 SCATS Access 16.28.1 The Superintendent ’ s Representative will provide the Contractor with a copy of the SCATS Access and SCATS Log programs to monitor this system for lamp failures to repair and to advise the Superintendent ’ s Representative of other faults that may require attention if so directed .
This aspect of the contract will require permanently connected internet connection for continuous day time observation ( 0700hrs to 1700hrs ) .
The Contractor will assign an individual Personal Identification Number ( PIN ) that is between numbers 20 and 40 , to each Traffic Signal Technician .
These assigned numbers shall then to be provided to the Superintendent ’ s Representative within 7 days of the contract being awarded .
TRAFFIC SIGNALS AND INTELLIGENT TRANSPORT SYSTEMS MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 157 At each site visit , regardless of the type of fault or reason for attendance , the technician shall log in and then at the completion of the job shall log out .
This shall be undertaken at every controller where the facility allows .
For controllers where there is no log in / log out function such as an Eclipse type controller , the contractor shall open and close the door of the controller at arrival and departure of site , so the opening of the door switch registers attendance on SCATS .
The Superintendent ’ s Representative and Traffic section staff will use the Pin Numbers 1- 19 to assist with Identification of personnel working on site .
All fault logs shall be cleared by the contractor following the full completion of works ( rather than after initial attendance or if fault is ongoing ) with the exception of when the site is not communicating with SCATS .
In this instance the contractor is to leave the controller log as it is .
Fault / Item Identification Procedures To assist with the identification of asset furniture and lamp faults the contractor will use in their reporting , verbal or written , 1 of 2 methods along with the display colours of Red , Yellow , Green ( or R , Y , G ) .
Method 1 Use the pole identification as used on newly released Department plans .
Eg .
For a lamp fault on Signal Group 3 red lamp on pole 6 the ID would read SG3 , red , pole 6 , or SG3 R 6 Method 2 Here the pole numbers are not shown on the Department ’ s plan or no plan is available for viewing ( ie fault viewed in passing ) Use the notation , Right , Left , Centre , Primary , Tertiary , Secondary to identify the position of the furniture .
eg .
Signal Group 1 red left secondary or SG 3 R L/S Figure 16.1 Item Identification Procedures for Fault Reporting TRAFFIC SIGNALS AND INTELLIGENT TRANSPORT SYSTEMS MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 158 Lamp Fault Monitoring and Repairs 16.28.2 The Contractor will acknowledge Lamp Faults through the SCATS Access Alarm Management System and will service all non-functional lamps at its own volition , within the relevant time for attendance and at the rates tendered .
Lamp faults noted on SCATS will be actioned as per time lines identified in Table 16.12 - Response Times at the rates tendered .
All lamp fault times for attendance are measured against the time that the lamp fault has appeared on SCATS , however where the fault has occurred after hours , weekends or public holidays , the time where the time limit for repairs commences shall be 0900hrs ( 9am ) the following work day .
All faults ( including lamp faults ) noted by means other than identification by SCATS shall require an authority to proceed from the Superintendent ’ s Representative or Traffic section staff and any such incidence will be noted in the site report .
The contractor shall advise the Superintendent ’ s Representative or Traffic section staff of recurring lamp faults and recommended remedial action with details of the recurring fault .
A recurring lamp fault is considered one that occurs more frequently than others on that site and / or would be considered as the fault occurring once every 2 to 3 weeks .
NOTE : Where a lamp fault is shown on SCATS lamp faults but turns out to be a ‘ false positive ’ lamp fault on site ( shown on SCATS but not faulty in the field ) , the contractor shall only attend to repair the fault twice and reset the wattages .
The contractor shall advise the Superintendent ’ s Representative or Traffic Section staff of the false positive fault and suggest remedial measures .
The contractor will not be paid for attending site to repair a lamp fault which is a false positive beyond the second occurrence .
All other Faults observed are to be reported to Traffic Section for authority to proceed with appropriate remedial action .
Pole Top Connections 16.28.3 When performing works associated with pole top installation or repairs , identify : - Pole tops with an open link , creating an open link in the ring main .
Pole tops with an open link in the ring main shall have the top half of their pole top cover painted BLACK , or a ring ( minimum 100mm ) painted around the pole top cover in BLACK .
- Pole tops with a junction box or join in an associated pit , creating a join in the ring main .
The pole tops with a junction in an associated pit shall have the bottom half of the pole top cover painted WHITE , or a ring ( minimum 100 mm ) painted around the pole top cover in WHITE .
Detector Loops and Feeder Cables 16.28.4 When performing works associated with suspected failure or partial failure or intermittent problems associated with detector loops and associated feeder cables the following procedures will be implemented : - Perform normal electrical tests ( Continuity , Insulation , and Inductance will be required ) .
Provide to the Superintendent ’ s Representative or Traffic Section staff separate insulation resistance / resistance and Inductance measurements of : - Detector loop and feeder cable , - Loop feeder cable only ( disconnected from detector loop ) , - Detector loop only ( both loops separately ) .
Detector cables must be disconnected from controller terminal strip before measurements are taken .
Advise the Superintendent ’ s Representative or Traffic Section staff of test findings associated with Detector Loops verbally prior to leaving site and ensure these are written on the site job sheet to be provided to the Department .
Installation of additional or replacement Detector Loops will be performed as indicated in the standard drawing at the rates tendered .
Ensure that Pre-fabricated detector loops are installed where practical , or otherwise instructed by the Superintendent ’ s Representative or Traffic Section staff for all resealing works of asphalt .
Coordinate with the pavement contractor in order for the pre-fabricated loops to be installed and to ensure loops are placed in the correct sequence .
Newly installed detector loops shall have their resistance and insulation resistance measured and recorded prior to sealing in the road .
TRAFFIC SIGNALS AND INTELLIGENT TRANSPORT SYSTEMS MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 159 Traffic Signal Cabling 16.28.5 Multicore Connecting Cable Cable used shall be 51 core multicore as per AS/NZS 2276.1 and shall have a polyamide jacket termite sheath installed .
Terminate the cabling of signal lanterns and multicore cable in each associated terminal assembly .
Loop Detector Feeder Cables Cable used shall be as per AS/NZS 2276.2 and shall have a polyamide jacket termite sheath installed .
Install and connect feeder cables from detector loops to detector sensors units located in the controller housing .
Feeder cables to be indelibly marked with the loop detector number at each end .
Loop Cable for Vehicle Detectors Cable used shall be as per AS/NZS 2276.3 Cable will be V90 HT , 30/0.25 .
Detectors Cut Into Pavement : Supply and install the cable for the loop in a saw cut in the pavement surface .
Clean the saw cut of debris and sharp edges before installing the cable .
Twist loop feeder cable one turn every 200 mm between each loop and junction in the detector pit .
Backfill around the loop cables with polymer modified bituminous emulsion filler .
House cables in conduits where they pass under kerbs .
Fully test loop following installation , and test operation on SCATS .
Detectors Pre-fabricated : Supply and install the pre-fabricated detector loop allowing for 50mm of asphalt cover over the prepared pavement surface .
Clean the surface of loose debris and position the pre-fabricated loop in the correct location , ensuring that the tail of the loop is appropriately placed and protected .
Hand place and compact asphalt over the pre- fabricated loop to ensure the asphalt paving machine does not pick the loop up as it passes over .
Fully test loop following installation , and test operation on SCATS .
Workzone Safety 16.28.6 Figure 16.2 – Work Zone Safety – Ladder Exclusion Zone TRAFFIC SIGNALS AND INTELLIGENT TRANSPORT SYSTEMS MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 160 Contractor ’ s Personnel 16.28.7 The contractor shall ensure that they utilise qualified trades persons only for technical/electrical works .
Australian/New Zealand Wiring Rules apply .
Submit with the tender a list detailing the following for all nominated staff intended for use within the requirements of this contract : 1 .
Names of all personnel intended for use in the carrying out of works required under the Contract , ( mobile phone numbers also to be submitted as soon as the contract is awarded ) .
2 .
Detailed work experience and electrical qualifications of all personnel as provided above , including comprehensive details of : - Traffic Signal Controller maintenance and fault finding experience , and /or official training , - Communications equipment fault finding experience and official training which may include PSTN phone lines , 3G / 4G equipment , data cable testing , modems , routers and surge protection devices , - Uninterruptible Power Supply maintenance and fault finding experience , and / or official training , - Any other ITS experience , or other relevant training that may be of use in the traffic signal , communications , or information technology fields , 3 .
Workplace Health and Safety experience , accreditation and qualifications including the National Occupational Health and Safety Construction Induction card for construction training , 4 .
Northern Territory accredited Work Zone Traffic Management Qualifications required to undertake any traffic management duties on an NTG road reserve .
5 .
Northern Territory accredited Construction White Card ‘ Work Safely in the Construction Industry ’ , required to undertake any construction works / duties in the NT .
Expiration , Withdrawal or Cancellation of Qualification or Accreditations - The contractor shall keep the Superintendent ’ s Representative advised in writing , at least 48 hours in advance of any expiry , or as soon as practical following any cancellation of any qualification or accreditation .
Additionally Nominated Contractor ’ s personnel - Any additions of personnel to be utilised for the purpose of works within this contract shall be requested in writing to the Superintendent ’ s Representative for consideration , at least 48 hours prior to use , and may be accepted for use in the contract at the Superintendent ’ s Representative ’ s discretion .
The Superintendent ’ s Representative reserves the right to remove or suspend any person listed on the nominated staff list at any time , based on any expiration of accreditation , non- conformance or poor work practice , poor WZTM practices , actual or perceived lack of experience in relation to the technical requirements of this specification , or other reason as determined by the Superintendent ’ s Representative .
Any information not available at the time of tender submission shall be provided to Superintendent ’ s Representative within 7 days of the contract commencing .
Traffic Control at Work Sites shall only be performed by accredited Traffic Controller/s .
Training associated with this requirement of contract is available through Registered Training Providers at the Contractors expense .
16.28.8 Workplace Health and Safety ( WH & S ) Action Plan A complete company WH & S action plan and accompanying policies and procedures shall be submitted within 2 weeks of the contract being awarded .
The company WH & S action plan that is traffic signal specific shall be finalised and provided to the Superintendent ’ s Representative within 1 week following initial submission .
The WH & S plan is additional to the Traffic Management Plan ( TMP ) however these documents should reference each other .
It shall include , but is not limited to the following traffic signal and ITS maintenance tasks : - Fault Maintenance activities , - Routine Maintenance activities , - Specific Maintenance activities , - Traffic Accident Situations , - Working in the road reserve safety procedures , - Working at heights and appropriate ladder usage and procedures , - Electrical activities and procedures , TRAFFIC SIGNALS AND INTELLIGENT TRANSPORT SYSTEMS MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 161 - Heavy Lifting activities and ; - Any other relevant activity for the execution of works in this contract which may also include power tools usage , chemical handling procedures , and heat and exhaustion management .
Worksafe may be consulted in order to create an action plan that is acceptable for use .
The plan shall contain references to specific legislation and standards where appropriate .
TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT PLAN 16.29 Refer to PROVISION FOR TRAFFIC .
16.29.1 Submission of Traffic Management Plans/ Diagrams Within 2 weeks of the commencement of the contract the contractor shall provide the Superintendent ’ s Representative with a comprehensive Traffic Management Plan ( TMP ) and full risk assessment to be used as a template throughout this contract for all traffic signals and ITS maintenance works .
The TMP and risk assessment shall be used as a template document which shall be continuously updated throughout the contract .
Where site specific issues or concerns have been identified to apply to a particular worksite or location , the TMP should be supplemented with additional or expanded information which shall be provided with the site Specific TCD/s and risk assessment , referencing the TMP in order to address those specific issues or concerns .
The TMP original submission shall as a minimum include the following generic Traffic Control Diagrams ( TCD ’ s ) ; Type A ( Speed Reduction ) Traffic Management setups for implementation including : - speed reductions for an approach on a divided and undivided road , allowing for various speed zones and reductions , and various clearances to the work site .
Type B ( Lane Closures ) Traffic Management setups for implementation including : - Lane closure for a left hand and right hand through lane , allowing for various speed zones and reductions , - A right hand through lane in accordance with the above , allowing access for a right hand turn pocket , - Management of any side roads affected by the lane closure/s .
Type D ( Short Term Mobile Works ) Traffic Management setup for various implementation including : - Kerbside works - Median works - Right Turn Pocket works Provide site specific Traffic Control Diagrams ( TCDs ) per activity as required and/or as specified .
Where a generic TCD is selected for use , an appropriate risk assessment shall be undertaken by staff prior to arrival at site to ensure that the generic TCD is suitable for that specific location .
If the site does not allow for the generic TCD to be utilised , subject to consideration by qualified staff at the Department , a separate TCD and associated risk assessment shall be undertaken in order to complete the works .
Where a traffic management situation is not covered by a generic TCD within the TMP , submit the specific TCD and risk assessment to the Superintendent ’ s Representative or Traffic Section staff at least 2 working days prior to undertaking the required works .
For Urgent Works , advise of the generic TCD or submit the specific TCD within the required timeframes in accordance with Table 16.12 - Response Times .
The Traffic Management Plan ( TMP ) is required to be designed by a Northern Territory accredited Traffic Management Plan Designer .
Include the details of the TMP Designer ’ s name , accreditation number and date of expiry of accreditation on the TMP .
Produce the plan by electronic means and submit electronically to the Superintendent ’ s Representative .
16.29.2 Implementation of Traffic Management - Hold Point Hold Point - Do not proceed with implementation of traffic management , or the commencement any works within the relevant road reserve without the TCD and TMP amendments ( if necessary ) being endorsed by Traffic Section staff or Road Operations staff , and any associated Temporary Speed Limit Authorisations ( TSLA ) being signed by the delegated person in the Department .
In addition to this ; if works are on a Council road , do not proceed without the relevant permits being issued , and a copy provided to Traffic Section staff .
TRAFFIC SIGNALS AND INTELLIGENT TRANSPORT SYSTEMS MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 162 TRAFFIC SIGNAL & ITS LOCATIONS & OWNERSHIP - DARWIN 16.30 NT GOVERNMENT ( DEPARTMENT OF INFRASTRUCTURE ) 16.30.1 Note 1 : The below list is an indication of traffic signal and ITS assets as at October 2015 , and is subject to change .
Note 2 : Red Light Speed Cameras ( RLSC ) have been noted as ITS onsite so that the Maintenance Contractor is aware of the equipment within the controller and / or auxiliary cabinet .
Some ITS equipment utilised for RLSCs are also used for other ITS ( such as routers , fibre media converter , UPS etc . )
and will be worked on within the contract .
Table 16.7 - NT Government Owned Traffic Signals – Darwin Region Intersection Number Location No .
of Main Aspect Lamps No .
of Pedestrian Aspect Lamps No .
of Pedestrian Push Buttons ITS on site L0002 Stuart Hwy / Daly St / McMinn St 58 4 2 CCTV L0003 Stuart Hwy / Westralia St 45 20 10 RLSC L0004 Stuart Hwy / Parap Rd 45 8 3 - L0005 Stuart Hwy / Ross Smith / Woolner Rd 93 16 8 CCTV / UPS / RLSC x 2 L0006 Stuart Hwy / Bagot Rd / Snell St 70 14 5 - L0007 Stuart Hwy / Hook Rd 42 - - - L0008 Stuart Hwy / Amy Johnson Ave 89 - - - L0009 Stuart Hwy / Berrimah Rd / Vanderlin Dve 78 8 4 CCTV / UPS / RLSC x 2 L0010 Tiger Brennan Dve / Woolner Rd 77 16 6 - L0011 Bagot Rd / McMillians Rd 54 8 4 RLSC x 2 CCTV L0012 Bagot Rd / Trower Rd / Nightcliff Dve 48 12 5 - L0013 Trower Pelican Xing ( Francis St ) 24 8 4 - L0014 Trower Rd / Lakeside Dve 45 12 5 - L0015 Trower Rd / Parer Dve 45 12 5 - L0016 Trower Rd / Dripstone Rd 54 12 7 - L0017 Trower Rd / Vanderlin Dve 73 32 13 CCTV L0018 McMillans Rd / Rothdale Rd 70 24 11 - L0019 McMillans Rd / Lee Point Rd 66 24 11 CCTV / RLSC L0020 McMillans Rd / K.O.A Ped Xing 24 16 4 - TRAFFIC SIGNALS AND INTELLIGENT TRANSPORT SYSTEMS MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 163 Table 16.7 - NT Government Owned Traffic Signals – Darwin Region Intersection Number Location No .
of Main Aspect Lamps No .
of Pedestrian Aspect Lamps No .
of Pedestrian Push Buttons ITS on site L0021 McMillans Rd / Amy Johnson Ave 60 8 4 - L0022 Vanderlin Ped Xing ( Hibiscus ) 24 8 6 - L0023 Bagot Rd / Fitzgerald St 51 12 6 - L0024 McMillans Rd / Matthews Rd 87 32 15 - L0025 Tiger Brennan Dve / Dinah Beach 67 12 7 - L0026 Tiger Brennan / Bennett / McMinn St 60 12 7 CCTV L0029 Bagot Rd / Totem Rd 57 - - Lane Lights L0033 Stuart Hwy / Amaroo St 42 8 3 - L0034 Vanderlin Dve / Leanyer Dve 45 8 3 UPS L0035 Casuarina Bus Exchange / Bradshaw 42 16 8 - L0036 Trower Rd / Rapid Ck Rd 66 16 8 RLSC L0037 Tiger Brennan Dve / Amy Johnson Av 54 - - CCTV / UPS L0038 Tiger Brennan Dve / Berrimah Rd 32 - - - L0039 Berrimah Rd / Wishart Rd 54 - - - L0040 Vanderlin / Leanyer Waterpark Ent 45 12 6 - L0056 Tiger Brennan Dve / Gonzales St 66 8 4 Lane Lights L2002 Stuart Hwy / Tulagi Rd 33 - - UPS L2003 Stuart Hwy / Temple Tce 48 - - CCTV / UPS L2004 Stuart Hwy / McMillans Rd 39 - - - L2005 Roystonea Ave / University Ave 57 - - - L2006 Roystonea Ave / Temple Tce 79 20 9 - L2008 Stuart Hwy / Howard Springs Rd / Lambrick Ave 84 - - CCTV / UPS / RLSC x 2 L2009 University Avenue Ped Xing 18 8 4 - L2010 Stuart Hwy / Henning Rd 80 12 6 CCTV / RLSC x 2 TRAFFIC SIGNALS AND INTELLIGENT TRANSPORT SYSTEMS MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 164 Table 16.7 - NT Government Owned Traffic Signals – Darwin Region Intersection Number Location No .
of Main Aspect Lamps No .
of Pedestrian Aspect Lamps No .
of Pedestrian Push Buttons ITS on site L2011 Stuart Hwy / Arnhem Hwy 36 - - UPS L2012 Elrundie Ped Xing 24 4 2 - L2013 Temple Tce / Maluka Ave 72 32 14 - L2014 Stuart Hwy / Deviney Rd 86 8 4 CCTV / RLSC L2015 Chung Wah Ped Xing 6 4 2 - L2016 Wishart Rd / Kirkland Rd 23 - - CCTV L2017 Tiger Brennan Dve / Tivendale Rd 32 - - - L2018 Roystonea Ave / Yarrawonga Rd 19 12 6 - L2019 Chung Wah Tce / University Ave 17 20 9 - L2020 Stuart Hwy / Jenkins Rd TBA TBA TBA Radar detection RLSC x 2 L2021 Roystonea Ave / Lambrick Ave 51 16 6 - L2024 Temple Tce Ped Crossing 24 8 4 - L2026 Lambrick Ave / Farrar Bld / Zuccoli 74 24 13 - L0013 VSL Rapid Ck Variable Speed Limit Signs - - - VSLS x 2 L2010 VSL Arnhem Hwy Variable Speed Limit Signs - - - VSLS x 2 TRAFFIC SIGNALS AND INTELLIGENT TRANSPORT SYSTEMS MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 165 DARWIN CITY COUNCIL 16.30.2 Table 16.8 – Darwin City Council Owned Traffic Signals Intersection Number Location No .
of Main Aspect Lamps No .
of Pedestrian Aspect Lamps No .
of Pedestrian Push Buttons ITS on site L0027 Cavenagh St / Bennett St 36 16 8 - L0030 Mitchell St / Daly St 51 24 10 - L0031 Daly St / Cavenagh St 53 28 10 - L0032 Cavenagh St / Knuckey St 36 24 8 - L0041 Trower Rd / Casuarina Car Park 42 24 6 - L0042 Trower Ped Xing ( Casuarina ) 24 8 4 - L0043 Trower Rd / Bradshaw Tce 39 24 6 - L0044 Mitchell St / Knuckey St 36 24 8 - L0046 Gilruth Rd / Gardens Rd 51 8 6 - L0047 Gilruth Ave / East Point Rd / Goyder Rd 79 16 10 - L0048 East Point Rd Ped Xing ( Parap ) 18 4 2 - L0049 Dick ward Dve Ped Xing ( near Tang St ) 18 4 2 - L0050 Ross Smith Ave / Dick Ward Dve 42 16 4 - L0051 Lee Point Rd / Parer Dve 51 8 3 - L0052 Knuckey St / Smith St 29 20 6 - L0053 Lee Point Rd / VRD Drive 45 8 4 - L0054 Lee Point Rd / Tambling Tce 60 8 4 - TRAFFIC SIGNALS AND INTELLIGENT TRANSPORT SYSTEMS MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 166 PALMERSTON CITY COUNCIL 16.30.3 Table 16.9 – Palmerston City Council Owned Traffic Signals Intersection Number Location No .
of Main Aspect Lamps No .
of Pedestrian Aspect Lamps No .
of Pedestrian Push Buttons ITS on site L2007 Temple Terrace Ped Xing 18 8 4 - L2025 Chung Wah Tce / The Boulevard 57 12 6 - TRAFFIC SIGNALS AND INTELLIGENT TRANSPORT SYSTEMS MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 167 TRAFFIC SIGNAL LOCATIONS AND OWNERSHIP – ALICE SPRINGS 16.31 NT GOVERNMENT ( MANAGED BY DEPARTMENT OF INFRASTRUCTURE – ROAD PROJECTS ) Table 16.10 – NT Government Owned Traffic Signals – Alice Springs Intersection Number Location No .
of Main Aspect Lamps No .
of Pedestrian Aspect Lamps No .
of Pedestrian Push Buttons Type of Site Audit L0105 Stuart / Wills 45 16 8 Vehicle L0107 Stuart / Parsons 60 20 12 Vehicle L0101 Stuart / Larapinta 84 24 14 Vehicle L0106 Telegraph - Pedestrian Crossing 24 8 4 Pedestrian L0110 Telegraph - Warning Wig Wags 12 0 0 Fire Truck L0102 Stott / Bath 48 16 8 Vehicle L0103 Stott / Hartley 36 16 8 Vehicle L0104 Stott / Todd 48 16 8 Vehicle L0111 Larapinta - Pedestrian Crossing 24 8 4 Pedestrian ALICE SPRINGS TOWN COUNCIL ( MANAGED BY DEPARTMENT OF INFRASTRUCTURE – ROAD PROJECTS ) Table 16.11 – Alice Springs Council Owned Traffic Signals Intersection Number Location No .
of Main Aspect Lamps No .
of Pedestrian Aspect Lamps No .
of Pedestria n Push Buttons Type of Site Audit L0108 Wills / Leichhardt 48 14 6 Vehicle Where work is required to be carried out in easements or on land adjacent to the site for the purpose of connecting services or joining up of roads etc .
Ensure that the appropriate licences and approvals are obtained for work in those particular areas .
TRAFFIC SIGNALS AND INTELLIGENT TRANSPORT SYSTEMS MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 168 RESPONSE TIMES 16.32 Table 16.12 - Response Times MAINTENANCE OR ACTIVITY ALARM TYPE TIME FOR ATTENDANCE / RESPONSE BRIEF REQUIREMENTS – refer to Maintenance Section & Measurement & Payment for further details Legend for SCATS related alarms : BO : Black Out DA : Detector Alarm FY : Flashing Yellow LF : Lamp Fault NC/DZ/ST : SCATS Communications fault related PB : Pedestrian Button Detector Alarm WD : Watchdog NOTE : All response times listed are inclusive of after hours , weekends and public holidays – all response times apply NOTE : Maintenance & timeframes identified as ‘ urgent ’ is entirely at the discretion of the Superintendent ’ s Rep , Traffic Section , or On Call staff .
Maintenance identified as ‘ urgent ’ may be based on high risk consideration ( danger to the public or workers ) , maintenance required prior to peak hours , or other urgent requirements .
Fault Maintenance Controller , UPS or Hardware Malfunction FY / BO / WD 1 Hour The provision of time for the contractor ’ s technician to be onsite , appropriately equipped to rectify a controller , UPS or hardware malfunction .
This may include internal faults , minor accidents , vandalism , storm damage , cable faults , or exposed cables .
Accident Attendance FY / BO / WD 1 Hour The provision of time for the contractor ’ s 2 technicians to be onsite , appropriately equipped for an accident attendance which may include the controller , traffic signals pedestals , or any other ITS .
Other Urgent Fault , Malfunction or Maintenance as Directed - 1 Hour The provision of time for the contractor ’ s technician to be onsite , appropriately equipped to attend to an urgent issue relating to traffic signals or ITS , as directed by Traffic or On-Call staff .
Supply & Install Generator to Traffic Signal Controller or UPS BO 1 Hour The provision of time for the contractor ’ s technician to be onsite , appropriately equipped to connect a generator unit to a traffic signal controller or UPS , as directed by Traffic or On-Call staff .
Where a generator connection can be scheduled , as much notice as possible will be provided .
Site Inspection / Routine Maintenance Inspection - 2 Hours The provision of time for the contractor ’ s technician to be onsite to undertake a visual inspection of an asset or its operation , provide a photo & respond .
ITS Fault Attendance - 2 Days The provision of time for the contractor ’ s technician to be onsite , appropriately equipped to test & repair all components of faulty ITS equipment .
TRAFFIC SIGNALS AND INTELLIGENT TRANSPORT SYSTEMS MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 169 Table 16.12 - Response Times MAINTENANCE OR ACTIVITY ALARM TYPE TIME FOR ATTENDANCE / RESPONSE BRIEF REQUIREMENTS – refer to Maintenance Section & Measurement & Payment for further details Legend for SCATS related alarms : BO : Black Out DA : Detector Alarm FY : Flashing Yellow LF : Lamp Fault NC/DZ/ST : SCATS Communications fault related PB : Pedestrian Button Detector Alarm WD : Watchdog NOTE : All response times listed are inclusive of after hours , weekends and public holidays – all response times apply NOTE : Maintenance & timeframes identified as ‘ urgent ’ is entirely at the discretion of the Superintendent ’ s Rep , Traffic Section , or On Call staff .
Maintenance identified as ‘ urgent ’ may be based on high risk consideration ( danger to the public or workers ) , maintenance required prior to peak hours , or other urgent requirements .
Routine Maintenance Lamp Fault - Critical ( Replacement or Reset ) LF 2 Hours ( from 09:00hrs if occurring a/hrs ) The provision of time for the contractor ’ s technician to be onsite to replace or reset a traffic signal aspect array or lamp which is considered urgent by Traffic Section , or is a right turn arrow , or if the lamp fault is the second one for that signal group .
Lamp Fault – Standard ( Replacement or Reset ) LF 3 Days The provision of time for the contractor ’ s technician to be onsite to replace or reset a traffic signal aspect array or lamp which has been identified by the contractor on SCATS or by Traffic Section .
Lamp Fault – High Mast ( Replacement or Reset ) LF 7 Days ( or as negotiated ) The provision of time for the contractor ’ s technician to be onsite to replace or reset a highmast traffic signal aspect array or lamp which has been identified by the contractor on SCATS or by Traffic Section .
This maintenance may be negotiated by the contractor or Traffic Section to combine works , or if urgent .
Traffic Signal Aspect – Damaged or Conflicting Display ( Aspect out of Alignment ) - 1 Hour The provision of time for the contractor ’ s technician to be onsite , appropriately equipped to rectify a traffic signal aspect out of alignment or damaged .
Traffic Signal Pedestal Reinstallation - 7 Days The provision of time for the contractor to arrange & complete the reinstallation of a complete traffic signal pedestal , cabling , & associated hardware identified as of standard urgency by Traffic Section .
Traffic Signal Pedestal Reinstallation – Urgent - 2 Days The provision of time for the contractor to arrange & complete the reinstallation of a complete traffic signal pedestal , cabling , & associated hardware identified as urgent by Traffic Section .
TRAFFIC SIGNALS AND INTELLIGENT TRANSPORT SYSTEMS MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 170 Table 16.12 - Response Times MAINTENANCE OR ACTIVITY ALARM TYPE TIME FOR ATTENDANCE / RESPONSE BRIEF REQUIREMENTS – refer to Maintenance Section & Measurement & Payment for further details Legend for SCATS related alarms : BO : Black Out DA : Detector Alarm FY : Flashing Yellow LF : Lamp Fault NC/DZ/ST : SCATS Communications fault related PB : Pedestrian Button Detector Alarm WD : Watchdog NOTE : All response times listed are inclusive of after hours , weekends and public holidays – all response times apply NOTE : Maintenance & timeframes identified as ‘ urgent ’ is entirely at the discretion of the Superintendent ’ s Rep , Traffic Section , or On Call staff .
Maintenance identified as ‘ urgent ’ may be based on high risk consideration ( danger to the public or workers ) , maintenance required prior to peak hours , or other urgent requirements .
Detector Fault DA 2 Hours The provision of time for the contractor ’ s technician to be onsite , appropriately equipped to test & repair all components of a faulty traffic signal vehicle detector .
Detector Recut / Installation DA 7 Days The provision of time for the contractor ’ s technicians to be onsite , appropriately equipped to arrange & install or recut a traffic signal vehicle detector .
Pedestrian Push Button Repair or Replacement ( including audio ) DA / PB 2 Hours The provision of time for the contractor ’ s technician to be onsite , appropriately equipped to test , repair or replace all components of a faulty traffic signal pedestrian push button , including all audio tactile components .
Communications – Test & Restore Traffic Signals or ITS NC / ST / DZ TSC - 2 Hours ITS – 24 Hours The provision of time for the contractor ’ s technician to be onsite , appropriately equipped to test , repair or replace all components of faulty communication equipment for traffic signals or ITS equipment .
Specific Maintenance Site Audit – Vehicle Signalised Intersection - 7 Days The required time for a physical audit to be fully arranged , completed & recorded .
Site Audit – Pedestrian Signalised Crossing - 7 Days The required time for a physical audit to be fully arranged , completed & recorded .
Site Audit Completed Report - 7 Days The required time for the final audit report , drawing/s & quotes to be submitted & accepted by Traffic Section .
UPS Maintenance & Report - 7 Days The required time for the physical inspection & testing to be completed , & the corresponding report to be completed & submitted to Traffic Section .
TRAFFIC SIGNALS AND INTELLIGENT TRANSPORT SYSTEMS MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 171 Table 16.12 - Response Times MAINTENANCE OR ACTIVITY ALARM TYPE TIME FOR ATTENDANCE / RESPONSE BRIEF REQUIREMENTS – refer to Maintenance Section & Measurement & Payment for further details Legend for SCATS related alarms : BO : Black Out DA : Detector Alarm FY : Flashing Yellow LF : Lamp Fault NC/DZ/ST : SCATS Communications fault related PB : Pedestrian Button Detector Alarm WD : Watchdog NOTE : All response times listed are inclusive of after hours , weekends and public holidays – all response times apply NOTE : Maintenance & timeframes identified as ‘ urgent ’ is entirely at the discretion of the Superintendent ’ s Rep , Traffic Section , or On Call staff .
Maintenance identified as ‘ urgent ’ may be based on high risk consideration ( danger to the public or workers ) , maintenance required prior to peak hours , or other urgent requirements .
Miscellaneous / Administrative Timeframes Provide Lifting Equipment - 24 Hours ( or as negotiated ) The provision of time for the contractor ’ s technicians to be onsite , appropriately equipped with suitable hydraulic lifting equipment to access highmasts , CCTV or as otherwise required by Traffic Section .
Provide Detailed Quote – Standard - 5 Days The provision of time for the Contractor ’ s Representative to provide a comprehensive quote inclusive of all labour & materials , following a verbal or written request for traffic signal or ITS works or repairs of a standard nature .
Provide Detailed Quote - Urgent - 24 Hours The provision of time for the Contractor ’ s Representative to provide a comprehensive quote inclusive of all labour & materials , following a verbal or written request for traffic signal or ITS works or repairs of an urgent nature .
Work Order Responses - 10:00hrs - next business day Provision of time for all Work Order Responses , due fully completed with details of the works undertaken and other particulars as specified .
Salvaged Item Inspection - Next business day - AM Provision of time for the contractor to have damaged items ready for inspection , to agree on salvaged / unrepairable items .
Provide Site Specific TCD/s including Risk Management Plan - Standard - 5 Days Provision of time to supply Traffic Control Diagram/s & associated risk management plan in order to undertake works within the road reserve , including the preparation of any permits or authorisations that may be required in order to carry out the works .
Provide Site Specific TCD/s including Risk Management Plan - Urgent - 24 Hours Provision of time to supply Traffic Control Diagram/s & associated risk management plan in order to undertake works within the road reserve , including the preparation of any permits or authorisations that may be required in order to carry out the works of an urgent nature – i.e .
Traffic Signal Pedestal Reinstallation – Urgent TRAFFIC SIGNALS AND INTELLIGENT TRANSPORT SYSTEMS MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 172 SPECIFIC MAINTENANCE – TRAFFIC 16.33 SIGNALS AND ITS AUDIT Site Audit – Report Template 16.33.1 Refer to clause Figures and Tables Figure 16.3 - Sample Template Traffic Signal and ITS Audit Report Template .
The Traffic Signals and ITS Audit Template is a required to be comprehensively completed .
The current condition of all items shall be described , with any remedial works required to be listed in red .
Diagrams or drawings of the site shall also be submitted with the report , along with photographs to support descriptions of condition of hardware – contact Traffic Section for the most current drawings .
The reports provided shall be typed , with accompanying site drawing provided in a neat , clear format , within 5 working days from completion of the audit .
SPECIFIC MAINTENANCE – 16.34 UNINTERRUPTABLE POWER SUPPLY ( UPS ) SYSTEMS 16.34.1 UPS Maintenance and Battery Condition – Report Sheet Refer to Figure 16.4 – Sample Template UPS Maintenance and Battery Condition Report The UPS Maintenance and Condition report sheet shall be completed for each scheduled UPS maintenance inspection , and left in the door of the UPS housing .
A photo of the completed report shall be forwarded to Traffic Section following each specific maintenance activity for recording .
A copy should already be in each UPS unit for completion , however contact Traffic Section if there are any issues relating to this report document .
STOCK LIST & QUANTITIES 16.35 16.35.1 Stock List - Example of Excel Spreadsheet with Current Quantities Refer to Figure 16.5 – Sample Stock List – Darwin – As at August 2015 .
The Stock List is a current snapshot prior to advertising of this tender , of the items of stock owned by the Department and the Contractor .
The stock list will require updating upon award of this contract .
Cells highlighted in Green , indicate that the item has been added to the stock list for the month .
Cells highlighted in Red , indicate that the item has been utilised from the stock list within that month .
TRAFFIC SIGNALS AND INTELLIGENT TRANSPORT SYSTEMS MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 173 Figures and Tables 16.36 Figure 16.3 - Sample Template Traffic Signal and ITS Audit Report Template TRAFFIC SIGNALS AND INTELLIGENT TRANSPORT SYSTEMS MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 174 TRAFFIC SIGNALS AND INTELLIGENT TRANSPORT SYSTEMS MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 175 Figure 16.4 – Sample Template UPS Maintenance and Battery Condition Report TRAFFIC SIGNALS AND INTELLIGENT TRANSPORT SYSTEMS MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 176 TRAFFIC SIGNALS AND INTELLIGENT TRANSPORT SYSTEMS MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 177 Figure 16.5 – Sample Stock List – Darwin – As at August 2015 Available as Excel Spreadsheet to Contractor .
STREET SWEEPING STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 178 STREET SWEEPING 17 .
OUTLINE DESCRIPTION 17.1 This section specifies the sweeping of sealed , concrete and paved surfaces of roads , car parks , kerbs , traffic islands , cycleways and footpaths .
STANDARDS 17.2 Comply with the following Acts and Regulations : − Workplace Health Act and Regulations − Traffic Act and Regulations − Control of Roads Act − Environmental Offences and Penalties Act − Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act Comply with the Acts , Regulations , Guidelines and Codes applicable to the works .
Comply with the requirements of Authorities with jurisdiction over the works .
Conform to the Standards and Publications quoted throughout this document unless specified otherwise .
Refer to REFERENCED DOCUMENTS .
Refer to Plant And Equipment clause in MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS section .
Refer to Work Involving Chemicals clause in MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS section .
DEFINITIONS 17.3 Road Sealed carriageways utilised by motor vehicles , which consist of one or more traffic lanes in each direction , and may be edged by a concrete kerb .
Kerb Concrete edging to a sealed carriageway , which may include a concrete gutter .
Kerbs are generally associated with verges , medians , roundabouts or splitter islands .
Verges Areas of the road reserve between the carriageway and the property boundary .
Cycleways and footpaths are constructed on the road verges .
Verges may or may not be kerbed .
Medians Areas between divided portions of the carriageway , bounded by traffic lanes carrying traffic in opposite directions .
Medians may or may not be kerbed .
Roundabouts Circular centre islands at an intersection , usually having a kerbed perimeter .
Splitter Islands Kerbed islands in varying shapes and sizes used to control the route vehicles take at intersections and other locations .
Intersections Junction points of at least two roads , and may include roundabouts , splitter islands and medians .
Median Breaks Trafficable gaps in a road centre median which allow vehicles to gain access to the opposite side of the road .
Median breaks are not located at intersections .
Cycleways/Footpaths Sealed or concreted carriageways provided for the shared use of pedestrians and/or cyclists , but exclude motorised vehicles .
FREQUENCY OF WORKS 17.4 The frequency of sweeping is determined by the number of cycles to be performed during the period of the contract , i.e .
: 12 cycles per year equates to monthly sweeping , 26 cycles per year equates to fortnightly sweeping , 52 cycles per year equates to weekly sweeping .
Nominated major intersections , median breaks , kerbed sections of roads , cycleways and footpaths will be swept at the frequency nominated in the Response Schedules .
Other areas will be called up for sweeping at the discretion of the Superintendent .
SCHEDULED SWEEPING PROGRAM 17.5 Submit to the Superintendent at least 7 days in advance of the works , the scheduled sweeping program for the following calendar month .
The program is to include the scheduled sweeping of all roadways , intersections , median breaks , cycleways and footpaths .
REQUIREMENTS 17.6 17.6.1 General Ensure that all loose or foreign material such as stone , sand , gravel , and vegetative waste deposited against kerbs and on roadways cycleways and footpaths is picked up by the sweeping plant and removed at the time of service .
Where objects such as palm fronds or any other form of obstruction with a weight of less than 40 kg is encountered and found to be obstructing progress of the street sweeping machine , relocate the object out of the path of the machine in order to permit works to proceed .
Any such material may be deposited a safe distance back from kerb for later retrieval by others .
17.6.2 Contractor to Inform themselves The Contractor shall be deemed to have to have examined all sites as nominated in the Response Schedule , and satisfied themselves as to the correctness of all areas of the individual roads and cycle/footpaths under the Contract irrespective of lengths and widths .
17.6.3 Manual sweeping The hand sweeping of surfaces of medians and splitter islands may be required on occasion , and STREET SWEEPING STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 179 this will be undertaken by the Contractor on a tendered hourly rate .
Traffic management associated with the hand sweeping work will be supplied by Contractor .
Sweeping of Intersections 17.6.4 The sweeping of intersections includes the sweeping of all road surfaces and all kerbs associated with medians , splitter islands and roundabouts .
Sweeping includes all turning , stopping , crossing , and acceleration or deceleration areas including line marked areas across the whole of the road pavement within the area of the intersection .
Sweeping must be undertaken in the direction of the normal traffic flow .
An intersection will commence from the diversion point of any associated slip lane , or from the start of any painted chevron associated with line marking for diverging traffic , whichever is the most distant from the intersection .
Where no slip lanes or painted chevrons exist , works will commence at a point fifty metres from the centre point of the intersecting roads .
The manual sweeping of surfaces of medians and splitter islands may be required on occasion , and this will be undertaken by the Contractor on a tendered hourly rate .
Traffic management associated with the hand sweeping work is to be supplied by the Contractor .
Sweeping of Median Breaks 17.6.5 The sweeping of median breaks includes the sweeping of all road surfaces and all associated kerbs .
Sweeping will include all turning , stopping , crossing , and acceleration or deceleration areas including line marked areas across the whole of the road pavement within the area of the median break .
Sweeping must be undertaken in the direction of the normal traffic flow .
A median break will commence from the diversion point of any associated slip lane , or from the start of any painted chevron associated with line marking for diverging traffic , whichever is the most distant from the median break .
Where no slip lanes or painted chevrons exist , works will commence at a point twenty metres from the centre point of the median break .
17.6.6 Sweeping of Cycleways and Footpaths The sweeping of cycleways and footpaths includes the sweeping of all associated surfaces .
Loose or foreign material deposited as a result of heavy rain or flooding is also to be removed .
17.6.7 Sweeping of Kerbs , Roads and Car Parks Sweeping of kerbed areas of nominated roads includes all kerbs associated with medians and verges and must be undertaken in the direction of the normal traffic flow .
Sweeping of other roads and car parks will be as directed by the Superintendent .
Sweeping of car parks includes all car park surfaces and associated kerbs .
Cleaning and sweeping of road surfaces associated with spillages of concrete , oil , paint and other liquids will be required on occasion as directed by the Superintendent .
ROAD SWEEPING EQUIPMENT 17.7 The Contractor will possess sufficient plant to ensure continuity of service and conformance with contract requirements .
This will include the provision for continuity of service when machinery is unavailable through service or mechanical breakdown .
The following characteristics are required as a minimum on road sweeping equipment : − “ suction ” or “ regenerated air ” type .
− dual cab controls , enabling the sweeper to be operated from either the right or left side .
− fitted with dual gutter brushes and suction nozzles , enabling sweeping to be carried out on either side of the carriageway while maintaining the direction of traffic flow .
− minimum useable hopper capacity of 5.0 m3 .
− fitted with noise and dust suppression features in accordance with manufacturers and regulatory requirements .
− fitted with a suction litter hose for the removal of lightweight litter .
− fitted with street washers for the cleaning of road surfaces .
The machine must be capable of injecting detergent into the street washer facility .
Refer to 17.9 Detergent .
− fitted with a high pressure hand washer , with reel hose and lance for remote cleaning .
The machine must be capable of injecting detergent into the hand washer facility .
Refer to 17.9 Detergent .
− minimum water tank capacity of 1200 litres .
− fitted with a dual rotating beacon positioned on the cabin of the vehicle , and two single yellow rotating beacons positioned at the rear of the vehicle .
Refer to 17.12.1 Vehicle- Mounted Warning Device .
− fitted with an illuminated flashing arrow sign , or an approved flashing bar light .
Refer to 17.12.2 Illuminated Flashing Arrow Sign .
− fitted with audio-visual reversing equipment .
STREET SWEEPING STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 180 − maintained in good order and condition throughout the Contract .
CYCLEWAY AND FOOTPATH 17.8 SWEEPING EQUIPMENT The following characteristics are required as a minimum on cyclepath and footpath sweeping equipment : − “ suction ” or “ regenerated air ” type .
− minimum hopper capacity of 375 litres .
− capable of removal of all material up to half a kilo ( 500 g ) in weight .
− fitted with noise and dust suppression features in accordance with manufacturers and regulatory requirements .
− fitted with a vehicle-mounted warning device .
Refer to 180 Vehicle-Mounted Warning Device .
− fitted with audio-visual reversing equipment .
− maintained in good order and condition throughout the Contract .
DETERGENT – HOLD POINT 17.9 Detergent utilised for either street washing or remote high pressure washing with the lance is to be supplied by the Contractor .
Detergent is to meet the following requirements : − heavy duty general purpose cleaner/degreaser concentrate − diluted in accordance with manufacturer ’ s recommendation − water soluble and biodegradable − low foam , quick break product − be non-toxic , − not contain ; caustic material , phosphate builders or glycol ether solvents − temperature stable to a minimum temperature of 42 ºC .
Hold Point - Provide product information details and SDS to Superintendent for approval of the detergent intended for use in the performance of the Contract prior to the commencement of the works .
DISPOSAL OF RECOVERED WASTE 17.10 All recovered waste associated with the sweeping operation will be disposed of at an appropriate waste management facility .
Waste is not to be abandoned on site , deposited on adjoining properties , or hidden on areas of vacant land .
PERSONNEL 17.11 Ensure that all works are identified and undertaken in conformance with the requirements of the Contract .
Adequately train machinery operators in the correct operation of all equipment used in the performance of the contract .
All operators will hold current licences as required under law .
All supervisors and operators will wear reflective fluorescent safety vests whenever working off machinery or out of vehicles during the performance of the Contract .
TRAFFIC CONTROL 17.12 Provide traffic control associated with the works in accordance with AS 1742.3 .
The following requirements are intended to supplement or clarify the requirements of AS 1742.3 .
17.12.1 Vehicle-Mounted Warning Device Fit road sweeping equipment with one amber rotating dual beacon ( Britax Aerobar 420-00 or similar ) mounted over the cabin and fitted with minimum 55 watt globes .
The beacon is to be visible from the front and both sides .
Fit cycleway and footpath sweeping equipment with a single beacon device visible from all directions .
For road sweeping equipment , additionally provide two single rotating beacons , mounted one on each side at the upper rear of the vehicle , and visible to traffic approaching from the rear .
Ensure that all lights are operational and maintained in a clean state whenever the plant or equipment is working on roadways , cycleways or footpaths .
17.12.2 Illuminated Flashing Arrow Sign Road sweeping equipment will be fitted with either an illuminated flashing arrow sign , or an approved flashing bar light mounted horizontally and centrally on the upper portion of the rear of the equipment .
The flashing pattern required for an illuminated flashing arrow sign while sweeping roadside kerbs is for the central bar only to be flashed .
17.12.3 Very Short-Term and Low Impact Works Scheduled work will be undertaken as “ Work Taking 5 Minutes Maximum ” .
As there will not be any workers on foot associated with the undertaking of these Contract works , a lookout person will not be required .
Works undertaken under the Contract will not be considered as “ Mobile Works ” .
17.12.4 Urgent Works Request An Urgent Works Request may be made by the Superintendent for reasons of safety , and may be the result of a motor vehicle accident , material or debris spillage , or other incident .
Such requests are to be attended to on site within one hour of the request .
In such circumstances , the Superintendent will make alternative arrangements for the management of traffic .
OTHER REQUIREMENTS 17.13 ( If applicable ) Refer to PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS section of Request for Tender .
AERODROME MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 181 AERODROME MAINTENANCE 18 .
OUTLINE DESCRIPTION 18.1 This section specifies the general maintenance of sealed and unsealed , aerodromes and/or aerodrome landing area ( ALA ) , ancillary works to comply with the requirements of the Civil Aviation Safety Authority ( CASA ) .
More information on site rules available at Specification Service webpage ( link to CASA and link to manuals ) : https : //infrastructure.nt.gov.au/specification- services/site-specific-rules .
REFERENCED DOCUMENTS 18.2 Specification Reference Refer to the Northern Territory Government Standard Specification for Environmental Management and to the RFT .
For ALA , carry out inspections and maintenance works in accordance with the Civil Aviation advisory publication CAAP 92 – 1 ( 1 ) , Civil Aviation Orders , Part 82 , Section 82.3 , Issue 3 , Appendix 3 , where applicable and all CASA Directives .
For registered aerodromes , carry out inspections and maintenance works in accordance with the CASA publication Manual of Standards ( MOS ) Part 139 .
Precedence ; Where conflict arises between this specification and CASA requirements , the CASA requirements prevail .
STANDARDS 18.3 Comply with the Acts , Regulations , Guidelines and Codes applicable to the works .
Comply with the requirements of Authorities with jurisdiction over the works .
Conform to the Standards and Publications quoted throughout this document unless specified otherwise .
Refer to REFERENCED DOCUMENTS .
Refer to Plant And Equipment clause in MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS .
Refer to Work Involving Chemicals clause in MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS .
Refer to Site Rules : Civil Aviation Safety Authority ( CASA ) Manual of Standards ( MOS ) Part 139 Chapter 12.1.7 ‘ Aerodrome works ’ for registered aerodromes For unregistered Aeroplane Landing Areas ( ALA ) adapt CASA MOS Part 139 Chapter 10.10 ‘ Aerodrome Works Safety ’ as a guideline .
MAINTENANCE WORKS 18.4 Carry out the maintenance works to include all works to meet the specified performance criteria .
This includes inspection , monitoring and reporting on the condition of the aerodrome to ensure its continual compliance with the requirements of the MOS Part 139 Section 10 .
Maintain the aerodrome in a condition that complies with the requirements of the Civil Aviation Regulations ( CAR ) and all CASA Directives .
UNFORSEEN MAINTENANCE 18.5 Unforseen maintenance works includes all works other than routine maintenance works required to the aerodrome to maintain it in a condition that complies with the CAR .
Contractor to advise Superintendent of any deficiencies .
SLASHING 18.6 Slash the grassed areas to maintain grass and other vegetation below the following maximum heights ; − 15 mm on the runway , taxiways and apron − 150 mm in all other areas within the aerodrome fence line − 150 mm around the outside perimeter of the fence line − As part of the slashing operation remove any litter , rubbish or debris from these areas .
WEED CONTROL 18.7 For weed control by the chemical spraying method refer to the Aerodromes sub-clause in the Vegetation Control clause in SLASHING AND WEED CONTROL .
CUTTING OF RE-GROWTH 18.8 Cut the re-growth on the approaches and side transitions to maintain the longitudinal and traverse clearway and slope requirements , as detailed in the Guidelines for ALA of the CASA .
Remove the cut re-growth from the site to an approved location .
DRAGGING OF AERODROME 18.9 Drag the aerodrome with a sufficiently heavy metal beam to fill minor depressions , cracks and wheel ruts and to spread any build up of loose material .
Break up and dispose of ant hills and backfill , if necessary with suitable material .
Compact backfilled areas where ant hills were removed .
Maintain the surfaces to limit cracks to the following dimensions ; Runways , taxiways and aprons ; 40 mm .
Runway strips adjacent to the runway ; 70 mm ROLLING OF RUNWAYS 18.10 UNSEALED RUNWAYS Roll gravel runways and taxiways when there is moisture in the pavement , but not saturated , to incorporate loose material and to compact the surface .
AERODROME MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 182 Roll with a rubber multi tyred roller with a minimum mass of 15 tonnes and a minimum of 3 passes at approximately 10 km/h .
SEALED RUNWAYS Roll bitumen sealed runways and taxiways to invigorate the bitumen and rebind loose aggregate .
Carry out the rolling work during dry weather and at the hottest part of the day .
Roll with a rubber multi tyred roller with a minimum mass of 15 tonnes and a minimum of 3 passes at approximately 10 km/h .
MAINTENANCE GRADE – RUNWAY 18.11 Grade the full width of the runway surface to remove corrugations and fill in ruts , holes and depressions .
Win and recover material from the edge of the runway .
Spread the trimmed and windrow material evenly across the full width of the runway to fill depressions and to obtain the required cross section .
GRAVEL SHEETING 18.12 Where gravel sheeting is required refer to the Gravel Sheeting clauses of MAINTENANCE GRADING AND GRAVEL SHEETING .
FENCE AND GATE MAINTENANCE 18.13 Maintain aerodrome fences and gates to ensure the fence provides a continuous and taut barrier that prohibits the entry of livestock and similarly sized feral animals to the same level as when originally constructed .
When replacing fencing components conform to the standards of materials and workmanship on the appropriate standard fencing drawings .
AERODROME FURNITURE 18.14 WINDSOCK Repair or replace the windsock when it is not working effectively or when it has reduced visibility such that it is not clearly visible to all aerodrome users .
Maintain the windsock and signal areas in a blackened state to provide sufficient contrast that the windsock signals would be visible to all aerodrome users .
Maintain white markers to clearly define the boundaries of these areas .
MARKER CONES Eradicate grass around marker cones such that no grass or vegetation reduces the visibility of the complete cone or marker .
SAFETY EQUIPMENT Maintain flares in working order to the number required by CASA .
Ensure that the following safety equipment is available , is stored safely and is repaired , painted or replaced as necessary ; − un-serviceability cross − orange safety cones − displaced threshold markers − red and white un serviceability cones AERODROME LIGHTING Inspect and maintain the runway lighting including the supply and installation of batteries and globes as required .
REPLACEMENT FURNITURE The supply of replacement safety equipment and furniture as necessary will be provided by the Principal .
18.14.1 Aerodrome Products General Comply with Civil Aviation Safety Authority ( CASA ) legislations and regulations unless otherwise specified .
Items required under this section will include : − Gable Boundary Markers − Cone Markers − Unserviceability Marker Cones − Windsocks − Threshold Lights ( battery operated ) − Battery Powered Solar Charged Photo Cell ( LED ) Lights Colour and sizes will be as ordered .
Gable Boundary Markers Manufactured of fibreglass , with provision for securing to the ground with steel pegs .
Size : Length 3000mm , Width 1000mm , Height 500mm .
Colour : White .
Cone Markers Manufactured either of rubber or lightweight frangible materials such as fibreglass , with provision for securing to the ground with steel pegs .
Size : Either : − Base diameter 750mm , Height 500mm , or − Base diameter 500mm , Height 260mm .
− Colour : White or yellow , as ordered : − White for 750x500 , or − White or yellow for 500x260 .
AERODROME MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 183 Unserviceability Marker Cones Manufactured either of rubber or lightweight frangible materials such as fibreglass , with provision for securing to the ground with steel pegs .
Size : Base diameter 750mm , Height 500mm .
Colour : White , with a midway horizontal red band 230mm high .
Windsocks Manufactured using unlaminated poly fabric complete with a 19mm rod support around the 900mm opening together with eyelets for attachment .
Size : Length 3650mm , Diameter : 900mm tapering evenly to 230mm .
Threshold Lights Manufactured using high-impact plastic .
− Battery Powered Solar Charged Photo Cell ( LED ) Lights Lens Colour : Either red blue green or half and half , as ordered .
Battery Powered Solar Charged Photo Cell Lights must meet the requirements of the CASA .
OTHER REQUIREMENTS 18.15 ( If applicable ) Refer to PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS section of Request for Tender .
ROAD AND MARINE AMENITY MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 184 ROAD AND MARINE AMENITY 19 .
MAINTENANCE ROAD AND MARINE AMENITIES 19.1 The road and marine amenities referred to in this section include rest areas , tourist features , boat ramp amenity areas , roadside stopping places , information bays and car , boat and truck parking bays .
General descriptions of these areas are provided in the Definitions clause of AS 1742.6 .
Marine amenity specific requirements appear at the end of this work section .
OUTLINE DESCRIPTION 19.2 This section specifies the maintenance requirements for routine , periodic and specific maintenance of road and marine amenity areas identified in the PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS section of the RFT .
The maintenance operations in this section are performance based to specified service levels .
Some operations are specifically ordered as required by the Superintendent .
Maintenance operations generally include : − Rubbish removal − Maintenance of toilets , shelters and furniture − Grass cutting , trimming , weeding − Supplying water and maintaining irrigation systems − Maintenance of water tanks and water quality − Maintenance of barbecues and provision of firewood − Roadside rubbish collection − Removal of dead animals and abandoned vehicles .
STANDARDS 19.3 Comply with the Acts , Regulations , Guidelines and Codes applicable to the works .
Comply with the requirements of Authorities with jurisdiction over the works .
Conform to the Standards and Publications quoted throughout this document unless specified otherwise .
Refer to REFERENCED DOCUMENTS .
Refer to Plant and Equipment clause in MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS .
Refer to Work Involving Chemicals clause in MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS .
Refer to Waste Disposal clause in MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS .
Refer to Diving Work clause in MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS .
Refer to Cyclone Event Damage in LANDSCAPE MAINTENANCE .
Specification Reference Refer to the Northern Territory Government Standard Specification for Environmental Management and to the RFT .
DEFINITIONS 19.4 Routine Maintenance Ongoing maintenance carried out in accordance with the program of works to achieve the service levels required .
Periodic Maintenance Items of maintenance to be carried out at a particular time in accordance with the program of works .
Specific Maintenance Items of maintenance to be carried out as and when required and ordered with the issue of a works order by the Superintendent .
Vegetation Refers to any plant growth , grasses , shrubs and trees in the area to be treated .
Weeds Refers to undesirable vegetation in the area to be treated .
Herbicide A chemical formulation for control and eradication of vegetation and weeds .
REFERENCE STANDARD DRAWING 19.5 Refer to PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS section of the RFT for locality map and list of Road Amenity areas included in the contract .
PROGRAM OF WORKS 19.6 Submit a 12 month Maintenance Program for routine and periodic maintenance of all Road and Marine Amenity areas within 2 weeks of award of contract in the first year , and 2 weeks prior to the commencement of a subsequent 12 month period .
Identify the type , frequency and timing for each service associated with the contract , however , achieve the specified service levels regardless of frequency of treatment .
The Superintendent will measure the progress of the work against the Contractor ’ s submitted Maintenance Program .
EXTENT OF WORK 19.7 Maintain the full extent of all Road and Marine Amenity areas identified in the PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS section of the RFT .
Identify and undertake the works required to maintain all amenity areas to comply with the specified service levels , which are clearly defined outcomes specified for all the maintenance works specified herein .
Undertake specific scheduled works issued by the Superintendent .
Undertake specific unscheduled works requested by the Superintendent , to be paid at a fair and reasonable rate negotiated between the Contractor and Superintendent .
Replacement items of a major nature and not covered under routine or periodic maintenance ROAD AND MARINE AMENITY MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 185 will be paid for at the invoiced price plus the Contractor ’ s scheduled mark-up percentage .
Comply with the specified response times for attendance and completion of work to be carried out for safety or other reasons , including afterhours call-outs .
The Superintendent will engage a third party to attend to and complete the work at the Contractor ’ s expense if specified response times are not met .
INFORMATION SIGN 19.8 Erect an information sign at each rest area with details of the : − Name and telephone number of Period Contractor for Maintenance of Road and Marine Amenity Areas .
Erect the sign to be clearly visible and securely attached to the shelter shed , and where there is no shelter shed , at a location approved by the Superintendent .
Ensure that the information on the sign is kept current for the duration of the contract .
Fabricate the sign from 0.6 mm off white pre- painted sheet steel , size 600 mm x 400 mm , with 50 mm high Helvetica medium black lettering .
Fix to the metal framework of the shelter with 4 mm pop rivets at 200 mm centres .
RUBBISH COLLECTION 19.9 19.9.1 Service Levels for Rubbish Collection Maintain Road and Marine Amenity areas ; − Clear the site of all rubbish that is visible from the site and ensure that , − There are no more than ten items of rubbish within the site or visible from within the site at any time .
19.9.2 Rubbish Collection Operations - Witness Point Collect rubbish and remove from Road and Marine Amenity areas to comply with the service level requirements , and prior to grass cutting operations .
Dispose of all rubbish at a Community or Council Waste Disposal Site and pay all dump fees where applicable .
Do not store rubbish for later retrieval anywhere within the amenity areas .
Rubbish is defined as any loose unattached inanimate item or any other object that does not form part of the Road Amenity areas .
Rubbish includes , but is not limited to : − food scraps − goods packaging , − paper products , − plastic products , − rubberized products , including tyres and batteries .
− glass products , − metal / alloy products , − stone or masonry products or items including concrete chunks , − any material excluding liquids resultant from a vehicle accident , − any vegetative item , − any mechanical item or part that is not related to intact mechanical , electrical or service- related infrastructure occurring within the amenity areas , − any loose , unattached inanimate item that the Superintendent deems is not required , wanted or expected to occur within the amenity areas .
Witness Point - Normal rubbish collection does not include illegal signage or abandoned vehicles or equipment , however , report these items to the Superintendent .
Witness Point - Report to the Superintendent any occurrences of concrete spills , gravel , sand or soil on any trafficable surface .
These materials are not rubbish under the terms and conditions of the contract and may be removed by others .
If not removed by others , remove upon issue of direction to work from the Superintendent at a fair and reasonable negotiated rate .
Remove rubbish resulting from a significant spill event that can not reasonably be removed within one hour of commencement of work at a fair and reasonable negotiated rate for time expended in excess of one hour .
Remove any single item of rubbish with a weight greater than 50 kg at a fair and reasonable rate negotiated with the Superintendent .
19.9.3 Roadside Rubbish Collection Roadside rubbish collection is a specific maintenance item and is only to be carried out after a works order is issued by the Superintendent .
Collect all rubbish and remove from the roadside verge , within 10 km of towns , communities , commercial areas , and roadhouses .
Collect rubbish and remove from the roadside between the outside of the outer batters on each side of the road formation , and in fill areAS 4 m from the toe of the batter , only upon issue of a direction to work from the Superintendent .
RUBBISH REMOVAL 19.10 19.10.1 Service Levels for Rubbish Removal and Bin Placement and Replacement Maintain amenity areas so that ; − bins do not overflow and have a build-up of rubbish on the ground around the base of the bin , − bins are not unpleasant for users to deposit rubbish into , due to decomposing rubbish .
ROAD AND MARINE AMENITY MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 186 19.10.2 Rubbish Removal Operations Empty bins and remove rubbish from the amenity areas to comply with the service level requirements .
Install new plastic rubbish bin liners in all rubbish bins when rubbish is removed .
Fold the plastic bin liners over the lip of the bins and secure with packaging tape .
Respond to any direction given by the Superintendent to empty bins and/or remove rubbish within 48 hours .
Dispose of rubbish at a community or council waste disposal site and pay all fees and charges .
Do not store rubbish for later retrieval anywhere within the amenity areas .
Modify the frequency of rubbish removal as necessary to allow for seasonal variances .
19.10.3 Deodorising Rubbish Bins – Witness Point After emptying rubbish bins wash out as necessary and place deodorising granules in the bottom of the bins to comply with the service level requirements .
Witness Point - Use Nilodew granules as manufactured by Nilodor Inc. or equivalent as approved by the Superintendent .
Spread approximately 30 grams of the deodorant granules across the bottom of each rubbish bin .
19.10.4 Bin Placement and Replacement Operations Provide rubbish bins , replace or repair missing , damaged or rusted rubbish bins , at amenity areas to comply with the service level requirements .
Provide suitable metal or plastic 200 litre capacity rubbish bins , painted off white .
These become the property of the Principal once on site .
Provide sufficient drain holes to prevent bins holding water .
Provide new plastic bin liners in all rubbish bins .
Modify the number of bins as necessary to allow for seasonal variances .
19.10.5 Rubbish Bin Lids At the commencement of the contract ensure that all rubbish bins have lids to prevent animals and birds removing the contents .
Where necessary fabricate new lids from 25 mm x 25 mm welded mesh with a wire diameter of 3.15 mm ( Smorgon WG311 ) and welded to a 10 mm diameter rod frame hinged to a mild steel frame on the top of the bin , fabricated from 50 mm x 3 mm mild steel flat .
Refer to Standard Drawing RU3A ( B95-2284 ) .
Ensure that lids are maintained at all times .
If a bin loses its lid replace it within 7 days .
19.10.6 Illegal Rubbish Collection – Witness Point Normal rubbish collection does not include illegal dumping of household refuse , signage or abandoned vehicles or equipment ; however , report these items to the Superintendent .
Witness Point - Report to the Superintendent any occurrences of illegal rubbish dumping , vegetation dumping , concrete spills , gravel , sand or soil on any trafficable surface .
These materials are not rubbish under the terms and conditions of the contract and may be removed by others .
If not removed by others , remove upon issue of direction to work from the Superintendent , to be paid for at unit rates nominated in scheduled rates , or at negotiated rate .
CLEANING OF ROAD AND MARINE 19.11 AMENITY AREA FURNITURE 19.11.1 Service Levels for Cleaning of Road and Marine Amenity Area Furniture Maintain tables and seating at rest areas so that they are clean , free of rubbish and suitable to use at all times .
19.11.2 Cleaning of Road and Marine Amenity Area Furniture Operations Clean tables and seating at rest areas to comply with the service level requirements .
Respond to any direction given by the Superintendent to clean tables and seating within 48 hours .
Remove rubbish from the surface of tables and seating , scrub clean with a scrubbing brush , water and detergent , rinse off with water .
Leave in a clean hygienic condition and suitable for use .
Modify the frequency of cleaning tables and seating as necessary to allow for seasonal variances .
CLEANING OF AMENITY AREA TOILET 19.12 BLOCKS 19.12.1 Service Levels for Cleaning of Amenity Area Toilet Blocks Maintain toilet blocks at amenity areas so that ; − they are clean , free of rubbish and suitable to use at all times .
− the 500 litre water tanks are not less than 30 % full at all times .
− the jumbo toilet rolls have sufficient paper to last to the next service by the Contractor .
− the liquid soap dispensers are filled at each service by the Contractor with liquid soap as recommended by the dispenser manufacturer .
− the solar powered exhaust fans , where fitted , are in working order .
ROAD AND MARINE AMENITY MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 187 19.12.2 Cleaning of Amenity Area Toilet Block Operations Clean the toilet block at amenity areas where installed to comply with the service level requirements .
Respond to any direction given by the Superintendent to clean the toilet block within 48 hours .
Keep all surfaces free from dirt , grime and cobwebs .
Mop the floors with a disinfecting agent and disinfect all handled surfaces , i.e .
hand rails , door knobs taps , etc .
Take care when cleaning the toilet bowl not to allow disinfectant to be added to the storage chamber .
Ensure that the toilet roll holders and soap dispensers are clean and work efficiently .
Leave in condition that is suitable for use .
Modify the frequency of cleaning toilet block as necessary to allow for seasonal variances .
MAINTENANCE OF ROAD AND 19.13 MARINE AMENITY AREA TOILETS 19.13.1 Toilet Systems The particular toilet system at a road amenity area is identified in the PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS section of the RFT .
19.13.2 Composter Type Systems Inspect the composting chamber at monthly intervals and rake over the compost using the special compost rake .
After raking , cover the compost with a layer of wood shavings to the manufacturer ’ s specifications .
Ensure that the drain is free flowing and unobstructed .
Advise the Superintendent when the composting chamber is to the level requiring the compost to be removed and the chamber to be re-started .
19.13.3 Clean Out of Toilet Compost systems When instructed by the Superintendent , clean out and re-start the toilet compost chambers as follows ; Clean out the compost chamber and dispose of the compost by burying at a community or council waste disposal site and pay all fees and charges .
Cover the floor of the compost chamber with wood shavings and treat with chemical composting bacteria in accordance with the manufacturer ’ s instructions .
Spray the area lightly with a water mist .
Ensure that the drain is free flowing and unobstructed .
19.13.4 Collection Well Type Toilet Systems Treat the collection wells with a deodorising organic based chemical at weekly intervals .
Only use chemicals recommended by the toilet manufacturer and in accordance with the application instructions .
19.13.5 Emptying Collection Wells When the collection well is at a maximum of 75 % capacity arrange for the well to be pumped out and the system restarted with seed water in accordance with the manufacturer ’ s instructions .
For liquid waste removal only use operators that are accredited in waste management and approved to dispose of waste at a Power Water sewerage treatment site .
Ensure that all health requirements are met when pumping out collection wells and transporting waste .
GRAFFITI 19.14 19.14.1 Graffiti Removal Clean off or paint over any graffiti at road and marine amenity sites so that ; − the contained area of graffiti on signs , furniture or other surfaces does exceed 10 % of the total readily visible surface area for the particular item .
− offensive graffiti is removed as soon as it is observed and before leaving the particular site .
Clean graffiti off signs with an approved graffiti cleaning agent .
Respond to any direction given by the Superintendent to remove graffiti within 48 hours .
GRASS CUTTING 19.15 19.15.1 Service Levels for Grass Cutting Maintain verges within the established confines of road amenity areas so that ; − Grass maximum cut from the ground is as per Table 19.1 – Grass Height Specification .
− Grass height for more than 10 % of any one area at any time does not exceed the heights in the table below .
− Grassed verges are neat and tidy .
Refer to PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS in the RFT/RFQ .
ROAD AND MARINE AMENITY MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 188 Table 19.1 – Grass Height Specification Amenity Maximum grass cut Grass height does not exceed Special Areas as nominated in the Project Specific Req .
100 mm 200 mm Rest Areas within townships 100 mm 200 mm Rest Areas on National Highways 100 mm 200 mm Rest Areas on other roads within 10 km of a township 100 mm 300 mm Rest Areas - Other 100 mm 300 mm Truck Parking Bays within townships 100 mm 200 mm Truck Parking Bays – Other roads within 10 km of township 100 mm 300 mm Truck Parking Bays – Others 100 mm 300 mm Aerodromes 100 mm 200 mm Irrigated verges within townships 50 mm 200 mm Non-irrigated verges within townships 100 mm 200 mm Parks 50 mm 200 mm 19.15.2 Grass Cutting Operations Cut grass at road and marine amenity areas to comply with the service level requirements .
Respond to any direction given by the Superintendent for grass cutting within 7 days .
Collect rubbish prior to grass cutting operations .
Definition : grass includes clumps or tufts of grass growing on scalded areas , grass species that grow at faster rates than other species , and includes the whole of the plant including leaves , seed stems and seed heads .
Cut grass from the edge of pavement and seal to the extent of the rest areas , truck parking bays and boat ramp areas or to the cleared tree line .
Cut grass to clean cut , not broken or ripped , using equipment capable of maintaining the health and appearance of the grass and ground cover .
Cut grass around established trees and shrubs , and around road furniture .
Do not cut shrubs and trees with a calliper size at base greater than 50 mm diameter , planted vegetation , or vegetation regardless of size that has been pegged and directed by the Superintendent to be retained .
Remove cut material or other detritus matter from the grass cutting , trimming or weeding processes from the site and dispose of at a community or council waste disposal site and pay all fees and charges .
Modify cutting methods and frequency as necessary to allow for seasonal variances .
Immediately replace and/or repair furniture damaged by grass cutting operations .
19.15.3 Grass Cutting Plant and Equipment Anticipated plant requirements are ride on mowers or push motor mowers .
Use suitable guards on all machinery to prevent material being sprayed onto the road surface and endangering vehicles , persons or property .
Keep 2 x 9 kg water fire extinguishers on site to extinguish fires that may be started by mowing operations .
GRASS TRIMMING 19.16 19.16.1 Service Levels for Grass Trimming Maintain verges within the established confines of road and marine amenity areas to service levels for grass cutting using trimmers where they can not be addressed by grass cutting operations .
Maintain joints on concrete , seal and paving and any other hard surfaces occurring within the road amenity areas so that ; − Grass does not reach 50 mm in height and/or 100 mm in diameter .
19.16.2 Grass Trimming Operations Trim grass at road and marine amenity areas to comply with the service level requirements , in conjunction with grass cutting service .
Respond to any direction given by the Superintendent for grass trimming within 7 days .
Trim grass for the purposes of aesthetics , integrity of asset , functionality , public safety , including vegetation protruding from adjoining properties .
Trim grass at back of kerbs , around drainage inlets and outlets , drainage lines and culverts , edges and surfaces of footpaths and cycle paths , access ramps , drive ways , any form of infrastructure , utility , furniture , signs , on in or around verges , traffic control devices , fence lines , barriers , trees , concrete or paving .
Trim grass on concrete , paved or bituminous surfaces to ground or surface level .
Use of super- heated steam for longer term treatment is permitted here , as is herbicide in accordance with the Herbicide clause .
19.16.3 Grass Trimming Plant and Equipment Use mechanical or manually operated hand held equipment that has no detrimental effect to the landscape or road asset .
Fit suitable guards on all machinery to prevent material being sprayed onto the road surface and endangering vehicles , persons or property .
ROAD AND MARINE AMENITY MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 189 WEEDING 19.17 19.17.1 Service Levels for Weeding Maintain verges within the established confines of road amenity areas to service levels for grass cutting and trimming , but where they can not be addressed by grass cutting or trimming operations .
Remove unwanted plant and grass species .
19.17.2 Weeding Operations Weed any areas and at road pavement and kerb junctions , within garden beds and within or around any other structure or feature occurring within the road amenity areas which can not be controlled by grass cutting or trimming , to comply with the service level requirements .
Respond to any direction given by the Superintendent for weeding within 7 days .
Carry out weeding for the purposes of addressing issues related to aesthetics , integrity of asset , functionality or public safety .
Dispose of all removed weed matter at a community or council waste disposal site and pay all fees and charges .
Do not allow weeding treatment to impinge on the health of other desirable species , or result in damage to any part of the road amenity area asset .
Carry out weeding by mechanical , manual or chemical means .
Remove or treat with herbicide all weeds prior to them seeding .
19.17.3 Chemicals – Witness Point Witness Point - Submit to the Superintendent the list of chemicals intended for use during the contract , if herbicide is intended for use , details of pest species controlled by the chemicals , and life expectancy of control .
Use chemicals that are approved by the APVMA .
Find all information pertaining to the use requirements of chemicals on the Authority ’ s web site http : //services.apvma.gov.au/ .
Use herbicides that are biodegradable and do not contain lead arsenates or other substance or salts dangerous to humans or animals .
Use spreading agents if and as recommended on the labels .
19.17.4 Herbicide Glyphosate is the only herbicide permitted for use for weed control .
Use according to manufacturer ’ s directions for use .
Do not use herbicide for the treatment of weeds at the following areas : − at drainage lines − beyond 500 mm of road amenity area or roadside furniture − beyond 500 mm from the vertical trunk at the base of any tree .
Minimise the use of herbicide .
Apply herbicide at killing strength and not to retard growth .
Do not use dyes in the application of herbicides .
19.17.5 Chemical Spraying Handle , transport , spray , store and dispose of chemicals and their containers as specified in product SDS .
Do not spray on days of wind velocity greater than 15 km/h mean value and gusts exceeding 19 km/h because of the risk of spray drift causing a hazard on adjoining properties .
Do not cause or allow spray drift .
Prevent misting in breeze conditions by spraying at a lower pressure or adjusting spray nozzles to increase droplet particles size , or other suitable means .
Do not spray near schools during school hours or during outdoor activities at the school at any time .
Spray only when wind is blowing away from the school .
Do not spray during rain or when vegetation is saturated .
19.17.6 Personnel Handling of Chemicals Be registered for business as weed control operators , or engage subcontractors registered for business as weed control operators .
Personnel carrying out spraying operations must have undertaken and passed a National Farm Chemical User Training Program .
Do not allow spray drift .
Operators must be competent in their understanding of how to prevent spray drift .
Keep a copy of the Safety Data Sheet on site for each type of chemical used Handle all chemicals as specified in product SDS .
Wear as a minimum the protective clothing as specified in product SDS .
IRRIGATION SYSTEMS 19.18 19.18.1 Top Up Systems Where irrigation water storage systems are installed , top up the system with water at each visit to the particular site .
Check the system for correct operation and maintain as required .
AMENITY TREES 19.19 19.19.1 Replacement Trees Replace any amenity trees in the particular road amenity site that have died or have been badly damaged .
Replace with healthy trees of the same species and of a minimum height of 2 m. Dispose of dead trees and waste at a community or council waste disposal site and pay all fees and charges .
ROAD AND MARINE AMENITY MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 190 WATER TANKS AND WATER 19.20 MAINTENANCE 19.20.1 Service Levels for Water Tank and Water Maintenance Maintain water tanks and water in water tanks at road and marine amenity areas so that ; − tanks are never less than 30 % capacity , − water in tanks is at all times uncontaminated and potable , − taps can not be left on , are well maintained and are simple to use .
19.20.2 Water Tank and Water Maintenance Operations Maintain water tanks and water in water tanks at road amenity areas to comply with the service level requirements .
Respond to any direction given by the Superintendent for water tank and water maintenance within 48 hours .
Refill water tanks with potable water from a town water supply .
Monitor quality of water in tanks as follows : − Supply and maintain chlorine level testing equipment .
− Test free chlorine levels after filing of tank with a Hach 46700-00 or equivalent Digital Chlorimeter .
− Ensure chlorine levels are within 1 to 1.25 ppm ( or mg/L ) prior to leaving rest area .
− Record free chlorine levels on report form Road Amenity Adverse Condition Report , and submit with monthly CSR / tax invoice .
Empty , clean out , disinfect and refill water tanks when water becomes contaminated in accordance with the Water Tank De-Contamination clause .
Replace taps that are damaged or missing .
Repair leaks in water tanks as required .
Modify frequency of service as necessary to allow for seasonal variances in use .
19.20.3 Water Tank Inspection Inspect the water tank at each visit for damage or vandalism .
Fit locks to tank lids and keep locked at all times .
If the tank lid has been forced open or the tank is damaged to allow the importation of foreign material the water contained in the tank is deemed to be contaminated .
19.20.4 Water Tank De-contamination Where a water tank is deemed to be contaminated , carry out the following procedure ; − Drain the tank , − Repair the damage , if applicable , by a suitable method to ensure the integrity of the tank , − Thoroughly clean the insides of the tank using a high pressure water jet and super chlorinated water containing 40 ppm of free chlorine .
− In some cases the contamination may need to be removed by scrubbing the internal surfaces .
Ensure worker safety by complying with Work Health and Safety ( NUL ) Act and Regulations and with Codes of Practice applicable to work in confined spaces and with AS 2865 .
Finally flush the tank out as per the preceding paragraph .
− Refill the tank with fresh potable water and add chlorine to the correct level and test .
19.20.5 Prevent Cross Contamination Protect the potable water supply from cross contamination from equipment used in the maintenance of the toilet systems or other areas .
Do not use tanks , pumps , hoses or other equipment associated with the maintenance of toilet systems in the servicing of potable water tanks .
MAINTENANCE OF BARBECUES 19.21 19.21.1 Service Levels for maintenance of Barbecues Maintain the barbecues at road and marine amenity areas so that they are clean and suitable for use at all times .
Respond to any direction given by the Superintendent for barbecue maintenance within 72 hours .
19.21.2 Disposal of Ash Remove the ash and burnt wood fragments from the barbecues and dispose of at a community or council waste disposal site and pay all dump fees and charges .
The removed ash may be used as mulch on garden beds provided it is not visually distracting .
PROVISION OF FIREWOOD 19.22 19.22.1 Firewood Bins Provide firewood bins at each roadside and marine amenity site where barbeques are provided .
Use upturned concrete culverts at least 1.2 m wide , 2.4 m long and 0.9 m deep .
Place the firewood bins a minimum of 4 m from the barbeques and bed them solidly to prevent rocking .
19.22.2 Service Levels for Provision of Firewood Provide firewood at road and marine amenity areas so that ; − firewood log diameter does not exceed 150 mm , − firewood should be of reasonable burning quality suitable for use in public barbecues and with a minimum density of 1000 kg/m3 , Do not provide any treated timber as firewood .
ROAD AND MARINE AMENITY MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 191 Fill the firewood bins at the following frequencies ; Table 19.2 - Firewood Bin Refilling Frequencies Location Frequency Special areas as nominated in the Project Specific Req .
Stockpiles never fall below 200 kg Rest Areas on National Highways Once a week Other areas Once a week 19.22.3 Provision of Firewood Operations Provide adequate stockpiles of firewood at road and marine amenity areas where there are barbecues to comply with the service level requirements .
Store the firewood in the firewood bins .
Respond to any direction given by the Superintendent for provision of firewood within 72 hours .
Modify frequency of service as necessary to allow for seasonal variances in use .
PAINTING OF FURNITURE AND 19.23 EQUIPMENT Carry out all painting in accordance with AS/NZS 2311 .
Prepare new surfaces for painting in accordance with Section 3 of AS/NZS 2311 .
For repainting of existing surfaces conform to Sections 7 and 8 of AS/NZS 2311 .
This includes cleaning down with sugar soap , treatment of mould growth , rubbing back existing painted surfaces with abrasive paper and patching and priming of damaged surfaces .
Refer to PROTECTIVE COATINGS for marine locations and steel protection .
19.23.1 Paint Materials Use only 100 % acrylic low-gloss paint complying with the APAS specification 0280/3 Use only premium paints from approved manufacturers which include the following ; − Dulux Weathershield − Taubmans Sunproof / Endure − Wattyl Solagard .
The colours for painting of furniture and equipment are standard colours from the AS 2700 colour range and are as follows ; − Water tanks , tables and seating , shelter shed ; − Northern Region – Darwin to Dunmarra .
G 11 Bottle Green .
Similar to Mid Brunswick Green on Manufacturer ’ s colour charts .
− Southern Region – Dunmarra to the South Australian border .
G 54 Mist Green .
Similar to Mist Green on Manufacturer ’ s colour charts .
− Rubbish bins , water tank protection rails - Y 35 off White .
Ensure that the manufacturer ’ s tinting is suitable for external use .
Use paint from the same manufacturer to ensure consistency of finish , particularly when touching up existing paintwork .
19.23.2 Initial Painting Repaint all existing furniture at road amenity areas at commencement of the contract .
Paint new rubbish bins prior to placing on site .
19.23.3 Touch Up Painting Carry out touch up painting on all existing furniture at road amenity areas once every 12 months .
19.23.4 Service Levels for Subsequent Painting Maintain the appearance on all existing furniture at road amenity areas so that graffiti is removed or painted over and other blemishes are painted over to leave the furniture in pristine condition and suitable for use .
19.23.5 Painting Existing Furniture Carry out painting on existing furniture at road amenity areas to comply with the service level requirements .
Respond to any direction given by the Superintendent for painting existing furniture within 14 days .
Paint the following items of existing furniture : Water Tank : External walls of tanks only .
Tank protection rails .
Table and Seating : Tops of seating and tables and associated edges only .
Shelter Shed : All exposed surfaces except the upper surface of the roof .
Rubbish Bins : External surfaces .
Modify frequency of service as necessary to allow for seasonal variances in use .
19.23.6 Painting new furniture and equipment When installing replacement furniture or equipment initially paint the new surfaces in accordance with the Painting Existing Furniture clause .
For new work apply a minimum of 2 coats of paint .
REPAIR AND REPLACEMENT OF 19.24 ROAD AND MARINE AMENITY AREA FURNITURE 19.24.1 Service Levels for Repair and Replacement of Road and Marine Amenity Area Furniture Maintain barbecues , tables and seating at road amenity areas so that they are in good condition and suitable for use at all times .
ROAD AND MARINE AMENITY MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 192 19.24.2 Repair and Replacement of Road And Marine Amenity Area Furniture Operations Repair or replace barbecues , tables and seating at road and marine amenity areas to comply with the service level requirements .
Respond to any direction given by the Superintendent to repair or replace damaged or missing barbecues , tables and seating within 14 days .
Repair barbecues , tables and seating where necessary , including repainting if required , to a standard of suitable functionality , appearance and safety .
Obtain the advice of the Superintendent on the extent of repairs .
Provide replacement barbecues , tables and seating of equivalent standard to existing .
Obtain Superintendent ’ s approval of suitable replacement prior to purchase .
These items become the property of the Principal , once installed on site .
Remove and dispose of existing barbecues , tables and seating damaged beyond reasonable repair to a community or council waste disposal site .
Secure barbecues , barbecue plates , tables and seating to deter theft .
Modify frequency of service as necessary to allow for seasonal variances .
REMOVAL OF DEAD ANIMALS 19.25 19.25.1 Service Levels for Carcass Removal Remove any carcass as per the following table ; Table 19.3 - Carcass Removal Service Levels Area Response time from observation or notification Within 50 km of the contract base 1 hour Within 150 km of the contract base 2 hours All other areas 24 hours Ensure that vehicles , while working on the roadway , comply with the Rotating Beacons On Plant clause in the PROVISION FOR TRAFFIC section .
19.25.2 Carcass Removal Operations Remove multiple or singular carcasses of dead animals from within the road reserve irrespective of reason or event resulting in the demise of the animal .
Dispose of animal carcasses located within 10 km of towns , communities , commercial areas and roadhouses by taking to a dedicated council or community “ dead on arrival ” pit and pay all fees and charges .
In other areas move the carcass to the outside of the outer batter and out of motorists ’ vision .
There are 2 categories of animal carcasses ; Carcass weight greater than 50 kg .
These include : Larger animals including but not limited to cattle , buffalo , camels , horses and donkeys .
Carcass weight not greater than 50 kg .
These include : All other native and exotic species , including but not limited to dogs , cats , kangaroos , wallabies , birds , lizards and pigs .
Remove any carcass that is attracting scavengers , no matter how small the remains of the carcass may be .
The time period for removal of carcasses will commence from time of notification by the Superintendent or observation by the Contractor , whichever is earlier .
Quantities of carcasses resulting from a significant spillage or killing event that can not reasonably be removed within 2 hours of commencement of work will be paid at a fair and reasonable rate negotiated between the Contractor and Superintendent .
This payment will be for time expended in excess of 2 hours .
REMOVAL OF ABANDONED 19.26 VEHICLES 19.26.1 Service Levels for Vehicle Removal – Witness Point Witness Point - Report any vehicle suspected of being abandoned to the Superintendent within 24 hours of observation .
When instructed by the Superintendent remove any vehicle that has been abandoned in compliance with NT Traffic Regulations Part 5 - Abandoned Vehicles .
19.26.2 Vehicle Removal Operations Remove abandoned vehicle only upon issue of a direction to work from the Superintendent .
Remove and transport vehicle to a community or council waste disposal site and pay all fees and charges .
ADVERSE CONDITION REPORT 19.27 Submit to the Superintendent a Road Amenity Adverse Condition Report when condition of rest areas , truck parking bays and boat ramp areas is adverse due to factors not covered by this specification .
Carry out the works in accordance with the program or issued CSRs , however , submit a modified version of the work program if works are to be interrupted due to external or unforeseen circumstances .
Irrespective of external or unforeseen circumstances continue to maintain the assets within the service levels specified .
ROAD AND MARINE AMENITY MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 193 LIAISON WITH THE SUPERINTENDENT 19.28 Refer all matters relating to difficulties or problems experienced in carrying out the requirements of the Contract to the Superintendent .
CONTRACTOR ’ S PERSONNEL 19.29 19.29.1 Supervisors Employ sufficient supervisors familiar with the requirements of contract to attend all operations in each area of work to ensure full compliance with specified service levels .
Nominate an individual or provide a roster of individuals including their contact phone numbers who will be available at all times , including nights , weekends and Public Holidays during the Contract .
19.29.2 Personnel in Crews Provide appropriate crew size and numbers for the operations to achieve the specified service levels .
Provide adequate training in the correct operation of all powered equipment , hand tools , trimming techniques , use of chemicals , and first aid .
Where applicable ensure that staff holds current licences as required under law .
All personnel , supervisors , staff and operators on or off the machines are required to wear reflective safety vests to day or night in compliance with Work Health and Safety ( N.U.L ) Act and Regulations when working within the road reserve .
19.29.3 Personnel Working in Water Tanks Be suitably trained for working in confined spaces in compliance with AS 2865 and WHS ( N.U.L ) Act .
Comply with NT WorkSafe Code of Practice Confined Spaces .
MARINE AMENTIES MAINTENANCE 19.30 19.30.1 Cleaning and maintenance of Boat Ramps Service levels for maintenance cleaning of Boat Ramp Boat ramp clear of algae growth and debris that compromises user safety .
No loose rocks or hazards at base of ramp Maintenance Cleaning of Boat Ramp Maintain the boat ramp concrete deck and surrounds , so that they are clean and free from algae , sand/mud build up and any other detritus materials .
Use high-pressure water blasting methods and a nozzle pressure sufficient to remove all marine growth , algae and slippery surfaces that become a hazard to the public use of boat ramps .
Maintain the surface at the base of the boat ramp to enable the launching of boats at low tide .
Reposition loose rocks or hazard , to enable and assist with a smooth path for boats and trailers into or out of the water .
This operation is to be undertaken on a receding tide for boat ramps , the contractor to program works for the most effective tide , in order to maximise the extent of the cleaning of the ramps ’ lengths .
Ensure that ramps are available to users at all times .
If necessary , the Contractor may have to demobilise from the ramp to enable users to launch or retrieve boats .
High-pressure water blasting operations are not to pose a danger to or any inconvenience to the public and nor damage their vehicles or boats or trailers .
19.30.2 Cleaning and maintenance for Jetty , Pontoon , Fishing Platforms and Filleting Tables Service levels for Jetty , Pontoon , Fishing Platforms and Filleting Tables Maintenance Maintain the Jetty , pontoon structure , platforms and tables so that they are clean , free of all undesirable substances , algae and hazardous surfaces that compromise user safety .
Maintenance for Jetty , Pontoon , Fishing Platforms and Filleting Tables : Maintain the Jetty , pontoon structure , platforms and tables so that it is clean , free of all undesirable substances , algae and hazardous surfaces .
Use high-pressure water blasting methods using a nozzle pressure sufficient to remove all fish carcases , offal , blood stains , scales and or any undesirable substances that may produce an offending sight or odours on the jetty and pontoon deck , its railings , the jetty shelter and surrounds .
Areas which still produce obnoxious odours following water blasting and or scraping , are to be further treated by the use of an approved environmentally friendly disinfectant to neutralise the possibility for flies , maggots to breed , and to reduce obnoxious odours .
Use high-pressure water blasting methods and a nozzle pressure sufficient to remove all marine growth , algae and slippery surfaces that become a hazard to the public use .
Care is to be taken to avoid causing any damage to concrete , steel coating , and other surfaces during high-pressure water blasting operations .
Program works for the most effective time frames in order to maximise the extent of the high- pressure water blasting operation .
Ensure that the amenities are available to public use at all times .
If necessary , cease the works to enable the immediate use of the amenity by the public at any time .
19.30.3 Maintenance for Marine Growth/ Shellfish Encrustations on Structures Service levels for Marine Growth/ Shellfish Encrustations on Structures Maintenance Maintain the jetty structure piles landing decks , walkways , and the associated steel grating ROAD AND MARINE AMENITY MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 194 railings and posts so that they are clean , free of hazardous surfaces , and suitable to use at all times .
Maintenance for Marine Growth/ Shellfish Encrustations on Structures : Remove , or make smooth , all sharp edges of shellfish encrustations from the structure .
Use a small tomahawk and a hammer or other approved tools to scrape and knock the shellfish encrustations off without damage to the underlying protective coatings .
Run a curved sharpened blade over all cleaned areas to remove any remaining shellfish encrustations .
Remove or smooth all sharp edges of shellfish encrustations projecting above the top surface of the landing deck grating .
Where ever shellfish encrustation is threatening to fill the gaps between any grating bars by more than 30 % , carefully rod through the gap with an approved object to open up the gap and knock off the growth .
It is important to maintain the openings in the decking so that wave action is free to move through the openings .
If this is not done then the decking will act like a solid plank .
The force of the waves can then exert pressure and dislodge the decking units which are only fixed by clips to the structure .
Otherwise use high-pressure water blasting methods and a nozzle pressure sufficient to remove all marine growth , algae and slippery surfaces that are hazardous to the public users .
Touch-up any paint damaged during the cleaning process with an approved protective coating .
Take particular care to not damage the paint coating of grating since “ touch-up ” painting of the grid is not feasible .
Clean any damaged protective coating back to bare metal or clean sound paint work .
Feather edges and lightly abrade areas of existing paintwork that are to be touched up .
Prime the area to be painted as soon as possible after surface preparation and prior to any deterioration or submergence of the surface .
Use Wattyl Sigma EP Universal Primer and Wattyl Sigmacover TCP Coating Glassflak or other approved system that is impact resistant , extremely tolerant of surface moisture , is high build , and will reliably adhere to the existing paint system .
Mix , handle and apply the paint strictly in accordance with the manufacturer ’ s instructions .
Refer to PROTECTIVE COATINGS .
OTHER REQUIREMENTS 19.31 ( If applicable ) Refer to PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS section of Request for Tender .
PROTECTIVE COATINGS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 195 PROTECTIVE COATINGS 20 .
CODES , STANDARDS AND 20.1 LEGISLATION All materials and work shall comply with the latest issue of the relevant codes and standards .
Some standards and codes are listed in the REFERENCED DOCUMENTS sections .
When conflict arises between the requirements in the manufacturer ’ s data sheets or recommendations and the specification , the highest standard shall be adopted as directed by the Superintendent .
Standards AS 1580 Paints and related materials Methods of test .
AS/NZS 1580.108.1 Determination of dry film thickness on metallic substrates - Non- destructive methods .
AS 1627 Metal finishing — Preparation and pretreatment of surfaces .
( Code of Practice for Preparation and Pretreatment of Metal Surfaces prior to Protective Coating ) .
AS 1627.1 Removal of oil , grease and related contamination .
AS 1627.2 Power tool cleaning .
AS 1627.4 Abrasive blast cleaning of steel .
AS 1627.9 Pictorial surface preparation standards for painting steel surfaces .
AS 1678 Emergency Procedures Guide – Transport .
AS 1678.3A1 Group Text EPGs for Class 3 substances – Flammable Liquids .
AS 1940 The Storage and Handling of Flammable and Combustible .
Liquids .
AS/NZS 2311 Guide to the Painting of Building .
AS/NZS 2312 Guide to the Protection of Structural Steel against atmospheric corrosion by the use of protective coatings .
AS/NZS 2312.1 Paint coatings .
AS 2700 Colours for General Purpose .
AS 2865 Confined Space .
AS 3894 Site Testing of Protective Coatings .
AS 3894.3 Determination of dry film thickness .
AS 3894.5 Determination of surface profile .
AS 3894.10 Inspection Report – Daily surface and ambient conditions .
AS 3894.11 Equipment Report .
AS 3894.12 Inspection Report – Coating .
AS 3894.13 Inspection Report – Daily blast and paint .
AS 3894.14 Inspection Report – Daily painting AS/NZS ISO 9000 Quality management systems - Fundamentals and vocabulary .
ASTM D5064 Standard Practice for Conducting a Patch Test to Assess Coating Compatibility .
Work Health and Safety ( NUL ) Act .
Work Health and Safety ( NUL ) Regulations .
Code of Practice , Abrasive Blasting , Safe Work Australia .
Code of Practice , Managing the Risk of Falls at Workplaces , NT WorkSafe .
PROTECTIVE COATING 20.2 SPECIFICATIONS - SYSTEMS AND APPROVED PRODUCTS – HOLD POINT Refer to Clause 20.16 TABLES - PROTECTIVE COATING SPECIFICATIONS - SYSTEMS AND APPROVED PRODUCTS .
Protective coating Hold Point - Surface Preparation : To AS 1627 .
Remove loose millscale , rust , oil , grease , dirt , globules of weld metal , weld slag and other foreign matter .
Priming : Apply the primer coat to the structural steel before delivery to the site and protect from damage during handling and transport .
Hold Point - Complete and submit Site testing of protective coatings : To AS 3894.10 and AS 3894.11 and AS 3894.12 Single pack zinc phosphate Thoroughly wire brush steelwork to AS 1627.2 and prime with one coat of single pack zinc phosphate to APAS specification 0162/1 with a dry film thickness of 40 microns .
Epoxy zinc phosphate Blast clean to the recommendations of AS 1627.4 to grade Sa of AS 1627.9 and prime with one coat of epoxy zinc phosphate to APAS specification 2971with a dry film thickness of 45 microns .
Inorganic zinc silicate Blast clean to recommendations of AS 1627.4 to grade Sa of AS 1627.9 and prime with one coat of inorganic zinc silicate to APAS specification 2908 with a dry film thickness of 75 microns .
Site work : After erection , repair any damage to the shop coating and apply the coating , if any , omitted at site connections .
Time delay : Prime the steel surface as soon as possible after surface preparation and prior to any deterioration of the surface .
If the surface is contaminated or rust bloomed , repeat the surface preparation before applying the primer .
CONTRACTOR ’ S RESPONSIBILITIES - 20.3 WITNESS POINT Applicators are to be PCCP accredited in the category appropriate to the works .
PROTECTIVE COATINGS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 196 Witness point : Provide documentary evidence of PCCP accreditation before commencing protective coatings work .
Provide all protective coating materials , abrasives , labour , supervision , equipment and materials required to complete all work as specified .
Submit : - written details of plant and equipment to be used for the work , - written details of experience in similar projects , - ITPs ( Inspection & Test Plans ) detailing all procedures and test plans to be undertaken to complete the project .
- Details of Environmental Policy .
Contractor must present details of procedures to protect the environment .
- Details of warranties outlining the responsibilities of the Coating Manufacturer and the Contractors period of warranty .
20.3.1 Pre Job Meeting Attend a pre job meeting with the Superintendent and the coating applicator , to review this specification and the coating contractors ITPs .
Any variation proposed shall be discussed at this meeting .
No variation shall be allowed unless agreed at this meeting and formally signed off .
20.3.2 Standard Of Workmanship Follow the protective coating manufacturer ’ s instructions pertaining to mixing , application , drying time etc .
Produce a satisfactory end result acceptable to the superintendent .
Compliance with the protective coating manufacturer ’ s instructions shall not absolve the Contractor of responsibility to rectify unacceptable work .
Perform all work in a safe and workmanlike manner .
All phases of the work shall be available for observation by a representative of the coatings manufacturer as well as by the Superintendent or their appointed Inspector .
Use personnel experienced in their particular field to carry out all work on surface preparation , protective coatings application and inspection .
The Superintendent may require the Contractor to produce proof of the tradesmen ’ s qualifications .
20.3.3 Abbreviations ACA Australasian Corrosion Association DFT Dry Film Thickness EPA Environment Protection Authority EPG Emergency Procedure Guide to AS 1678 ICorr Institute of Corrosion , UK ITPs Inspection Test Plans JSA Job Safety Analysis NACE National Association of Corrosion Engineers , USA NCR Non-Conformance Report PCCP Painting Contractors Certification Program ppm Parts per million QA Quality Assurance SDS Safety Data Sheets – formerly known as Material Safety Data Sheets SWMS Safe Work Method Statement TDS Total Dissolved Solids SAFETY 20.4 Comply with Work Health and Safety ( NUL ) Act , Regulations , Codes of Practice , Policies and Procedures applicable to the works at all times during the execution of the works .
Abrasive blasting and protective coatings application must include safety precautions necessitated by the presence of air-hydrocarbon mixtures or other flammable materials .
Thinners , Solvents And Coating Material Safety All thinners , solvents , primers and coating materials shall be regarded as hazardous materials and their use and storage shall comply with AS 1940 , the coating manufacturer ’ s recommendations and Dangerous Goods Regulations .
All caution notices on the product containers and material labels shall be strictly observed .
The SDS for all chemicals , including paints and solvents , used and stored on site must be registered with the site manager prior to the product arriving on site .
A copy of the SDS and the applicable Emergency Procedure Guide ( EPG ) as per AS 1678 must accompany all chemicals during transport .
Keep SDS for all paints as reference .
TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT 20.5 Comply with the Traffic Management requirements in PROVISION FOR TRAFFIC .
Obtain a Permit to Work in a Road Reserve and comply with any conditions imposed in the Permit .
Provide a Traffic Management Plan that caters for vehicular traffic .
Include provisions in the Traffic Management Plan for pedestrians , cyclists and water transport if pedestrians , cyclists or water craft might be affected by the works .
BARRIERS 20.6 Install barriers and warning signs for fire hazards , dust , abrasive blasting operations , dangerous fumes and the like , during blasting and coating activities .
Protect adjacent areas and equipment from abrasive blasting grit , water , and detritus and overspray by the erection of screens , hoardings , or drop sheets .
Remove all materials used to mask areas requiring protection during blasting and painting operations upon completion .
PROTECTIVE COATINGS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 197 EQUIPMENT 20.7 Use equipment including , but not necessarily limited to , ladders , scaffold , compressors and electrical and pneumatic equipment conforming to the requirements in force by the appropriate statutory Acts , regulations and by-laws .
Maintain and use this equipment in strict accordance with any safety regulations or requirements pertaining to them .
Do not use ladders as work platforms .
All equipment including dust collectors , air compressors , lifting devices etc .
shall conform to the relevant Standards for safety and performance .
Use air supply hoses and couplings of the anti- static type which are safety wired .
Note : Compliance to site safety instructions will be in addition to regulatory requirements .
20.7.1 Personal Air Supply Where personal breathing equipment is used , the operator ’ s hood or headgear shall be ventilated by clean , cool , oil free air served through a regulator filter .
Air supply must be of respiratory quality .
20.7.2 Equipment – Witness Point Use compressors used for blasting , cleaning and spray painting which have oil and moisture separators with properly maintained filters in the airlines .
Perform oil carry-over tests prior to the start of blasting and coating application and on a weekly basis thereafter .
Record the results .
Witness Point – Give notice so that this test may be witnessed by the Superintendent or their nominated representative .
ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS 20.8 Comply with coating manufacturers ’ specifications , particularly with reference to ambient environmental conditions , such as temperature , relative humidity and substrate temperature , prevailing at the location where surface preparation and coating system application is to take place .
Provide copies of Environmental Test Reports to AS 3894 , Parts 10 , 11 , and 12 .
In addition provide Reports to AS 3894 Parts 13 and 14 for structural steel .
Consider the movements of the tide or work to be conducted on components located in tidal waters .
SURFACE PREPARATION 20.9 Remove all substrate surface defects including weld spatter , slag , burrs , fins , sharp edges and corrosion product .
Remove all surface contaminants such as oil , grease and dirt in accordance with AS 1627.1 using a suitable solvent , oil emulsifier , alkaline degreaser or other approved product .
Assess compatibility and substrate and inter-coat adhesion between the original and new coating systems during maintenance activities by coating a test patch and assessing compatibility and adhesion by ASTM D5064 .
Plan and execute all works so as to minimize the possibility of pollution of the Site and adjoining areas from chemicals , dangerous goods and potential contaminants such as dust from abrasive blasting .
20.9.1 Preparation Of Surfaces Prior To Blast Cleaning Permanent welds shall be smooth and shall merge evenly with joining surfaces .
All edges , including drilled or punched holes shall be de-burred and rounded where practical to a minimum of 2mm radius .
20.9.2 Abrasive Blasting – Hold Point Abrasives shall conform to AS 1627.4 and shall be free from oil , grease , and moisture .
The abrasive shall contain no more than 50 ppm soluble salts ( TDS ) and free from greater than 100 ppm lead .
Do not use silica sand and other potentially silica containing materials .
Do not use zinc or copper slag .
Abrasive shall be capable of providing the specified profile .
Do not carry out abrasive blasting if : - The relative humidity is above 85 % .
- The metal temperature is less than 3ºC above the dew point .
Blow down blasted surfaces with clean , dry compressed air , or vacuum , or wipe free of dust and spent abrasive media , before any coatings are applied .
Hold Point - At the completion of the final blast and prior to coating application , the surface profile of each item shall be measured according to Method A , Profile Replicating Tape , of AS 3894.5 .
Provide documentary confirmation that the surface is suitable for the application of the specified coatings .
This shall be identified as a Hold Point in the contractor ’ s ITP .
20.9.3 Spot And Whip Abrasive Blasting Use spot blasting of localised corrosion or coating breakdown to provide a profile suitable for the coating system being applied during maintenance coating activities .
Feather the perimeter of the spot blasted area over a 50mm width from where the original coating system is sound .
Whip blast the generally sound coating surface after spot blasting to provide an adequate key for the coating system being applied .
Where whip blasting is not possible , gloss on sound coating may be removed by power tool or hand sanding .
PROTECTIVE COATINGS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 198 20.9.4 Alternate Surface Preparation – Hold Point Hold Point - Do not use forms of surface preparation other than abrasive blasting , such as bristle blaster , needle guns , power tool cleaning and hand tool cleaning , without written permission from the Superintendent .
Alternate methods of surface preparation must be included in the Contractor ’ s ITP .
20.9.5 Water Washing and Jetting Low pressure water washing Low pressure water washing operates at pressures up to 35 MPa ( up to 5000 psi ) .
Used to remove loose millscale , rust , paint chalking and soluble salts .
High pressure water washing For effective high pressure water washing 35 MPa to 70 MPa ( 5000 to 10,000 psi ) .
Used to remove light to moderate rust scale , concrete splashes , severe marine fouling and loose coatings .
High pressure water jetting High pressure water jetting operates at 70 MPa to 210 MPa ( 10 000 to 30 000 psi ) .
Used to remove some rust , intact paints and contaminants .
Ultra high pressure water jetting Ultra high pressure water jetting , equipment needs to operate above 210 MPa ( 30 000 psi ) .
Used to remove rust and coatings and to prepare steel to a cleanliness level close to near white metal .
Alternate methods Alternate methods of surface preparation must be included in the Contractor ’ s ITP .
Final rinse To avoid flash rusting final rinse should employ the use of demineralised water .
APPLICATION OF PROTECTIVE 20.10 COATINGS 20.10.1 Atmospheric Conditions The atmospheric conditions which prevail during the application of coatings shall be such that the surface being coated is completely free of moisture .
Do not apply coatings if : - The ambient temperature is below 5ºC , unless otherwise permitted by the material supplier ’ s data sheet or - The relative humidity is above 85 % or - The metal temperature is less than 3ºC above the dew point or - The ambient temperature is above 35ºC , unless otherwise permitted by the material supplier ’ s data sheet or - Any combination of the above .
Record the ambient conditions both before and at the completion of each day 's coating and at three hourly intervals during coating .
Submit this information with other daily records specified .
Refer to Contractor Records in Inspection And Testing .
20.10.2 Coating – Witness Point – Hold Point Witness Point – Provide copies of specifications for application of protective coatings from the manufacturers of the products used .
Provide copies of manufacturers ’ product technical data sheets for all products used .
Have all coating materials delivered to the factory , workshop or site in the manufacturers ’ original containers with the labels intact and seals unbroken .
All materials which have been stored for longer than the specified shelf life or exposed to conditions outside the permissible storage conditions shall be discarded and replaced .
Stored , mix , thin , apply and use all paints strictly in accordance with the coating manufacturers ’ recommendations .
Hold Point - Provide coating manufacturers ’ written approval for use before using any other additives ( eg promoters , accelerators etc ) .
Do not mix or use coating materials which have livered , gelled or otherwise deteriorated .
Do not exceed the pot life of catalysed materials corresponding to the working temperature .
When the pot life limit is reached , the spray pot shall be emptied , remaining material discarded , the equipment cleaned , material line shall be emptied and flushed out with nominated solvent/cleaner , and new material mixed and catalysed .
20.10.3 Thinners Use only thinners and dilutents from the same manufacturer as the specified coating for that coating .
Use these only at the rate recommended by the coating manufacturer for the specific application .
20.10.4 Stripe Coating Stripe coat all metal with edges ( 100mm either side of the weld or edge ) , where practical , prior to applying the remainder of the protective coating .
Apply the stripe coating by brush or spray .
Use the specified coating materials .
Ensure the correct DFT for each coat is achieved .
20.10.5 Multiple Coats Where multiple coats of paint of the same type are specified , each successive coat of paint shall show , where possible , a distinguishable difference in colour to the one over which it is applied .
Comply with coating manufacturer 's recommended recoating times for the ambient conditions and temperatures prevailing at the time of coating .
If this can not be achieved and the recoat period is exceeded submit a Non PROTECTIVE COATINGS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 199 Conformance Report and Corrective Action Report .
20.10.6 Alternate Coating – Hold Point Hold Point - Do not use coating materials other than specified , without written permission from the Superintendent .
Alternate coating materials must be included in the Contractor ’ s ITP .
20.10.7 Coating Defects – Hold Point – Witness Point Adhesion of coatings shall be sound throughout .
All coatings shall be free of sagging , pinholes , dry overspray and other defects .
Hold Point – Provide details of repairs required and procedures and processes proposed for making the repairs to the Superintendent prior to making any repairs .
Any requirements for the repair of protective coatings shall be identified as a Hold Point in the contractor 's ITP .
Marking of defective areas shall be made using a marker compatible with the coating over which it is applied .
Crayons and paint pens shall not be used .
Witness Point - This compatibility between marker and coating is to be confirmed by the coating manufacturer .
Provide written evidence of this compatibility if requested by the Superintendent .
Sand , or whip blast , and recoat surfaces contaminated by embedded dust to the specified DFT using the full system selected .
If the defects can not be rectified through the above means , then the Contractor is required to submit a Non Conformance Report and a Corrective Action Report .
20.10.8 Transit And Erection Damage And Field Weld Margins Spot abrasive blast all coating damaged during transit and erection , including field weld margins , such that it is thoroughly cleaned .
Restore the area according to the coating manufacturer 's recommendations with a material compatible with , and providing at least the same performance as , the parent coating .
20.10.9 Surfaces Not To Be Coated Do not blast or coat the following surfaces and materials unless specifically directed by the Superintendent : - Stainless Steel - Other surfaces nominated by the Superintendent .
Inspection And Testing 20.10.10 All work performed may be subject to inspection by the Superintendent or a nominated representative .
Ensure all necessary inspections are carried out .
QUALITY ASSURANCE AND 20.11 TRACEABILITY The Superintendent will give preference to Protective Coating System manufacturers and applicators certified to ISO 9000 Series or equivalent , or holding approval from the Paint Contractors ' Certification Program ( Class 4 ) .
ITP , JSA AND SWMS – HOLD POINT 20.12 Hold Point – Provide ITPs , JSAs , a SWMS and other quality control procedures and documents to be used during protective coating systems application .
These must be approved prior to commencement of work .
CONTRACTOR RECORDS – WITNESS 20.13 POINT – HOLD POINT Maintain written records of the work so that complete traceability of all work and materials provided under this Specification is maintained .
Use the relevant sections of AS 3894.10 , AS 3894.11 & AS 3894.12 QA report forms as a basis of this record keeping format for all protective coating work under this contract .
Use AS 3894.13 and AS 3894.14 , in addition to the preceding Australian Standards , for structural steel work coated under this contract .
Witness Point - Maintain these reports on a daily basis .
Submit them to the Superintendent when requested , or , if not specifically requested , at least weekly .
Hold Point - Provide copies of all NCRs ( Non Conformance Reports ) immediately they are completed or received .
The NCRs must detail the non-conformance and be accompanied by a Corrective Action Report ( CAR ) which is to detail the action proposed to be undertaken to rectify the non-conformance .
20.13.1 Film Thickness – Hold Point – Witness Point The film thickness is the minimum average dry film thickness , with an exception criteria as defined in AS 3894.3 , including primer coats specified in the painting system .
Hold Point - Final acceptance of each increment of work will not be made until the dry film thickness meets or exceeds the specified thickness .
Regardless of the number of coats specified , additional coats shall be applied as may be necessary to achieve the specified thickness , at the contractor 's expense .
Witness Point - Provide and operate wet film and dry film thickness gauges of approved types to ensure the correct thickness of each coat and the full system is achieved .
Provide details of the gauges proposed for use .
Use an electronic thickness gauge to determine the total dry film thickness on metallic substrates .
Calibrate the gauges in accordance with AS 3894.3 ( dry film thickness ) or AS/NZS 1580.108.1 ( wet film thickness ) .
PROTECTIVE COATINGS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 200 20.13.2 Inspector – Hold Point Appoint an inspector of coatings , qualified or certified under ACA , NACE , or ICorr , for inspection and testing of substrate preparation and protective coating systems applied under this contract .
Hold Point – Provide the name and qualifications of the inspector prior to commencement of work .
All work may be subject to inspection by the Superintendent .
This shall not relieve the Contractor of his own Quality Assurance/Quality Control responsibilities .
HANDLING OF FINISH COATED ITEMS 20.14 Handle with care all metalwork that has been coated to preserve the coating in the best practicable condition .
Do not handle coated metalwork until the coating has dried hard .
Use web slings or slings covered with a rubber hose or similar soft material for the handling of finish coated items .
Protect finish coated items with soft material such as cloth , carpet or rubber sheeting on areas of contact ( eg .
wooden supports and holding down chains or slings ) during transport and storage .
Repair and make good any damage to finish coated items .
Items with any damage caused by insufficient care are to have the entire coating removed and be recoated in accordance with this specification at the Contractor ’ s expense .
OTHER REQUIREMENTS 20.15 Refer to PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS section of Request for Tender document .
NOTES Coating systems are to be compatible with level of surface preparation available or proposed .
Refer to NT CLIMATE ZONES TABLE .
PROTECTIVE COATINGS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 201 TABLES - PROTECTIVE COATING SPECIFICATIONS - SYSTEMS AND APPROVED PRODUCTS 20.16 Table 20.1 - Corrosivity Categories of Areas of the NT ARID REGIONS : Corrosivity Category C2 Low Areas south of , and including , Tennant Creek .
( NTCZ01 ) INLAND REGIONS : Corrosivity Category C3 Medium Areas north of Tennant Creek and south of , and including , Katherine and areas more than 50 km from the coast or tidal estuaries .
( NTCZ02 ) COASTAL / TROPICAL : Corrosivity Category C5-M Very High and T ( Inland Tropical ) Areas north of Katherine and areas up to 50 km from the coast or tidal estuaries .
( NTCZ03 & NTCZ04 ) Table 20.2 - Protective Coating Specification # PS1 General Coating Specification for Steel – Arid Regions Corrosivity Category C2 Low Areas Coating system for Steel where Abrasive Blasting can not be undertaken .
Typical Exposure : Atmospheric exposure for arid regions including areas of Alice Springs , Tennant Creek and all central Australian locations .
Areas south of , and including , Tennant Creek .
( NTCZ01 ) Surface Preparation Surfaces to be clean , free of oil and grease and all contaminants and salts .
All loose and flaking coating to be removed .
All edges to be feathered back to a sound tightly adhered surface .
All corrosion to be removed by power or hand tool cleaning to AS 1627.2 and AS 1627.9 Class St 3 standard .
Protective Coating System as per AS/NZS 2312 1st Coat DFT in µm Int ’ l Paints Dulux Jotun PPG Industries Hempel Wattyl Epoxy Mastic 100- 150 Interplus 1180 Durebild STE Jotamastic 90 Amerlock 400 Hempadur Quattro 17634 Epinamel DTM 985 Optional 2nd Coat Finish Coat Polyurethane 75 Interthane 990 Weathermax HBR Hardtop Flexi Amershield Hempathane HS 55610 Poly U750 Total DFT in µm 175- 225 Notes : Apply all coatings in strict accordance with the manufacturers ’ technical data sheets .
Provide coatings manufacturers ’ recommendations prior to commencing work .
The coating systems in these tables form part of , and should be read in conjunction with , the other clauses in this work section .
PROTECTIVE COATINGS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 202 Table 20.3 - Protective Coating Specification # PS2 General Coating Specification for Steel – Arid Regions Corrosivity Category C2 Low Areas Coating system for Steel where Abrasive Blasting can be undertaken .
Typical Exposure : Atmospheric exposure for arid regions including areas of Alice Springs , Tennant Creek and all central Australian locations .
Areas south of , and including , Tennant Creek .
( NTCZ01 ) Surface Preparation Surfaces to be clean , free of oil and grease and all contaminants and salts Abrasive blast to AS 1627.4 & AS 1627.9 Sa 2½ , near white metal with angular surface profile 40 – 75 microns .
Protective Coating System as per AS/NZS 2312 1st Coat DFT in µm Int ’ l Paints Dulux Jotun PPG Industries Hempel Wattyl Zinc Rich Epoxy Primer 75 Interzinc 52 Zincanode 402 Barrier Plus Sigmazinc 471 Hempadur Zinc 17360 Galvit EP100 2nd Coat Finish Coat Polyurethane 75 Interthane 990 Weathermax HBR Hardtop Flexi Amershield Hempathane HS 55610 Poly U750 Total DFT in µm 150 Notes : Apply all coatings in strict accordance with the manufacturers ’ technical data sheets .
Provide coatings manufacturers ’ recommendations prior to commencing work .
The coating systems in these tables form part of , and should be read in conjunction with , the other clauses in this work section .
PROTECTIVE COATINGS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 203 Table 20.4 - Protective Coating Specification # PS3 General Coating Specification for Steel – Inland Regions Corrosivity Category C3 Medium Areas Coating system for Steel where Abrasive Blasting can not be undertaken .
Typical Exposure : Atmospheric exposure for inland regions including Katherine and other inland regions .
Areas north of Tennant Creek and south of , and including , Katherine and areas more than 50 km from the coast or tidal estuaries .
( NTCZ02 ) Surface Preparation Surfaces to be clean , free of oil and grease and all contaminants and salts .
All loose and flaking coating to be removed .
All edges to be feathered back to a sound tightly adhered surface .
All corrosion to be removed by power or hand tool cleaning to AS 1627.2 and AS 1627.9 Class St 3 standard .
Protective Coating System as per AS/NZS 2312 1st Coat DFT in µm Int ’ l Paints Dulux Jotun PPG Industries Hempel Wattyl Epoxy Mastic 75- 100 Interplus 356 Durebild STE Jotamastic 90 Amerlock 400 Hempadur Quattro 17364 Epinamel DTS 680 2nd Coat Intermediate Epoxy Mastic 75- 100 Interplus 356 Durebild STE Jotamastic 90 Amerlock 400 Hempadur Quattro 17364 Epinamel DTS 680 Optional Top Coat Finish Coat Polyurethane 75 Interthane 990 Weathermax HBR Hardtop Flexi Amershield Hempathane HS 55610 Poly U 750 Total DFT in µm 225- 275 Notes : Apply all coatings in strict accordance with the manufacturers ’ technical data sheets .
Provide coatings manufacturers ’ recommendations prior to commencing work .
The coating systems in these tables form part of , and should be read in conjunction with , the other clauses in this work section .
PROTECTIVE COATINGS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 204 Table 20.5 - Protective Coating Specification # PS4 General Coating Specification for Steel – Inland Regions Corrosivity Category C3 Medium Areas Coating system for Steel where Abrasive Blasting can be undertaken .
Typical Exposure : Atmospheric exposure for inland regions including Katherine and other inland regions .
Areas north of Tennant Creek and south of , and including , Katherine and areas more than 50 km from the coast or tidal estuaries .
( NTCZ02 ) Surface Preparation Surfaces to be clean , free of oil and grease and all contaminants and salts .
Abrasive blast to AS 1627.4 & AS 1627.9 Sa 2½ , near white metal with angular surface profile 40 – 75 microns .
Protective Coating System as per AS/NZS 2312 1st Coat DFT in µm Int ’ l Paints Dulux Jotun PPG Industries Hempel Wattyl PRIMER Zinc Rich Epoxy 50- 75 Interzinc 52 Zincanode 402 Barrier Plus Sigmazinc 471 Hempadur Zinc 17360 Epinamel PR360ZPS 2nd Coat Intermediate High Build Epoxy 100- 150 Interplus 1180 Duremax GPE Jotacote Universal Amerlock 400 Hempadur Quattro 17364 Epinamel DTM 985 Optional Top Coat Finish Coat Polyurethane 75 Interthane 990 Weathermax HBR Hardtop Flexi Amershield Hempathane HS 55610 Poly U750 Total DFT in µm 225- 300 Notes : Apply all coatings in strict accordance with the manufacturers ’ technical data sheets .
Provide coatings manufacturers ’ recommendations prior to commencing work .
The coating systems in these tables form part of , and should be read in conjunction with , the other clauses in this work section .
PROTECTIVE COATINGS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 205 Table 20.6 - Protective Coating Specification # PS5 General Coating Specification for Steel – Coastal Regions Corrosivity Category C5M Very High and T ( Inland Tropical ) Areas Coating system for Steel where Abrasive Blasting can not be undertaken .
Typical Exposure : Atmospheric exposure for coastal regions including Darwin and other coastal establishments .
Areas north of Katherine and areas up to 50 km from the coast or tidal estuaries .
( NTCZ03 & NTCZ04 ) Surface Preparation Surfaces to be clean , free of oil and grease and all contaminants and salts .
All loose and flaking coating to be removed .
All edges to be feathered back to a sound tightly adhered surface .
All corrosion to be removed by power or hand tool cleaning to AS 1627.2 and AS 1627.9 Class St 3 standard .
Protective Coating System as per AS/NZS 2312 1st Coat DFT in µm Int ’ l Paints Dulux Jotun PPG Industries Hempel Wattyl Epoxy Mastic MIO 125- 150 Interplus 356 Durebild STE MIO Jotacote 605 MIO Amerlock 400 MIO Hempadur Mastic 45881 Epinamel DTM 985 MIO 2nd Coat Intermediate High Build Epoxy 100- 150 Interplus 1180 Duremax GPE Jotacote Universal Amerlock 400 Hempadur Quattro 17364 Epinamel DTM 985 Optional Top Coat Finish Coat Polyurethane 75 Interthane 990 Weathermax HBR Hardtop Flexi Amershield Hempathane HS 55610 Poly U750 Total DFT in µm 325- 375 Notes : Apply all coatings in strict accordance with the manufacturers ’ technical data sheets .
Provide coatings manufacturers ’ recommendations prior to commencing work .
The coating systems in these tables form part of , and should be read in conjunction with , the other clauses in this work section .
PROTECTIVE COATINGS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 206 Table 20.7 - Protective Coating Specification # PS6 General Coating Specification for Steel – Coastal Regions Corrosivity Category C5M Very High and T ( Inland Tropical ) Areas Coating system for Steel where Abrasive Blasting can be undertaken .
Typical Exposure : Atmospheric exposure for coastal regions including Darwin and other coastal establishments .
Areas north of Katherine and areas up to 50 km from the coast or tidal estuaries .
( NTCZ03 & NTCZ04 ) Surface Preparation Surfaces to be clean , free of oil and grease and all contaminants and salts .
Abrasive blast to AS 1627.4 & AS 1627.9 Sa 2½ , near white metal with angular surface profile 40 – 75 microns .
Protective Coating System as per AS/NZS 2312 1st Coat DFT in µm Int ’ l Paints Dulux Jotun PPG Industries Hempel Wattyl PRIMER Zinc Rich Epoxy 50- 75 Interzinc 52 Zincanode 402 Barrier Plus Sigmazinc 471 Hempadur Zinc 17360 Galvit EP100 2nd Coat Intermediate High Build MIO Epoxy 150- 200 Interplus 1180 Duremax GPE MIO Penguard Express MIO Amerlock 400 MIO Hempadur Mastic 45881 Epinamel DTM 985 MIO Optional Top Coat Finish Coat Polyurethane 75 Interthane 990 Weathermax HBR Hardtop Flexi Amershield Hempathane HS 55610 Poly U 750 Total DFT in µm 275- 350 Notes : Apply all coatings in strict accordance with the manufacturers ’ technical data sheets .
Provide coatings manufacturers ’ recommendations prior to commencing work .
The coating systems in these tables form part of , and should be read in conjunction with , the other clauses in this work section .
PROTECTIVE COATINGS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 207 Table 20.8 - Protective Coating Specification # PS7 General Existing Hot Dipped Galvanised Steel Subject to Severe - Atmospheric Exposure – New and Maintenance Areas Coating system for galvanized steel .
Surface Preparation Surfaces to be clean , free of oil and grease , salts and all other contaminants .
Abrasive Sweep ( brush ) blast to AS 1627.4 Appendix ‘ D ’ to achieve an angular surface profile using garnet to 25-40 microns .
Rust affected areas to be spot blasted to AS 1627.4 & AS 1627.9 Sa 2½ with an angular surface profile of 40-75 microns .
Protective Coating System as per AS/NZS 2312 1st Coat DFT in µm Int ’ l Paints Dulux Jotun PPG Industries Hempel Wattyl Primer Zinc Phosphate Epoxy Primer 50 - 75 Intergard 251 Durepon P14 Pengard Special Grey Sigmacover 280LT Hempadur 15590 Epinamel PR 250 2nd Coat Finish Coat High Build Epoxy 300 - 350 Interzone 505GF Durebild STE GF Jotamastic 87 GF Sigmashield 825 LT ( Amerlock 2K Glass Flake ) Hempadur Multi- Strength 45540 Epinamel DTM 985 Total DFT In µm 350 - 475 Allowance should be made for the galvanizing approximately 85 microns .
Notes : Apply all coatings in strict accordance with the manufacturers ’ technical data sheets .
Provide coatings manufacturers ’ recommendations prior to commencing work .
The coating systems in these tables form part of , and should be read in conjunction with , the other clauses in this work section .
PROTECTIVE COATINGS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 208 Table 20.9 - Protective Coating Specification # PS8 General Repair specification for wharf structures , steel piling , ship loading facilities , oil spill clean up equipment and plant piping operating at < 40°C .
Areas Marine environment : onshore and offshore Surface Preparation Abrasive blast clean to remove all previous coatings and corrosion products .
Bevel all edges .
Surface shall be high pressure water blasted at a minimum pressure of 3,000 psi then tested to ensure free from soluble salts ( see Clause 6 ) .
Abrasive blast clean to AS 1627.4 Class 2½ Surface profile 30-60µm Protective Coating System as per AS/NZS 2312 Protective Coating – PS8.1 Steel with light to minimal pitting 1st Coat DFT in µ Int ’ l Paints Dulux Jotun PPG Hempel Wattyl High build epoxy 200-250 Interzone 954 Durebild STE Glass Flake Marathon 500 Sigmashield 880 Hempadur Quattro 17634 Epinamel DTM 985 2nd Coat High build epoxy 200-250 Interzone 954 Durebild STE Glass Flake Marathon 500 Sigmashield 880 Hempadur Quattro 17634 Epinamel DTM 985 Total DFT 400-500 Protective Coating System as per AS/NZS 2312 Protective Coating – PS8.2 Heavily pitted steel 1st Coat DFT in µ Int ’ l Paints Dulux Jotun PPG Hempel Wattyl High build epoxy 450-500 Interzone 954 Durebild STE Glass Flake Marathon 500 Sigmashield 880 Hempadur Quattro 17634 Epinamel DTM 985 2nd Coat High build epoxy 450- 5000 Interzone 954 Durebild STE Glass Flake Marathon 500 Sigmashield 880 Hempadur Quattro 17634 Epinamel DTM 985 Total DFT 900- 1000 Notes : Apply all coatings in strict accordance with the manufacturers ’ technical data sheets .
Provide coatings manufacturers ’ recommendations prior to commencing work .
The coating systems in these tables form part of , and should be read in conjunction with , the other clauses in this work section .
PROTECTIVE COATINGS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 209 Table 20.10 - Protective Coating Specification # PS9 General Ultra high build epoxy for coating new piles , and other surfaces in underwater or splash zone environment .
Areas Underwater & splash zone Surface Preparation Abrasive blast clean to remove all corrosion products and/or previous coatings .
Bevel all edges .
Surface shall be high pressure water blasted at a minimum pressure of 3,000 psi then tested to ensure free from soluble salts ( see Clause 6 ) .
Abrasive blast clean to AS 1627.4 Class 2½ 75-100µm ( angular profile ) Protective Coating System as per AS/NZS 2312 1st Coat DFT in µ Int ’ l Paints Dulux Jotun PPG Hempel Wattyl Primer Holding Primer ( if required ) 30-50 Interline 982 Luxepoxy 66 N/A Sigmacover 280LT Hempadur 15590 Epinamel PR 250 ( thinned ) 2nd Coat Ultra High Build Epoxy 1000-1500 Interzone 485 Luxepoxy UHB Jotacote UHB Sigmashield 880 Hempadur Multi Strength 45540 ( 2 coats of 500 um ) Epinamel UHB 1000 Total DFT 1030 - 1550 Notes : Apply all coatings in strict accordance with the manufacturers ’ technical data sheets .
Provide coatings manufacturers ’ recommendations prior to commencing work .
The coating systems in these tables form part of , and should be read in conjunction with , the other clauses in this work section .
PROTECTIVE COATINGS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 210 Table 20.11 - Protective Coating Specification # PS10 General Repair coating for cylindrical piling using petrolatum tape system , for use in very exposed sites and harsh environments .
Areas Very exposed sites and harsh environments .
Surface Preparation Remove all loose rust , original coating , marine growth etc , by scraping , chipping , water blast cleaning or ship ’ s hull scrubber .
Close examination , after preparation , to ensure thoroughly clean surface without growth , sharp or protruding edges .
System Primer Denso Seashield Primer ( or equal approved ) Tape Denso Seashield Tape ( or equal approved ) Overlap of 55 % Outer Cover Denso Seashield 2000 FD Outer Cover ( or equal approved ) Fixed with 316 stainless bolts Note : Inspection points as per Denso Seashield published instructions .
Notes : Apply all coatings in strict accordance with the manufacturers ’ technical data sheets .
Provide coatings manufacturers ’ recommendations prior to commencing work .
The coating systems in these tables form part of , and should be read in conjunction with , the other clauses in this work section .
MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 211 MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT 21 .
The following Measurement and Payment clauses refer to the specification sections of the same name , however , the clause numbers do not match the section numbers of the same title .
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 21.1 Environmental Management Generally Not measured separately .
Include the cost of environmental management in the rates for the applicable items .
21.1.1 Environmental Management Plan Measured as an item .
21.1.2 Cleaning of Vehicles and Plant Measured by number cleaned .
Vehicles and plant items are priced separately .
21.1.3 Establishment Mobilisation : Not measured separately included in rates for applicable items .
Measured per kilometre , one way , 40 km from the regional post office to the furthest location of the initial work order , along the shortest practical route for the applicable work crew .
Mobilisation will not be paid for work within 40 km of the regional post office Or determined by regional requirements .
When side roads are included in the work order , mobilisation will be paid for the one way distance from the beginning of the side road to the furthermost point of the work .
Where subsequent work orders are issued , the distance is calculated from the furthest location of the original work site to the furthest location of the new work site along the shortest practical route .
Kilometre measurement will be consistent with the Department ’ s Permanent Reference Points ( PRP ’ s ) , Or determined by regional requirements , ( If applicable ) Refer to PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS section of Request for Tender .
Include in the rates , the cost of escort as required .
Refer to Figure 20.1 Mobilisation Diagrams at Clause 20.22 .
Demobilisation : Not measured separately .
Include all costs associated with demobilisation in with the costs of mobilisation .
Officer and Vehicle 21.1.4 Officer and vehicle to be paid for on hourly rate inclusive of vehicle and reports .
21.1.5 Rehabilitation of Existing Material Extraction Areas Measured by hectare rehabilitated .
21.1.6 Progressive Rehabilitation of New Material Extraction Areas Not measured separately .
Include the cost of progressively rehabilitating new Material Extraction Areas in the cost of gravel supply etc .
Negotiated Rate 21.2 Where a type of works is described but does not appear in the schedule of rates or is not defined in the specification and not included in the Schedule of Rates items , a rate shall be negotiated to cover the works required .
The item of works may then be included in the contract Schedule of Rates at the Superintendents discretion .
PROVISION FOR TRAFFIC 21.3 21.3.1 Traffic Management Plan Measured as an item .
Includes Traffic Control Diagrams .
Provision For Traffic Not measured separately .
Included in rates for applicable items .
Specific Traffic Control Diagrams Measured by number .
Payment will be made progressively in proportion to the value of work carried out .
Variable message boards Measured as an item .
21.3.2 Provision for Traffic – Rural Areas Not measured as a separate item for work in rural areas .
Allow for in other items .
21.3.3 Provision for Traffic – Urban Areas To be at a negotiated rate per work site , or as nominated in the Schedule of Rates 21.3.4 Gravelling of Side Tracks for Detours Measured in square metres for the specified gravel thickness and width .
Make allowance for supply , delivery , and compaction of material .
TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT 21.4 Complex Traffic Management items are inclusive of minor traffic management requirements for the entire site of works .
The following item/s shall be submitted to Superintendent for approval prior to use ; 21.4.1 Site Specific Traffic Management Plan and Traffic Control Diagrams Measured by number .
Payment will include the labour , equipment and materials required to compile and submit a site specific Traffic Management Plan and associated MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 212 TCDs , in accordance with the Provision for Traffic , to the Superintendent .
Note ; the Template TMP ’ s and Generic and TCD ’ s required under the Provision for Traffic Clause 2.5.1 are not to be classed as chargeable items .
EARTHWORKS AND DRAINAGE 21.5 21.5.1 Formation Width Clearing Measured by kilometre for 1 side of the road .
21.5.2 Mulching Measured by kilometre for 1 side of the road .
21.5.3 Earthworks in Cut – General Material Measured in in-situ cubic metres .
21.5.4 Earthworks in Cut - Rock Measured in in-situ cubic metres .
Payment only for works directed by the Superintendent .
Payment for excavation only and payment for filling is at the rate for Select Fill .
21.5.5 Earthworks in Cut – Unsuitable Material and/or Weathered Rock Measured in in-situ cubic metres .
Payment only for works directed by the Superintendent .
Payment for excavation only , and payment for filling is at the rate for Select Fill .
21.5.6 Earthworks in Fill – Scour and Washout Repair Measured in compacted cubic metres .
21.5.7 Earthworks in Fill – General Filling Measured in compacted cubic metres .
21.5.8 Select Fill Measured in compacted cubic metres for material sourced and imported from a location up to a distance of 15 km from the site .
21.5.9 Select Fill Excess Haulage Measured in loose cubic metres per kilometre over and above importing distance of 15 km .
1 compacted cubic metre measured in place is nominated as equal to 1.5 loose cubic metre .
21.5.10 Removal of Excess Material Measured in in-situ cubic metres .
21.5.11 Preparation and Maintenance of Sub- grade Surface Measured in square metres .
21.5.12 Table Drains Measured by kilometre for 1 side of road .
21.5.13 Table Drain Offlets Measured by number .
21.5.14 Table Drain Blocks Measured by number .
A table drain block has approximate volume of 20 compacted cubic metres .
Allow for material sourced and imported from a location up to a distance of 15 km from the site .
Payment for excess haulage shall be at the rate for Select Fill Excess Haulage .
21.5.15 Stop Berms Measured by number .
A stop berm has approximate volume of 15 compacted cubic metres .
Allow for material sourced and imported from a location up to a distance of 15 km from the site .
Payment for excess haulage shall be at the rate for Select Fill Excess Haulage .
21.5.16 Catch Drains Measured in linear metres .
21.5.17 Repair Existing Formation Width Measured in linear metres .
21.5.18 Trim and Compact Unpaved Areas Measured in square metres .
21.5.19 Surface Formation Measured in linear metres .
CONFORMANCE TESTING 21.6 The Superintendent will pay for all conformance testing directly to the Panel Period Contractor selected to perform the conformance tests required under the contract and nominated as the Superintendent ’ s responsibility .
If any tests fail to meet specification , all retesting costs will be a negative variation to the contract .
When testing has been ordered and the site is not ready for testing at the time specified by the Contractor , the Contractor will bear the cost of time and travel incurred by the Panel Period Contractor and the Superintendent , where applicable .
21.6.1 Process Testing The Contractor is responsible for the ordering up and payment for all process tests carried out .
This is not measured separately .
Include the cost of process testing under the relevant items in the Schedule of Rates .
GRADING AND GRAVEL SHEETING 21.7 Generally ; include all costs within the rates , including the supply of materials , where applicable .
21.7.1 Gravel Resheeting Measured in square metres for 150 mm compacted thickness of gravel material in pavement and shoulder , where material is sourced and imported from a location up to a distance of 15 km from the site .
This item applies to lot section sizes greater than 600 m2 .
MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 213 Include in the rate , the pavement or shoulder materials outside the carriageway width not included in measurement .
21.7.2 Stockpile Gravel Material Measured in cubic metres in the stockpile .
Include in the rate , the locating , pushing up , stockpiling and trimming to a uniform shape .
21.7.3 Gravel Resheeting from Stockpile Measured in square metres for 150 mm compacted thickness of gravel material in pavement and shoulder , where material is imported from an existing gravel material stockpile up to a distance of 15 km from the site .
This item applies to lot section sizes greater than 600 m2 .
Include in the rate , the pavement or shoulder materials outside the carriageway width not included in measurement .
21.7.4 Gravel Repairs to Wash outs and Blow outs Measured in square metres for 150 mm compacted thickness of gravel material in pavement and shoulder , where material is sourced and imported from a location up to a distance of 15 km from the site .
This item applies to lot section sizes less than 600 m2 .
21.7.5 Gravel Repairs to Wash outs and Blow outs from Stockpile Measured in square metres for 150 mm compacted thickness of gravel material in pavement and shoulder , where material is imported from an existing gravel material stockpile up to a distance of 15 km from the site .
This item applies to lot section sizes less than 600m2 .
21.7.6 Gravel Excess Haulage Measured in loose cubic metres per kilometre over and above importing distance of 15 km .
1 compacted cubic metre measured in place is nominated as equal to 1.5 loose cubic metre .
21.7.7 Opening Grade - Unsealed Pavements Measured in kilometres .
21.7.8 Maintenance Grade - Carriageway - Unsealed Pavements Measured in kilometres .
21.7.9 Maintenance Grade – Between Inverts - Unsealed Pavements Measured in kilometres .
Include in the rate , the reinstatement of table drain blocks .
21.7.10 Maintenance Grade – Between Batters - Unsealed Pavements Measured in kilometres .
Include in the rate , the reinstatement of table drains and table drain blocks .
21.7.11 Full Maintenance Grade - Unsealed Pavements Measured in kilometres .
Include in the rate , the reinstatement of table drains , offlet drains and table drain blocks .
21.7.12 Grade and Roll - Unsealed Pavements Measured in kilometres .
Include in the rate , the reinstatement of table drain blocks .
21.7.13 Grade Water and Roll - Unsealed Pavements Measured in kilometres .
Include in the rate , the reinstatement of table drains and table drain blocks .
21.7.14 Rip and Re-compaction - Unsealed Pavements Measured in kilometres .
Include in the rate , the reinstatement of table drains , offlet drains and table drain blocks .
21.7.15 Reformation and Re-compaction - Unsealed Pavements Measured in square metres for nominated top up compacted thickness of gravel material of 50 mm or 100 mm .
Include in the rate , the reinstatement of table drains , offlet drains and table drain blocks .
21.7.16 Drainage Maintenance Grade – Sealed Road Shoulder Maintenance Measured in kilometres for 1 side of road .
Include in the rate , the reinstatement of table drains , offlet drains and table drain blocks .
21.7.17 Grade and Roll – Sealed Road Shoulder Maintenance Measured in kilometres for 1 side of road .
21.7.18 Grade Water and Roll – Sealed Road Shoulder Maintenance Measured in kilometres for 1 side of road .
Include in the rate , the reinstatement of table drain blocks .
21.7.19 Rip And Re-compaction – Sealed Road Shoulder Maintenance Measured in kilometres for 1 side of road .
Include in the rate , the reinstatement of table drains , offlet drains and table drain blocks .
21.7.20 Reformation and Re-compaction - Sealed Pavements Measured in square metres for nominated top up compacted thickness of gravel material of 50 mm or 100 mm .
Include in the rate , the reinstatement of table drains , offlet drains and table drain blocks .
MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 214 21.7.21 Protection of Road Furniture Not measured separately .
Include in the rates of other items for the removal , protection , storage , replacement of any road furniture damaged during the work , and the reinstatement of all removed road furniture items within the work zone .
STABILISATION MAINTENANCE 21.8 21.8.1 Supply and Spread Stabilising Agent For in-situ methods .
Measured in tonnes .
Determined by multiplying the application rate of cement and lime indicated in the procedure by the area to be treated .
21.8.2 Supply Top-up Materials Measured in square metres for nominated top up compacted thickness layer material of 50 mm in subgrade , pavement and shoulder , where material is sourced and imported from a location up to a distance of 15 km from the site .
21.8.3 Mixing , Compacting , Trimming and Curing Stabilised Layer Measured in square metres for 150 mm compacted thickness for each specified layer : 21.8.4 Mixing , Compacting and Trimming Pulverised Wet Mix Layer Measured in square metres for 150 mm compacted thickness for each specified layer .
BITUMINOUS SURFACE 21.9 MAINTENANCE 21.9.1 Pothole Patching , Edge Patching and Regulation Patching Measured in tonnes placed for the type specified .
Regulation patching will be measured as evidenced by weigh bridge dockets .
21.9.2 Reconstruction Patching Measured in square metres for the thickness specified and asphalt type specified .
21.9.3 Crack Sealing Measured in litres for the sealant specified .
Include all preparation , application , and blinding materials .
21.9.4 Profiling Work Measured in square metres for depth specified .
Includes profiling and material disposal .
SPRAY SEALING FOR MAINTENANCE 21.10 AREAS LESS THAN 300m2 21.10.1 General Measured in square metres for specified aggregate size Allow for surface preparation , precoat , binder , aggregate and all activities to achieve the final sealed surface .
21.10.2 Primer Seal Measured in square metres for the size nominated .
Allow for preparation , precoat , binder and aggregate and all activities to achieve the final sealed surface .
21.10.3 Reseal work Measured in square metres for the size nominated and binder type nominated .
Allow for preparation , precoat , binder and aggregate and all activities to achieve the final sealed surface .
Make allowance for existing texture .
Geofabric 21.10.4 Measured in square metres of completed area .
Make allowance for supply and placement .
Make allowance for overlapping at joins .
AREAS GREATER THAN 300m2 Preparation of Pavement 21.10.5 Measured in square metres of the prepared area .
21.10.6 Prime Coat , Enrichment Coat , Emulsion Coat , Primer Seal and Seal Coats Measured in litres at 15 ºC .
Adjust volumes using Table 7.10 - Bitumen Equivalent Volumes .
Refer to Clause 7.22 for Tables Payment calculated for each spray run .
Quantity sprayed is determined by dipping the sprayer tank for each spray run .
Allow for the temperature of the mixture in determining the actual application rate .
The designated volume is determined from the area sprayed and the rate of application indicated in the procedure for such area at 15 ºC .
Multipliers for reducing the volume of hot bitumen to the equivalent volume at 15 ºC are contained in Table 7.10 - Bitumen Equivalent Volumes .
For primers , enrichment coats , primer seals , polymer modified binder or emulsion seals the rate of application refers to the whole of the mixture .
Allow for adhesion agent in the rate for polymer modified binder .
Adjustment to payment for the sprayed volume when the spray application rates equal or exceed 0.8 L/m2 : − Application 90 % to 95 % of the designated volume : − Payment for the sprayed volume less one-half the difference between the sprayed volume and 95 % of the designated volume .
MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 215 ( Example : Application = 92 % of designated volume .
Pay for ( 92 % - 0.5 x ( 95 % - 92 % ) ) = 90.5 % of designated volume . )
− Application 95 % to 105 % of the designated volume : − Payment for the sprayed volume .
− Application 105 % to 115 % of the designated volume : − Payment for 105 % of the designated volume .
− Application less than 90 % or more than 115 % of the designated volume will be rejected .
Rectify by methods approved by the Superintendent , at the Contractor ’ s expense .
− Adjustment to payment for the sprayed volume when spray application rates below 0.8 L/m2 : − Application plus 0.05 L/m2 and minus 0.05 L/m2 of the designated spray rate : − Payment for the sprayed volume .
− Application more or less than 0.05 L/m2 of the designated spray rate will be rejected .
Rectify by methods approved by the Superintendent , at the Contractor ’ s expense .
Payment will be made for the designated volume upon satisfactory reseal of the rejected area at no extra expense to the Principal .
Adjustment to payment for seal coat items ( binder , additive , precoat , aggregate ) is in accordance with Table 21.1 Payment Adjustments .
Refer to Clause 21.24 for Tables Additives 21.10.7 Measured in litres at 15 ºC .
Polymer additives in polymer modified binders not measured separately .
Make allowance in the rates for seal coats .
Precoat Applied to Aggregate 21.10.8 Measured in litres .
Make allowance for adhesion agent .
Stockpile Sites 21.10.9 Make allowance for in the relevant rates for sealing aggregate .
Sealing Aggregate 21.10.10 SUPPLY AND DELIVERY Measured in cubic metres in the stockpile ; or in loaded vehicles at the work site .
SUPPLY AND APPLICATION Measured in square metres of finished aggregate work for each size of aggregate .
Measured in square metres of completed area .
Make allowance for supply and placement .
Make allowance for overlapping at joins .
CONCRETE MAINTENANCE 21.11 General 21.11.1 Make allowance for saw cutting , excavation , bedding , reinforcement , installation of expansion joints and backfilling in the following items .
Cycle/Footpaths 21.11.2 Measured in square metres .
Dependent on the number of square meters ordered .
Allow for a minimum 100 mm depth of concrete and the requirements of reinforcement .
Refer to the PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS in the RFT/RFQ .
Vehicle Crossings and Access Strips 21.11.3 Measured in square metres .
Kerbs and Gutters 21.11.4 Measured in linear metres for each type Drainage structures or crossings are excluded from the measured lengths .
Side Entry/Letter Box Pit Lids 21.11.5 Measured in square metres .
Side Entry Pit Lintels 21.11.6 Measured by the number of bays to be repaired .
21.11.7 Wing/Head Walls , Aprons and Cut Off Walls Measured in square metres 21.11.8 Miscellaneous Concrete Works Including but not limited to : Vehicle Accesses , Pram Crossings , Wheel Chair Accesses and Traffic Island Median Infill .
Measured in square metres .
( For tender purposes , make allowance for 100 mm thick concrete . )
DRAINAGE MAINTENANCE 21.12 21.12.1 Excavation in Trenching Measured in in-situ cubic metres for the specified range of depths to invert .
The length of the trench shall be measured between the outside face of headwalls or between the centre of pits .
The width of the trench shall be the outside width of the culvert plus 300 mm on each side .
The depth of the trench is the average of the depths to invert measured at the structure at each end of the section .
The depth to invert is the lesser of the depth below natural surface and the depth below finished surface level .
In the case of kerbside structures , the finished surface level is measured at the top of kerb .
MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 216 Make allowance for shoring , bedding , inlet and outlet structures and irregularities in the natural surface where applicable .
21.12.2 Embankment Protection - Concrete Measured in square metres of the face area .
Make allowance for weep holes .
21.12.3 Margins Measured in linear metres .
Make allowance for reinforcement .
21.12.4 Supply , Load , Transport , Bed , Lay and Backfill Culverts Measured in linear metres along the invert of the culvert as the distance between the outside face of headwalls or other structures for the type and size scheduled .
Multiple barrel culverts are measured as the single distance between the outside face of headwalls or other structures .
Excavation is measured separately .
21.12.5 Excavate , Supply , Load , Transport , Bed , Lay and Backfill Culverts Measured in linear metres along the invert of the culvert between the outside face of headwalls/inside face of pits or other structures for the type and size scheduled .
Multiple barrel culverts are measured as the single distance between the outside face of headwalls or other structures .
Make allowance for RC floor slabs for precast box culverts .
21.12.6 Concrete Headwalls , Maintenance Holes and Other Structures Measured in cubic metres of concrete for repairs .
Measured by number for replacements .
21.12.7 Collar Joints , Bandage Joints , Anchor Blocks and End Caps Measured by number .
Make allowance for splay ends .
21.12.8 Inlet and Outlet Channels Measured in in-situ cubic metres .
Not measured separately for culvert waterways less than 2 square metres in cross-sectional area and channels less than 50 metres long .
21.12.9 Open Unlined Drains Measured in in-situ cubic metres .
Subsoil Drains 21.12.10 Measured in linear metres .
Make allowance for blocks , headwalls , filter material , geotextiles , and connection to existing drainage system .
Demolish and Remove Existing 21.12.11 Drainage Structures Measured as an item .
Make allowance for backfilling PROTECTION WORKS MAINTENANCE 21.13 Geotextile Fabric 21.13.1 Measured in square metres of completed area .
Make allowance for supply and placement .
Make allowance for laps and folds .
Stone Pitching 21.13.2 Measured in square metres of the face area .
21.13.3 Grouted Stone Pitching Measured in square metres of the face area .
Make allowance for weep holes .
21.13.4 Dumped Rock Protection Measured in cubic metres .
21.13.5 Rubble Measured in cubic metres .
21.13.6 Gabions Measured in cubic metres .
Includes the excavation , steel wire mesh box and the stone filling .
21.13.7 Reno Mattresses Measured in square metres .
Includes the excavation , steel wire mesh box and the stone filling .
21.13.8 Revetment Mattresses Measured in square metres .
ROAD FURNITURE MAINTENANCE 21.14 21.14.1 Fencing Measured in linear metres for each type of fencing .
Make allowance for gates which are not measured separately .
Make allowance for clearing of fence lines which is not measured separately .
21.14.2 Guide Posts Measured by number .
Make allowance for delineators .
21.14.3 Road Signs , Manufacture , Supply and Delivery Measured by number of each sign type or classification .
Freight : to be paid on receipt of invoice 21.14.4 Road Signs : Remove existing signs .
Install new sign on existing post Measured by number of each sign type or classification within the sign surface area range .
( ≤ 2m2 ; 2m2 → 6m2 ; 6m2 → 12m2 ) 21.14.5 Road Signs and post : remove existing sign posts .
Supply , deliver and install new road signs and posts .
Measured by number of each sign type or classification MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 217 21.14.6 Road Signs : Relocate existing signs and posts Measured by number of each sign type or classification , and/or each post type 21.14.7 Road Signs , Supply and Install new Posts and remove and re-install existing sign Measured by number of each sign type or classification Make allowance for new brackets , bolts , nuts and bracings for each sign , and new caps for each post .
21.14.8 Flood Gauge Posts , supply deliver and install Measured by number .
Make allowance for gauge .
21.14.9 Cattle Grids Payment will be made at the tendered rates as defined in the Schedule of Rates as nominated for the type of repair and maintenance to cattle grids .
Grid Maintenance Service Crew travel measured by kilometres for rural regions only .
Make allowance for all plant and materials irrespective of the type of repair .
Removal of Graffiti 21.14.10 Measured by hours inclusive of the solvents and procedure required to remove the graffiti .
Steel Beam Guardrail 21.14.11 Supply , remove and replace guardrail measured in linear metres .
Supply , remove and replace posts measured by number .
Supply , remove and replace terminals , end posts and cable , measured by number .
Make allowance for delineators , nuts , bolts and fittings in all works .
Steel Beam Guardrail Maintenance Service Crew travel measured by kilometres for rural regions only .
Supply Install Guide Posts 21.14.12 Measured by number .
Supply and Install 150 mm 21.14.13 Round Recycled Plastic Bollard Measured by number irrespective of colour .
Supply and Install Vehicle 21.14.14 Movement Barrier Measured by number of stock or half stock sections .
Supply Install Cycle Holding 21.14.15 Rail Measured by number .
Remove Cycle Holding Rail 21.14.16 Measured by number .
Supply and Install Culvert 21.14.17 Crossing Guard Rail Measured by number of stock or half stock sections including delineators .
Remove Culvert Crossing 21.14.18 Guard Rail Measured by number of stock or half stock sections including delineators .
PAVEMENT MARKING 21.15 Setting Out 21.15.1 Rate to be negotiated on a site-specific basis for new work .
Make allowance for all plant and materials irrespective of the type repair .
Pavement Marking 21.15.2 Lengths of line being painted are based on the total length for the work item .
For example , 2,500 m of broken line will paid as a single rate item ‘ Broken Line ( BL ) 1,000 – 5,000 m ’ .
The following are measured in linear metres for type of painted line , inclusive of unpainted gaps : − Continuity line - ( single broken ) .
− Continuity line special ( single broken ) .
− Unbroken lane line - ( single continuous ) .
− Broken lane line or separation line - ( single ) .
− Barrier lines both directions - ( double continuous longitudinal lines ) .
− Barrier lines one direction - ( double longitudinal lines broken on one side , continuous on the other ) .
− Edge line - ( single continuous ) .
− Single Yellow Line - ( yellow single continuous ) .
− Outline ( around medians ) − Stop Lines ( single continuous ) − Hold Lines ( single continuous ) − Turn Lines ( single broken ) − Signalized Pedestrian Crossings ( single broken ) − Car / Bus / Truck Parking Bays The following are measured by number : − Arrow Heads ( single , double , triple , merge ) − Numbers and Letters − Disabled Symbols Chevrons and Speed Humps are measured by square meter ( painted area only ) Make allowance for the supply and application of specified glass beads with all markings .
MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 218 21.15.3 Raised Retroreflective Pavement Markers Measured by number .
Raised Retroreflective Pavement Markers will be supplied by the contractor and paid at cost plus mark up .
Payment for installation will be by number .
The scheduled rate for the Installation of Raised Retroreflective Pavement Markers in Urban Areas is inclusive of traffic control .
21.15.4 Removal of Linemarking Measured by square metre of actual painted area .
LANDSCAPE MAINTENANCE 21.16 The following landscape maintenance operations are measured in kilometres for all areas between road reserve boundaries for each specified road for 12 months to specified service levels .
21.16.1 Grass Cutting 21.16.2 Grass Trimming 21.16.3 Weeding 21.16.4 Pruning 21.16.5 Removal of Vegetation 21.16.6 Replacement of Plants 21.16.7 Litter Collection 21.16.8 Removal of Dead Animals 21.16.9 Treatment of Pest Species Fertilising 21.16.10 Clearing of Drainage Lines 21.16.11 Replenishment of Mulch 21.16.12 Disposal of Cut Materials 21.16.13 Irrigation Systems Maintenance 21.16.14 SLASHING AND WEED CONTROL 21.17 21.17.1 Opening Slash Slashing measured in kilometres including both sides of road for each specified road .
21.17.2 Full Slash Slashing measured in kilometres including both sides of road for each specified road .
Include for additional slashing on curves and at intersections to provide specified sight distance .
21.17.3 Cleaning of Plant and Equipment Measured by item of unit ( tractor and slasher ) 21.17.4 Slash Specific Areas Slashing of areas other than road reserves measured in square metres .
21.17.5 Slash Table Drain Offlets Measured by number .
21.17.6 Slash Firebreaks Measured in kilometres for nominated width .
21.17.7 Slash and Rake Firebreaks Slash and rake firebreaks measured in square metres .
21.17.8 Litter Collection & Disposal Not measured separately when included in slashing items .
Measured in kilometres including full width of road reserve both sides of road for each specified road .
21.17.9 Replacement of Damaged Roadside Furniture and Structures Not measured separately , include in slashing items .
Bushfire prevention 21.17.10 Not measured separately , include in slashing items .
Vegetation Control around 21.17.11 Guideposts , Signs , and at Bridges , Guardrails , Flood-ways , Culverts Spraying measured in kilometres including both sides of road for each specified road .
Vegetation Control at Rest 21.17.12 Areas and Truck-bays .
Slashing measured in square metres .
Spraying measured in square metres .
Vegetation Control at 21.17.13 Aerodromes Slashing measured in square metres .
Spraying measured in square metres .
Weed Control 21.17.14 Measured in kilometres including both sides of road for each specified road for 12 months treatment .
Progress payments will be paid for each treatment of the weed control program as a direct proportion of 90 % of the scheduled rate .
Final payment will be paid for effective eradication of noxious weeds as a scaled proportion of the remaining 10 % of the scheduled rate , based on : Effective Eradication Percentage Value : Final payment as a percentage of scheduled rate : 81-100 % 30 % 51-80 % 15 % TRAFFIC SIGNAL & ITS 21.18 MAINTENANCE The following Measurement and Payment clauses refer to the specification sections of the same name , however , the clause numbers do not match the section numbers of the same title .
21.18.1 Payment Generally Payment for Scheduled Work will be made at the tendered rate .
MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 219 21.18.2 Rates Generally The rates tendered are deemed to represent the full value of the work inclusive of plant , labour , messing , clearances , permits , transportation , fuel , oil , maintenance , tools , material procurement and delivery , all incidentals to complete the work , attendance in accordance with Appendix B ‘ Response Times ’ , supervision , and for overheads and profit .
All works shall be in accordance with any standard drawings if applicable .
If no standard drawing is appropriate for the works required , seek direction form the Superintendent ’ s Representative prior to completing any works .
Where a Schedule of Rate item for Scheduled Works is defined as “ Labour Only ” the rate tendered shall be inclusive of all of the above relating to the labour component .
Payment will be made for all activities associated with completing the work detailed in this Specification in accordance with the following Pay Items .
A lump sum price for any of these items will not be accepted .
Payment for the various pay items for all work carried out under this Specification shall include the costs for the following : - Installation and maintenance of ‘ minor traffic management ’ setups ( see below ) , - Submission of generic Traffic Management Plan & associated TCD ’ s & risk assessments , - Photographs provided digitally of any works completed , such as damaged and replaced items ( before and after ) to justify any completed works , or to assist with any additional works identified or outstanding , - Salvage of any usable parts and testing for reuse in this contract , - Maintaining the Department stock database so that it is always current , and ; - Travel from contractor ’ s base to the asset requiring works to be undertaken as instructed , and return to base .
Minor ( Non Complex ) Traffic Management Minor Traffic Management is defined as consisting of all warning signs , work signs and traffic management devices required to carry out work within the road reserve on all approaches to the work site , including safe management of pedestrian movements and in accordance with AS1742.3 and the 2014 / 15 Standard Specification for Road Maintenance titled “ Provision for Traffic ” .
Advising pedestrians of works , hazards , or giving directions around the works is considered minor traffic management and will not be paid separately .
Minor Non Complex traffic management setups would be generally acceptable for lamp changing , pedestrian button replacements , and other Routine Maintenance Repairs , as appropriately addressed in the contractors risk assessment .
Complex Traffic Management Complex Traffic Management is defined as consisting of any works requiring traffic management that is considered complex due to high risk or high speed environments .
Complex situational requirements such as speed reductions , lane closures and manual controlling of traffic with WZ2 qualified personnel ( control traffic with a stop / slow bat ) are considered complex .
These complex situations have been itemised and will be charged per approach as scheduled items .
If any item for which a quantity of work is listed in the Schedule of Rates has not been priced by you , it shall be understood that due allowance has been made in the prices of other items for the cost of the activity which has not been priced .
21.18.3 Fault Maintenance Payment will be for labour , plant , equipment and minor non-complex traffic management required to attend and rectify the fault in accordance with Appendix B “ Response Times ” .
Payment for materials required to repair the fault will be itemised and paid separately at the tendered rate for Routine Maintenance or the Supply of Materials .
21.18.4 Fault Attendance – Business Hours Measured by number .
Payment will generally be a one off fee for each traffic signal or ITS fault occurring between 0700hrs and 1700hrs Monday to Friday exclusive of public holidays .
The ‘ Fault Attendance – Business Hours ’ requires the contractor to attend site with a traffic maintenance equipped vehicle within the nominated response time ( Refer Appendix B ) , undertaking the works as directed or identifying the fault , and returning traffic signals , and / or UPS , CCTV and / or other ITS equipment to normal operating condition .
‘ Fault Attendance – Business Hours ’ will be payable once only for each time the Contractor leaves and returns to base , however if the same fault occurs at the same location within twenty four ( 24 ) hours * following the initial fault i.e .
a controller fault , or if faults have been added to the system through works undertaken i.e .
installing a controller module with a fault , the contractor shall attend at their own expense as soon as possible within the nominated time limit for repair .
A separate fault attendance shall be paid if work can be proven to be unrelated to the previous work undertaken , based on detailed records of work undertaken on the site job sheet and recorded fault log codes .
Payment for this item includes checking , testing and cleaning of equipment being worked on including communications , router , test and replace surge diverters , modem , uninterruptable power MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 220 supply ( UPS ) , wireless receivers and encoder , and reporting and documenting the fault/s .
Cost of materials supply is not included .
Refer to ‘ Supply of Materials ’ items , or Unspecified Materials items .
Cost of installation of scheduled items is not included .
Refer to ‘ Labour ’ items .
Note : If a Fault Attendance has exceeded two ( 2 ) hours and has become complex with the fault being a suspected cable fault in the field , the ‘ Hourly Rate – Business Hours ’ may be requested for use for additional staff member/s to attend to check pole tops and pits to assist rectify the fault .
Subject to approval by Superintendent ’ s Representative , Traffic Section staff member or the Department ’ s On-Call Officer .
* Does not override warranty or defects .
21.18.5 Fault Attendance - After Hours Measured by number .
Payment will generally be a one off fee for each traffic signal or ITS fault occurring not between 0700hrs and 1700hrs Monday to Friday exclusive of weekends and public holidays .
The ‘ Fault Attendance – After Hours ’ requires the contractor to attend site with a traffic maintenance equipped vehicle within the nominated response time ( Refer Appendix B ) , undertaking the works as directed or identifying the fault , and returning traffic signals , and / or UPS , and / or other ITS equipment to normal operating condition .
‘ Fault Attendance – After Hours ’ will be payable once only for each time the Contractor leaves and returns to base , however if the same fault occurs at the same location within twenty four ( 24 ) hours * following the initial fault i.e .
a controller fault , or if faults have been added to the system through works undertaken i.e .
installing a controller module with a fault , the contractor shall attend at their own expense within the nominated time limit for repair .
A separate Fault Attendance – After Hours shall be paid if work can be proven to be unrelated to the previous work undertaken .
If the Contractor is required to attend an additional site after being called to the first site , and has not returned to base , or is required to return to a previously worked on site , only one ‘ Fault Attendance – After Hours ’ will be paid .
If the work is at an additional site a ‘ Fault Attendance – Business Hours ’ will be paid .
If the callout is initiated during business hours but extends beyond normal working hours , the ‘ Fault Attendance – After Hours ’ shall not be paid unless the callout extends beyond two hours after business hours .
Payment for this item includes checking , testing and cleaning of equipment being worked on including communications , router , test and replace surge diverters , modem , uninterruptable power supply ( UPS ) , wireless receivers and encoder , and reporting and documenting the fault/s .
Cost of materials supply is not included .
Refer to ‘ Supply of Materials ’ items , or Unspecified Materials items .
Cost of installation of scheduled items is not included .
Refer to ‘ Labour ’ items .
Note : If a Fault Attendance has exceeded two ( 2 ) hours and has become complex with the fault being a suspected cable fault in the field , the ‘ Hourly Rate – After Hours ’ may be requested for use for additional staff member/s to attend to check pole tops and pits to assist rectify the fault .
Subject to approval by Superintendent ’ s Representative , Traffic Section staff member or the Department ’ s On-Call Officer .
* Does not override warranty or defects .
21.18.6 Accident Attendance – Business Hours Measured by number .
Payment will be a one off fee for traffic signal faults that has resulted from severe damage to traffic signals , CCTV , and / or UPS , and / or other ITS equipment by a vehicle accident or similar , occurring during business hours 0700hrs to 1700hrs Monday to Friday .
The ‘ Accident Attendance ’ item requires a minimum of two of the contractor ’ s appropriately qualified staff to attend site with a traffic maintenance equipped vehicle to allow them to make the site safe , photograph , and remove all damaged items from site , and return the site to fully operational conditions .
The ‘ Accident Attendance – Business Hours ’ item will be payable once only for each site requiring an accident attendance , however if there is a fault at the same location within four ( 4 ) hours following the accident attendance , the contractor shall attend at their own expense within the nominated time limit for repair .
If the ‘ Accident Attendance – Business Hours ’ type callout is initiated during business hours but extends beyond , the ‘ Accident Attendance - After Hours ’ type fee shall not be paid unless the callout extends beyond two hours after business hours - the ‘ Accident Attendance - After Hours ’ type fee will be paid in lieu of the business hours type in this instance .
Maintenance resulting from an accident is not to be included in the monthly CSR ’ s .
A separate CSR shall be raised by the Superintendent ’ s Representative or Traffic Section staff for works resulting from an accident .
The CSR will include all fault attendances , after hour ’ s fees and associated labour , plant and materials required to carry out the work .
Cost of materials supply is not included .
Refer to ‘ Supply of Materials ’ items .
Cost of installation of scheduled items is not included .
Refer to ‘ Labour ’ items .
MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 221 21.18.7 Accident Attendance – After Hours Measured by number .
Payment will be a one off fee for traffic signal faults that has resulted from severe damage to traffic signals , CCTV and / or UPS , and / or other ITS equipment by a vehicle accident or similar , occurring not between 0700hrs and 1700hrs Monday to Friday exclusive of weekends and public holidays .
The ‘ Accident Attendance – After Hours ’ requires a minimum of two of the contractor ’ s appropriately qualified staff to attend site with a traffic maintenance equipped vehicle to allow them to make the site safe , photograph , and remove all damaged items from site , and return the site to fully operational conditions ..
The ‘ Accident Attendance – After Hours ’ will be payable once only for each site requiring an accident attendance , however if there is a fault at the same location within four ( 4 ) hours following the accident attendance , the contractor shall attend at their own expense within the nominated time limit for repair .
Maintenance resulting from an accident is not to be included in the monthly CSR ’ s .
A separate CSR shall be raised by the Superintendent ’ s Representative or Traffic Section staff for works resulting from an accident .
The CSR will include all fault attendances , after hour ’ s fees and associated labour , plant and materials required to carry out the work .
Cost of materials supply is not included .
Refer to ‘ Supply of Materials ’ items .
Cost of installation of scheduled items is not included .
Refer to ‘ Labour ’ items .
21.18.8 Site Inspection / Routine Maintenance Inspection Measured by number .
Note : This item is intended to require less involvement by the contractor than a Fault Attendance as the only requirement is to visually check an asset , photograph and report to Traffic Section .
The reason may be to confirm a fault reported by a member of the public , or to provide other visual confirmation required .
Payment will include the establishment of plant and labour to visually inspect a site or asset and identify any Routine Maintenance required to be scheduled for another time , or to visually provide other advice .
A photograph may be required to be forwarded .
If the technician attends site on a Site Inspection , however deems the fault to be of an urgent nature , Traffic Section is to be notified immediately to permit works to be carried out without delay .
A Fault Attendance or other applicable item/s will then be paid in lieu of the Site Inspection / Routine Maintenance Inspection item .
Labour item only .
ROUTINE MAINTENANCE ( LABOUR ITEMS ) Payment will be for all labour , plant , equipment , and minor non-complex traffic management items required to carry out the work in accordance with Table 16.12 - Response Times in Clause 16.32 .
Material will be paid separately if included in the Schedule of Rates for Supply of Material .
21.18.9 Lamp Replacement / Reset Measured by number .
Payment will include the establishment of plant , labour , equipment and sundries , required to change a traffic signal lamp regardless of its type i.e .
incandescent , halogen or LED .
If the lamp is situated on the mast of a highmast , ‘ Supply Lifting Equipment ’ item shall be used .
If it is found a transformer is required to be replaced , a ‘ Fault Attendance – Business Hours ’ shall be paid in lieu of the lamp replacement .
Cost of lamp is not included .
Refer to Supply of Materials items .
Install Traffic Signal Lantern 21.18.10 Measured by number .
Payment will include the establishment of plant , labour , equipment and sundries required to install , relocate or change a traffic signal vehicle lantern ( 200mm or 300mm ) , for all single/ vertical aspect configurations .
Items included in installing the lantern are attaching target boards , louvres , cowls , cable and accessories to connect the aspect and test .
If the lantern required to be installed or replaced is situated on the mast of a highmast , ‘ Supply Lifting Equipment ’ item shall be used .
Cost of aspect , target board , brackets , louvres , cowls etc .
are not included .
Refer to Supply of Materials items .
Install Double Traffic Signal 21.18.11 Lantern Measured by number .
Payment will include the establishment of plant , labour , equipment and sundries required to install , relocate or change a double traffic signal vehicle lantern ( 200mm or 300mm ) , for all double aspect configurations .
Items included in installing the aspect are attaching target boards , louvres , cowls , cable and accessories to connect the lantern and test .
If the lantern required to be installed or replaced is situated on the mast of a highmast , ‘ Supply Lifting Equipment ’ item shall be used .
Cost of aspect , target board , brackets , louvres , cowls etc .
are not included .
Refer to Supply of Materials items .
Install Pedestrian Lantern 21.18.12 Measured by number .
MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 222 Payment will include the establishment of plant , labour and equipment and sundries required to install , relocate or change a pedestrian lantern and test .
Items included in installing the aspect are attaching cowls , cable and accessories to connect the lantern .
Cost of pedestrian aspect , cowls , brackets etc .
are not included .
Refer to Supply of Materials items .
Install / Replace Pole Top 21.18.13 Assembly Measured by number .
Payment will include the establishment of plant , labour and equipment and sundries required to install or change a complete pole top assembly including brackets , mounting points , cover and connector rack , and the removal and reinstatement of traffic signal aspects as required .
Items shall in include cable connections .
Payment will also include the painting of the pole top in the appropriate colour when that pole top being worked on has been identified as having a junction or open link .
If only the connector rack requires replacing ( with Traffic Section staff approval ) , it will be paid as a rewire pole top item .
Cost of pole top is not included .
Refer to Supply of Materials items .
Rewire Pole Top Assembly 21.18.14 Measured by number .
Payment will include the establishment of plant , labour and equipment required to completely rewire a pole top assembly .
The item shall include disconnecting , re-terminating each active core , reconnecting and relabelling cable at the pole top assembly and additional cable connections if required .
Payment will also include the painting of the pole top in the appropriate colour when that pole top being worked on has been identified as having a junction or open link .
Partial rewire will not be paid under this item .
If the connector rack requires replacing ( with Traffic Section staff approval ) , it will be paid as a rewire pole top item , however the connector rack will be paid for under the negotiated rate item .
Install Traffic Signal Pedestal 21.18.15 Measured by number .
Payment will include the establishment of plant , labour and equipment required to install or change a traffic signal pedestal , connect cables , fixing the pedestal to functional footings , and mortaring the base of the pole .
The pedestal shall be straight & level .
Cost of pedestal is not included .
Refer to Supply of Materials items .
If required Multi Core cable will be available from the Superintendent unless directed otherwise .
Install Traffic Signal Base Plate 21.18.16 Measured by number .
Payment will include the establishment of plant , labour , equipment and sundries required to install or change a base plate on a traffic signal footing .
Cost of the base plate is not included .
Refer to Supply of Materials items .
Install Traffic Signal Pedestal 21.18.17 Footing Measured by number .
Payment will include the establishment of plant , labour and equipment required to install or replace a traffic signal footing in accordance with the standard drawing , inclusive of all items and sundries to excavate material and damaged footing , backfill and compact , in situ concrete , formwork , bedding , grouting , reinstatement of surfaces and disposal of material .
Cost of footing rag bolt assembly is not included .
Refer to Supply of Materials items .
If the footing is in a new position and the connecting conduit junction pit is more than 5 meters from the footing location or crosses a sealed surface i.e .
concrete , or a rock base , the contractor shall provide quote for negotiated rate in addition to this item to allow for the additional works .
Repair Traffic Signal Footing 21.18.18 Measured by number .
Payment will include the establishment of plant , labour and equipment required to repair a traffic signal footing where only the thread on the existing footing has been damaged .
Payment is inclusive of all items and sundries to excavate any materials , cut off damaged threaded rods , drill holes for new threaded rods , install with chemset or similar , in situ concrete , formwork , bedding , grouting , reinstatement of surfaces and disposal of material .
Detector Test and Repair 21.18.19 Measured by number .
Payment will include the establishment of plant , labour , equipment and sundries required to test and repair a faulty traffic signal detector , including to reduce the detector to a half loop where instructed to by Traffic Section .
Payment will also include the technician providing the readings verbally to Traffic Section from site , then written on the job sheet and response .
Install Detector ( Saw cut ) 21.18.20 Measured by number .
Payment will include the establishment of plant , labour , material and equipment required to install a vehicle detector in accordance with the Standard Drawing , connect to the controller , testing , and provide readings .
MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 223 If required detector feeder cable will be available from the Superintendent ’ s Representative unless directed otherwise .
Install Detector ( Pre-fabricated ) 21.18.21 Measured by number .
Payment will include the establishment of plant , labour , material and equipment required to install a pre-fabricated vehicle detector , connect to the controller , testing , and provide readings .
Liaise with sealing or asphalt contractors to coordinate the works program accordingly .
If required detector feeder cable will be available from the Superintendent ’ s Representative unless directed otherwise .
Install Detector Pit 21.18.22 Measured by number .
Payment will include the establishment of plant , labour , materials , sundries and equipment required to install a detector pit .
The pit shall have 75mm of 20mm aggregate installed underneath the pit to allow for drainage , separated by a membrane to stop ingress of material into the pit .
The pit shall have a tooled concrete surround supporting the pit , minimum of 100mm wide x 100mm deep .
NOTE : The current standard drawing does not reflect this requirement and is soon to be updated .
Different types of pits may be considered subject to Superintendent ’ s Representative ’ s approval for use .
Cost of detector pit is not included .
Refer to Supply of Materials items .
Pedestrian Button Test and 21.18.23 Repair / Replace Measured by number .
Payment will include the establishment of plant , labour , sundries and equipment required to test and repair , and / or replace , a faulty or damaged pedestrian button .
If the pedestrian button is deemed unrepairable by the contractor when sent to test and repair , and a new pedestrian button is required to be installed , this item will only be paid once for replacement .
Items shall include disconnecting , reconnecting cables and testing the operation .
Cost of Audio tactile driver card and pedestrian push button in not included .
Refer to Supply of Materials items .
Audio Tactile Test and Repair / 21.18.24 Replace Measured by number .
Payment will include the establishment of plant , labour , sundries and equipment required to test and repair , and / or replace , a faulty or damaged audio tactile unit , including speaker .
If the audio tactile component or speaker is deemed unrepairable by the contractor when sent to test and repair , and a new audio tactile component is required to be installed , this item will only be paid once for replacement of the item .
Items shall include disconnecting , reconnecting cables and testing the operation .
Cost of audio tactile unit , components or speaker is not included .
Refer to Supply of Materials items .
Test and Restore 21.18.25 Communications / SCATS Communications Measured by number .
Payment will include the establishment of plant , labour , sundries and equipment required to test and repair communication links to SCATS or other ITS equipment .
Cost of hardware material is not included .
Superintendent ’ s Representative to advise of authorised suppliers .
Supply and Connection of 21.18.26 Generator Measured by hours ( Rounded up and payable in 30 minute blocks ) .
Payment will include the establishment of plant , labour , sundries and equipment required to connect , secure and maintain the operation of a 15amp / 240 volt generator to a traffic signal controller box , or UPS to power and maintain the operation of traffic signalised sites and associated ITS as specified by the Superintendent ’ s Representative or Traffic Section staff .
Payment includes attendance for disconnection at completion of use , and the first tank of fuel .
Generators shall be tested on a site to prove suitability for use .
Subsequent tanks of fuel will be paid as per ‘ Unscheduled Items ’ .
Install Multi Core Cable – 21.18.27 including and below 21 cores Measured by Lineal Meter .
Payment will include the establishment of plant , labour , sundries and equipment required to install multi core cable ( including and below 16 core ) and other cable such as data cable ( fibre / cat 5/6 ) into an existing conduit/s , pits , and posts , and to remove any existing damaged cable from conduit if necessary .
Note .
Any fibre termination is not included within this rate .
Install Multi Core Cable – 21.18.28 including and below 51 cores Measured by Lineal Meter .
Payment will include the establishment of plant , labour , sundries and equipment required to install multi core cable ( between 21 and 51 cores ) into an existing conduit/s , pits , and posts , and to remove any existing damaged cable from conduit if necessary .
MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 224 Multi Core cable ( 51 core ) may be available from the Superintendent and will be utilised unless directed otherwise .
Install Detector Feeder Cable 21.18.29 Measured by Lineal Meter of conduit that the cable is drawn through .
Payment will include the establishment of plant , labour , sundries and equipment required to install Detector Feeder cable into an existing conduit/s and to remove existing damaged cable from conduit if necessary .
Detector Feeder cable will be available from the Superintendent unless directed otherwise .
The Lineal Meter rate for ‘ Install Detector Feeder Cables ’ is not to be measured as per Lm of cable installed in the ground as this cable is often installed as multiple layers in the one conduit .
The rate shall be measured as per Lineal Meter of conduit drawn through for this cable to be installed .
Replace or Upgrade Traffic 21.18.30 Signal Controller , or Integrated UPS & Controller Measured by number .
Payment will include the establishment of plant , labour and equipment required to collect from the storage yard , install or upgrade a traffic signal controller , inclusive of all items and sundries , reinstatement of surfaces and disposal of material if previous controller had been damaged .
This item includes some modification of existing footing/plinth in relation to new tie-down rods to secure the controller to the existing footing regardless of the controller type .
Any modifications regarding significant concrete works required , new or replacement plinth , or extension of plinth , shall be undertaken under a negotiated rate .
The cost of the Traffic Signal Controller unit is not included .
Traffic Signal Controller unit will be available from the Superintendent unless directed otherwise .
Install Auxiliary Cabinet 21.18.31 Measured by number .
Payment will include the establishment of plant , labour , all sundries , cables ( power / Cat 5 data / fibre ) and equipment required to prepare , install and connect an auxiliary cabinet to a traffic signal controller including all the electrical components within .
Payment includes installation of the equipment required within the cabinet , including connection and establishment of communications with all items , tidy installation of all cables and equipment including to racks where possible , and use of appropriate length data cables .
Note : A standard drawing was not finalised at the time of advertising this contract .
A standard drawing may be provided during the contract term .
Provide Lifting Equipment 21.18.32 Measured per day .
Payment will include the establishment of plant , labour , safety devices and equipment required to provide and operate lifting equipment in order to carry out other works .
The ‘ Provide Lifting Equipment ’ item will be used to provide access for highmast aspect installations , realignments , and lamp replacements , also CCTV maintenance and installation , or any other requirements for lifting equipment as directed by Traffic Section .
Payment will include all lifting equipment required to reach a high mast or CCTV pole .
Cost of Traffic Management is not included .
Refer to ‘ Traffic Management ’ items .
Cost of traffic signal/CCTV hardware is not included .
Refer to Supply of Materials items .
Cost of installation of hardware not included – refer to Routine Maintenance items .
Pest Eradication 21.18.33 Measured by number .
Payment will include eradication of ants , cockroaches , spiders and other insects from the asset for a period of at least 3 months .
If the pest returns to the same location within 3 months , a further treatment will be required at the contractor ’ s expense .
Payment includes the treatment of a controller and associated communications pillar .
If the pest issue is in a pit , payment includes that pit and nearest two pits .
Payment does not include termites , this will be a negotiated rate if needed .
Hourly Rate – Business Hours 21.18.34 Measured by hours ( Rounded up and payable in 30 minute blocks ) .
Minimum payment of one hour applies .
Payment will include labour for an appropriately qualified technician to be available during business hours , for the services required by the Department where other scheduled items are not separately addressed .
Use of this item may be utilised where a Fault Attendance has exceeded two hours and has become complex , or where the services of a technician are required for a known or unknown duration such as post cyclone refuelling of generators , or other duties as directed by Traffic Section .
This item shall only be approved for use with prior approval from the Superintendent ’ s Representative , Traffic Section staff member , or the Department ’ s On-Call Officer .
If all of these personnel are unavailable , leave voice messages MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 225 and proceed with works , however make contact as soon as possible thereafter .
This item is reliant on the contractor providing evidence of attendance and duration on site via logon / logoff , door event or communication with Traffic Section / the On-Call Officer at commencement and completion for substantiation .
Be advised that lack of evidence may result in item not been authorised .
Labour and tools item only .
Hourly Rate – After Hours 21.18.35 Measured by hours ( Rounded up and payable in 30 minute blocks ) .
Minimum payment of three hours applies .
Payment will include labour for an appropriately qualified technician to be available after hours , for the services required by the Department where other scheduled items are not separately addressed .
Use of this item may be utilised where a Fault Attendance has exceeded two hours and has become complex , or where the services of a technician are required for a known or unknown duration such as post cyclone refuelling of generators , or other duties as directed by Traffic Section .
This item shall only be approved for use with prior approval from the Superintendent ’ s Representative , Traffic Section staff member , or the On-Call Officer .
If all of these personnel are unavailable , leave voice messages and proceed with works , however make contact as soon as possible thereafter .
This item is reliant on the contractor providing evidence of attendance and duration on site via logon / logoff , door event or communication with Traffic Section / the On-Call Officer at commencement and completion for substantiation .
Be advised that lack of evidence may result in item not been authorised .
Labour and tools item only .
Negotiated Rate 21.18.36 Measured by number .
To be determined as negotiated between the Superintendent ’ s Representative or Traffic Section staff and the Contractor for labour , equipment and services are requested to be provided by the contractor .
All Negotiated Rate items are to be submitted and itemised on the Quote Sheet .
All Negotiated Rate items shall be agreed upon based on the Quote provided in writing prior to the execution of the works or ordering of the items , unless deemed an emergency by Superintendent ’ s Representative , Traffic Section staff , or the Department ’ s On-Call Officer and agreed to verbally .
In an emergency instance the item shall be followed up in writing no later than the next working day thereafter .
This item is not to be priced in the Response Schedule – a Provisional Sum has been allowed for in the Schedule of Rates .
SPECIFIC MAINTENANCE Site Audit and Report- Vehicle 21.18.37 Signalised Intersection & ITS Measured by number .
Vehicle sites are defined in clauses 16.30 and 16.31 .
Payment will include the establishment of plant , labour and equipment , and collection of lighting plant if required , to audit and submit a corresponding report to the Superintendent ’ s Representative for a vehicle site in accordance with the site audit template shown in Figure 16.3 - Sample Template Traffic Signal and ITS Audit Report Template .
The Site Audit will also include carrying out minor repairs such as replacing lamps or arrays , damaged or missing cowls , and all other similar activities that can be undertaken within activities associated with the audit .
Any pole top assemblies identified at or prior to the audit shall be replaced as a priority while traffic management is on site .
This item shall also include written quotes for any works identified from the audit or other recommended maintenance .
The report shall also include fully detailed diagrams or drawings of the intersection .
The report shall be submitted to Traffic Section within 5 working days of the audit being completed .
Cost of hardware material is not included .
See Unspecified Materials items .
Cost of traffic management is not included .
See traffic management items .
Site Audit and Report – 21.18.38 Pedestrian Signalised Intersection & ITS Measured by number .
Pedestrian sites are defined in clauses 16.30 and 16.31 .
Payment will include the establishment of plant , labour and equipment , and collection of lighting plant if required , to audit and submit a corresponding report to the Superintendent ’ s Representative for a pedestrian site in accordance with the site audit template shown in Figure 16.3 - Sample Template Traffic Signal and ITS Audit Report Template .
The Site Audit will also include carrying out minor repairs such as replacing burnt out lenses or lamps , damaged or missing , cowls , visors and louvers and all other similar activities that can be undertaken within activities associated with the audit .
Any pole top assemblies identified at or prior to the audit shall be replaced as a priority while traffic management is on site .
MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 226 This item shall also include written quotes for any works identified from the audit or other recommended maintenance .
The report shall also include fully detailed diagrams or drawings of the intersection .
The report shall be submitted to Traffic Section within 5 working days of the audit being completed .
Cost of hardware material is not included .
See Unspecified Materials items .
Cost of traffic management is not included .
See traffic management items .
UPS Maintenance & Condition 21.18.39 Report Measured by number Payment for the Specific maintenance for UPS systems includes the establishment of plant , labour sundries and equipment including terminal grease , inspection and testing of all on-site equipment to identify its physical condition , operational performance and configuration of hardware in accordance with the scheduled tasks in Figure 16.4 – Sample Template UPS Maintenance and Battery Condition Report .
The required two hour discharge test will be undertaken remotely by Traffic Section .
The report shall be submitted to Traffic Section within 5 working days of the audit being completed .
SUPPLY OF MATERIALS Specified Materials 21.18.40 Measured by number .
Payment will be wholly inclusive of all mark up and freight charges .
All materials will be sourced from suppliers approved by the Superintendent .
Refer to Response Schedule for list of specified materials .
Traffic Signal Component 21.18.41 Repairs Measured by number .
Payment will include 10 % mark up and freight .
Invoices from supplier / repairer and freight handlers shall accompany CSR for payment authorisation .
This item is not to be priced in the Response Schedule – a Provisional Sum has been allowed for in the Schedule of Rates .
Non Specified / Unscheduled 21.18.42 Materials or Items Measured by number .
Payment will include 10 % mark up and freight .
Invoices from supplier and freight handlers must accompany CSR for payment authorisation .
This item is not to be priced in the Response Schedule – a Provisional Sum has been allowed for in the Schedule of Rates .
Supply LED Traffic Signal 21.18.43 Lantern or Aspect – Various sizes Measured by number .
Lantern sizes are priced separately in schedule of rates .
Payment will include the supply of a new LED traffic signal aspect or lanterns ( regardless of size ) , complete with all cowls , louvres , target board , LED arrays , transformers , brackets and fittings required to form a complete lantern .
Payment includes manufacturer ’ s warranty , and handling .
Cost of installation not included – refer to Routine Maintenance .
LED Array – Various Sizes and 21.18.44 Colours Measured by number .
LED array sizes , colours , roundels and arrows priced separately in the schedule of rates .
Payment will include the supply of a new traffic signal LED array required for an existing LED aspect .
Payment includes manufacturer ’ s warranty , and handling .
Cost of installation not included – refer to Routine Maintenance .
Supply LED Pedestrian Lantern 21.18.45 Measured by number .
Payment will include the supply of a new LED pedestrian lantern , complete with all cowls , LED arrays , transformers , brackets and fittings required to form a complete pedestrian lantern .
Payment includes manufacturer ’ s warranty , and handling .
Cost of installation not included – refer to Routine Maintenance .
Supply Target Board – Various 21.18.46 sizes Measured by number .
Target Board sizes priced separately in schedule of rates .
Payment will include the supply of a new traffic signal target board as a complete item for the corresponding size required for the aspect to be fitted , including any blank panels required for 4 or 5 way aspect configurations .
Cost of installation not included – refer to Routine Maintenance .
Miscellaneous Traffic Signal 21.18.47 Aspect Items Measured by number .
Various sizes , types of items listed below all priced separately in the schedule of rates .
Cowls - Payment will include the supply of new open or closed cowls of various sizes , complete MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 227 with all fittings required to install on a traffic signal aspect .
Aspect Doors - Payment will include the supply of new aspect doors , for traffic signal aspects and for pedestrian aspects , complete with all fittings required to install on a traffic signal aspect .
Aspect Seals – Payment will include the supply of new aspect seals , for traffic signal aspects and for pedestrian aspects , complete to install within a traffic signal aspect .
Cost of installation of above not included – refer to Routine Maintenance .
Lamps – Various Types 21.18.48 Measured by number .
Lamp types priced separately in schedule of rates .
Payment will include the supply of new traffic signal aspect lamps for older style Halogen and Incandescent lamps .
Cost of installation not included – refer to Routine Maintenance .
Supply LED Transformer 21.18.49 Measured by number .
Payment will include the supply of a new traffic signal transformer required for an LED array / Halogen , regardless of the type or size required for 200mm or 300mm green , yellow or red .
Cost of installation not included – refer to Routine Maintenance .
Supply 50 Way Finial Pole Top 21.18.50 Complete Measured by number .
Payment will include the supply of a new 50 way finial pole top assembly complete .
Cost of installation not included – refer to Routine Maintenance .
Supply Pole Top Cover 21.18.51 Measured by number .
Payment will include the supply of a new pole top cover only and will also include the painting of the pole top in the appropriate colour if that pole top being worked on has been identified as having a junction or open link .
Cost of installation not included – refer to Routine Maintenance .
Brackets – Full and Half 21.18.52 Measured by number .
Payment will include the supply of new full or half brackets complete with all fittings required to install an aspect on a traffic signal pedestal .
Cost of installation not included – refer to Routine Maintenance .
Standard Traffic Signal 21.18.53 Pedestal Measured by number .
Payment will include the supply of a new hot dipped galvanised traffic signal pedestal in one continuous length without joints , threaded suitably for connection to the base plate , for use to mount traffic signal hardware .
Cost of installation not included – refer to Routine Maintenance .
Traffic Signal Pedestal Base 21.18.54 Plate Measured by number .
Payment will include the supply of a new hot dipped galvanised traffic signal pedestal base plate , threaded suitably for connection to mount traffic signal pedestal .
Cost of installation not included – refer to Routine Maintenance .
Traffic Signal Pedestal Footing 21.18.55 Measured by number .
Payment will include the supply of a new traffic signal pedestal footing for use to mount traffic signal pedestal base plate .
Cost of installation not included – refer to Routine Maintenance .
Pedestrian Push Button 21.18.56 Measured by number .
Payment will include the supply of a new pedestrian push button complete with button , housing , audio tactile speaker and fixings .
Cost of installation not included – refer to Routine Maintenance .
Audio Tactile Speaker 21.18.57 Measured by number .
Payment will include the supply of a new audio tactile speaker and wiring required for installation , for use within a pedestrian push button .
Cost of installation not included – refer to Routine Maintenance .
Audio Tactile Driver Card 21.18.58 Measured by number .
Payment will include the supply of a new audio tactile driver card to be fitted within the housing unit , for use with pedestrian push button .
Cost of installation not included – refer to Routine Maintenance .
Detector Pit ( Polycrete Type ) 21.18.59 Measured by number .
Payment will include the supply of a new traffic signal detector pit complete , of Polycrete construction similar to pit ACO Type 33 ( L 340 mm x W 340 mm x D 440 mm ) .
Two drain holes to be installed in the base of the pit .
MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 228 Payment includes supply of pit and class B galvanised steel lid with a chain connection to the pit .
NOTE : The current standard drawing does not reflect this requirement and is soon to be updated .
Different types of pits may be considered subject to Superintendent ’ s Representative ’ s approval for use .
Cost of installation not included – refer to Routine Maintenance .
Handheld Terminal ( HHT ) 21.18.60 Measured by number .
Payment will include the supply of a new traffic signal Hand Held Terminal ( HHT ) , inclusive of freight .
Telephone Line Surge Diverter 21.18.61 Measured by number .
Payment includes the supply of Surge Protection equipment for traffic signal communications lines .
Protection equipment should be the same as that supplied by Microconnect for use with their equipment , Novaris # MPP-RJ12-001 .
Krone Rack 21.18.62 Measured by number .
Payment includes the supply of a Krone Rack for installation within a traffic signal communications pillar for traffic signal communications lines .
Cost of installation not included – refer to Routine Maintenance .
Fuses 21.18.63 Measured by number .
Payment includes the supply of 5mm x 20mm fuses required for use within a traffic signal controller .
Fuse types nominated for supply include all amperages for 5mm x 20mm fuses including : - 5mm by 20mm Quick acting 5 A fuse - 5mm by 20mm medium acting 6.3 A fuse - 5mm by 20mm medium acting 1 A fuse - 5mm by 20mm medium fast acting 1 A fuse - 5mm by 20mm medium fast acting 0.5 A fuse - 5mm by 20mm medium slow blow 3.15 A fuse Different sized fuses , Circuit Breakers and Miniature Circuit Breakers ( MCBs ) if required shall be paid utilising the unscheduled items / materials item .
Cost of installation not included .
Sea Wasp 21.18.64 Measured by number .
Payment includes the supply of a sea wasp surge diverter and sundries required for use within a traffic signal communications pillar .
Cost of installation not included .
Prefabricated Communication 21.18.65 Box Measured by number .
Payment includes the supply of a traffic signal communications pillar cover ( communications box ) , constructed of aluminium , powder-coated in a bright orange colour similar to others previously installed .
Four ‘ hex ’ bolts shall be supplied to fit the cover to the footing when installed , and remove any previously installed ‘ D ’ bolts .
Payment includes supply of communications box to suit various types of footings currently installed .
Cost of installation not included .
Supply Underground Junction 21.18.66 Box Measured by number .
Payment includes the supply of a permanently installed junction box to join multi core cable within a conduit junction pit .
The junction box shall be entirely waterproof .
Connector should be isolation tag type like in pole tops and should be numbered / identified as per pole top .
Payment includes all sundries required for use in installation .
Cost of installation not included - Payment does not include painting the associated pole top nearest to the pit when installed , however when installed the bottom half of the pole top shall be painted white .
Supply Auxiliary Cabinet 21.18.67 Measured by number .
Payment includes the supply of an auxiliary cabinet ( top hat ) to suit the nominated controller/s listed within this specification .
The auxiliary cabinet shall be constructed with the same materials as the traffic signal controller and be painted the same colour .
It shall be ventilated , waterproof and keyed in accordance with the Superintendent ’ s nominated key type , with 2 keys provided .
Payment will include a small suitable exhaust fan ( IP rated to suit the environment ) pre-installed , a sub-switchboard , and computer equipment racking to neatly store and secure items such as routers .
Cost of installation not included .
TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT 21.18.68 Complex Traffic Management Complex Traffic Management is defined as consisting of any works requiring traffic management that is considered complex due to high risk or high speed environments .
Complex situational requirements such as speed reductions , lane closures and manual controlling of traffic with WZ2 qualified personnel ( control traffic with a stop / MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 229 slow bat ) are considered complex .
These complex situations have been itemised and will be charged per approach .
Complex Traffic Management items are inclusive of Minor Non Complex traffic management requirements for the entire site of works , including all pedestrian management .
All Traffic Management Plans ( TMPs ) and Traffic Control Diagrams ( TCDs ) submitted for use in this contract ( specific or generic ) shall be reused within this contract for the same or similar works where possible , or as advised by the Superintendent ’ s Representative .
Payment for all traffic management items includes the submission of a Temporary Speed Limit Authorisation ( TSLA ) along with the TCD to be utilised , and any permits required for the works .
Daily Diaries from the traffic management company shall also be provided following the works , for any traffic management items utilised .
NOTE : SCATS can be utilised to assist with controlling traffic in some instances where it may otherwise not be possible due to speed or volume .
For example , requesting Traffic Section staff to dwell an approach in order to hold another approach for a short duration to enable a technician to access a pit or an aspect safely .
The contractor shall consider this as an option to assist with works .
The following item/s shall be submitted to Superintendent ’ s Representative or Traffic Section staff for approval prior to use : Traffic Management Type A 21.18.69 ( Speed Reduction - Non Lane Closure ) Measured per approach .
Payment will include the establishment of all plant , equipment , signage and labour to install appropriate traffic management for speed reductions and to maintain the setup with accredited staff and modify the existing traffic management setup for as long as required for a period of one working day .
This item will be paid per approach that speed reductions are required to complete the works and shall include other minor traffic management requirements for the site including safe pedestrian management .
This item may be paid in accordance with Traffic Management Type C for the period that type C is required but is not to be used in accordance with Traffic Management Type B for that approach .
Traffic Management Type B 21.18.70 ( Lane Closure/s ) Measured per approach .
Payment will include the establishment of all plant , equipment , signage and labour to install appropriate traffic management for lane closures and to maintain the setup with accredited staff and modify the existing traffic management setup for as long as required for a period of one working day .
This item will be paid per approach that lane closure/s are required to complete the works and are inclusive of any requirement of a closure change to an adjacent lane .
This item shall include other minor traffic management requirements for the site including safe pedestrian management .
This item may be paid in accordance with Traffic Management Type C for the period that type C is required but is not to be used in accordance with Traffic Management Type A for that approach .
Traffic Management Type C 21.18.71 ( Traffic Controller/s ) Measured by hours ( Rounded up and payable in 30 minute blocks ) .
Payment will include the establishment of all plant , equipment and labour to install appropriate traffic management for manual traffic control and to maintain the setup with accredited staff and modify the existing traffic management setup for as long as required .
This item will be paid per lane of traffic under control / per hour that WZ2 qualified controllers are required for the contractor to complete the works and shall include other minor traffic management requirements for the site including safe pedestrian management .
This item may be used in accordance with Traffic Management Type A or B for the period required .
Traffic Management Type D 21.18.72 ( Frequently Changing Work Area ) Measured by number / per site .
Payment will include the establishment of all plant , equipment and labour to install appropriate traffic management for a frequently changing work area and maintain the setup with accredited staff and modify the existing traffic management setup , regardless of how many approaches are required .
This item may require a speed reduction in accordance with these standards which is included in this item .
Appropriate shadow vehicles and / or attenuator shall be utilised .
This item will be paid per site that this item is utilised for .
Site Specific Traffic Control 21.18.73 Diagrams ( TCDs ) Measured by number / per site .
Payment will include the labour , equipment and materials required to compile and submit site specific Traffic Control Diagram/s ( TCD ) , associated specific Risk Assessment , to the Superintendent ’ s Representative or Traffic Section staff in order to undertake the required MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 230 maintenance works task .
If the works require two ( 2 ) or more TCDs in order to document the works required , or for after-hours care , this shall be included in the rate .
The TCDs and Risk Assessment shall reference the specific TMP for traffic signals maintenance , and ensure that it complies with this document .
Alternately , provide a separate summarised TMP where details contradict the primary maintenance TMP .
Site Specific TCDs shall join the suite of TCDs , including generic TCDs , under the Traffic Signals Maintenance contract TMP , and shall be reused for other works associated with this contract where possible .
Note : the Template TMP ’ s and Generic and TCD ’ s required are not to be classed as chargeable items .
STREET SWEEPING 21.19 21.19.1 Scheduled Works – Sweeping of Intersections , Median Breaks and Kerbed Sections of Roads Measured by the number of monthly sweeping cycles for each nominated road .
Sweeping will include intersections , median breaks and kerbed sections of roads .
21.19.2 Scheduled Works – Sweeping of Cycleways and Footpaths Measured by the number of monthly sweeping cycles for each nominated cycleway or footpath .
Priority Works 21.19.3 Road Sweeping Equipment : Measured as an hourly rate for on-site hours worked .
Cycleway and Footpath Sweeping Equipment : Measured as an hourly rate for on-site hours worked .
Urgent Works 21.19.4 Road Sweeping Equipment : Measured as an hourly rate for on-site hours worked .
Cycleway and Footpath Sweeping Equipment : Measured as an hourly rate for on-site hours worked .
Water not measured separately Supply and Use of Detergent 21.19.5 Measured by litres of detergent used .
21.19.6 Manual Sweeping of Medians , Splitter Islands , etc .
Measured as an hourly rate per person for on-site hours worked .
21.19.7 Travel Allowance past Stuart Highway/Arnhem Highway Intersection − Road Sweeping Equipment : Measured per kilometre from the Stuart Highway / Arnhem Highway intersection to the most distant point of the works , by the most direct route .
− Cycleway and Footpath Sweeping Equipment : Measured per kilometre from the Stuart Highway / Arnhem Highway intersection to the most distant point of the works , by the most direct route .
21.19.8 Disposal of Recovered Waste Not measured separately .
Make allowance for these items within other rates .
21.19.9 Traffic Control/ Provision for Traffic Not measured separately .
Make allowance for compliance with the contract requirements within other rates .
Provision for Traffic not measured separately .
AERODROME MAINTENANCE 21.20 Refer to the specification text for the full extent of work required under each scheduled item .
21.20.1 Slashing of grassed areas Measured as an item for the particular aerodrome .
21.20.2 Cutting of re-growth Measured as an item for the particular aerodrome .
21.20.3 Dragging of Aerodrome Measured as an item for the particular aerodrome .
21.20.4 Rolling of sealed runways Measured in square metres .
21.20.5 Rolling of gravel runways Measured in square metres .
21.20.6 Maintenance grade – Runways Measured in square metres .
21.20.7 Maintain fences and gates Measured in lineal metres .
21.20.8 Maintain aerodrome furniture Measured as an item for the particular aerodrome .
MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 231 ROAD AND MARINE AMENITY 21.21 MAINTENANCE The following routine maintenance operations for the maintenance of the nominated amenities are measured by month to the specified service levels : Adjustments to payment for these items will be subject to independent auditors report .
21.21.1 Rubbish Collection 21.21.2 Rubbish Removal 21.21.3 Bin Placement and Replacement 21.21.4 Cleaning of Road Amenity Area Furniture 21.21.5 Cleaning of Road Amenity Area Toilet Block 21.21.6 Cleaning of Amenity Area Structures and Furniture 21.21.7 Cleaning of Amenity Area Toilets and Toilet Block 21.21.8 Maintenance of Toilet Systems 21.21.9 Water Tanks and Water Maintenance Cleaning of Barbecues and 21.21.10 Provision of Firewood Cleaning and Pressure 21.21.11 Cleaning Jetty Decks Cleaning and Pressure 21.21.12 Cleaning of Boat Ramp and Pontoons Maintenance of Toilet Systems 21.21.13 Graffiti Removal 21.21.14 Grass Cutting 21.21.15 Grass Trimming 21.21.16 Weeding 21.21.17 Irrigation Systems maintenance 21.21.18 Tree replacement 21.21.19 Water Tanks and Water 21.21.20 Maintenance Cleaning and maintenance of 21.21.21 Barbecues Provision of Firewood Painting Existing Furniture 21.21.22 Repair and Replacement of 21.21.23 Road Amenity Area Furniture The following specific maintenance operations are measured as specified and directed by the Superintendent ( travel allowance to be paid where not mentioned separately for works in rural areas only ) Information Sign 21.21.24 Measured by number .
Initial Painting of Furniture 21.21.25 Measured as an item for all road amenity area furniture .
Touch Up Painting of Furniture 21.21.26 Measured as an item for all road amenity area furniture .
The following specific maintenance items are measured as specified .
Bin Placement and 21.21.27 Replacement Measured by number including NTG decals Pumping of Septic tanks 21.21.28 Measured by number of operations for each Amenity site .
Clean Out Toilet Compost Chambers Measured by number .
Roadside Rubbish Collection 21.21.29 Measured per kilometre including both sides of road .
Provision of Firewood Storage 21.21.30 Bins Measured by number .
Removal of Dead Animals 21.21.31 Measured by number .
Include in the rate for the specified rapid response time and removal of both large and small carcasses .
Removal of Graffiti 21.21.32 Measured by hours inclusive of the solvents and procedure required to remove the graffiti .
Removal of Abandoned 21.21.33 Vehicles Measured by number .
Illegal Rubbish Collection 21.21.34 Measured by lots of up to 250 kilo maximum weight Provide weighbridge dockets to verification for payments .
Provide photographic evidence to verification of payments Repair and Replacement of 21.21.35 Road Amenity Area Furniture To be paid at negotiated rate between the Contractor and Superintendent .
Painting Existing Furniture 21.21.36 To be paid at negotiated rate between the Contractor and Superintendent .
Tree and Plant Removal and or 21.21.37 Replacement To be paid at negotiated rate between the Contractor and Superintendent .
MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 232 Maintenance for Marine Growth/ 21.21.38 Shellfish Encrustations on Structures To be paid at negotiated rate between the Contractor and Superintendent Unscheduled items/materials and 21.22 Negotiated Rate Items not categorised in the Schedule Of Rates will be paid for by the following items .
Unscheduled items : Instances where the contractor has been requested to engage the sub- contractor ( such as cross-hire of equipment ) , or provided unscheduled materials ( freight to another region ) , the unscheduled item/material rate shall be utilised .
This item is where the contractor would be required to pay a third party .
Negotiated rate : Instances where the contractor has been requested to provide labour items , or provide other .
21.22.1 Unscheduled Items /material Measured by number and / or items .
Payment shall include 10 % mark-up on evidence of cost of Unscheduled items .
Evidence of cost in the form of an invoice from the supplier , or freight handler must accompany the CSR for payment authorisation .
Other evidence such as timesheets , log books or photos may be requested as evidence .
21.22.2 Negotiated Rate Measured by number and/ or items .
To be determined as negotiated between the Superintendent and the Contractor for unscheduled labour , service or hire provided by the contractor under existing conditions and contract .
Where a type of works is described but does not appear in the schedule of rates or is not defined in the specification and not included in the Schedule of Rates items , a rate shall be negotiated to cover the works required .
The item of works may then be included in the contract Schedule of Rates at the Superintendents discretion .
OTHER REQUIREMENTS 21.23 ( If applicable ) Refer to PROJECT SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS section of Request for Tender .
MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 233 PAYMENT ADJUSTMENTS TABLE AND MOBILISATION DIAGRAMS 21.24 Figure 21.1 – Mobilisation Diagrams Table 21.1 Payment Adjustments Viscosity ( At 60 ºC Pa.Sec ) Of Class 320 Bitumen Component Of The Binder Reduction In Payment Of Seal Coat Items Under 260 10 % reduction for each 10 Pa.sec ( or part thereof ) below 260 .
260 – 380 Nil .
Over 380 10 % reduction for each 10 Pa.sec ( or part thereof ) over 380 .
REFERENCED AUSTRALIAN STANDARDS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 234 REFERENCED AUSTRALIAN STANDARDS 22 .
Table – Referenced Australian Standards Use Standards , and their amendments , current 3 months before the date for the close of tenders except where different editions and/or amendments are required by statutory authorities , including , but not limited to , NATA and the National Construction Code including the Building Code of Australia .
Dates entered like this ( R2013 ) indicate that a Standard was reviewed and re-issued unaltered in the year cited in the parentheses .
Entries in Times New Roman italics indicate Standards not cited in this document but which may be useful references .
AS 1012 ( set ) - Method of testing concrete AS 1012.3.1 2014 - Determination of properties related to the consistency of concrete - Slump Test AS 1012.8.1 2014 - Method for making and curing concrete - Compression and indirect tensile test specimens AS 1012.9 2014 - Compressive strength tests - Concrete , grout and mortar specimens AS 1074 1989 Steel tubes and tubulars for ordinary services AS 1100 ( set ) - Technical drawing AS 1111 ( set ) 2015 ISO metric hexagon commercial bolts and screws - Product grade C AS 1112 ( set ) 2015 ISO metric hexagon nuts AS 1141 ( set ) - Methods for sampling and testing aggregates AS 1141.0 1999 - List of Methods AS 1141.1 2015 - Definitions AS 1141.2 2015 - Basic testing equipment AS 1141.3.1 2012 - Sampling - Aggregates AS 1141.11.1 2009 - Particle size distribution – Sieving method AS 1141.14 2007 - Particle shape , by proportional calliper AS 1141.15 1999 - Flakiness index AS 1141.18 1996 - Crushed particles in coarse aggregate derived from gravel AS 1141.20.1 2000 ( R2013 ) - Average least dimension - Direct measurement ( nominal size 10mm and greater ) AS 1141.20.2 2000 ( R2013 ) - Average least dimension – Direct measurement ( nominal size 7mm and 5mm ) AS 1141.20.3 2000 ( R2013 ) - Average least dimension – Calculation ( nomograph ) AS 1141.23 2009 - Los Angeles value AS 1141.24 2013 - Aggregate soundness – Evaluation by exposure to sodium sulphate solution AS 1141.25.1 2003 ( R2013 ) - Degradation factor – Source rock AS 1141.26 2008 - Secondary minerals content in igneous rocks AS 1141.29 2014 - Accelerated soundness index by reflux AS 1141.40 1999 - Polished aggregate friction value - Vertical road-wheel machine AS 1141.41 1999 - Polished aggregate friction value – Horizontal bed machine AS 1141.50 1998 ( R2016 ) - Resistance to stripping of cover aggregates from binders REFERENCED AUSTRALIAN STANDARDS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 235 Table – Referenced Australian Standards Use Standards , and their amendments , current 3 months before the date for the close of tenders except where different editions and/or amendments are required by statutory authorities , including , but not limited to , NATA and the National Construction Code including the Building Code of Australia .
Dates entered like this ( R2013 ) indicate that a Standard was reviewed and re-issued unaltered in the year cited in the parentheses .
Entries in Times New Roman italics indicate Standards not cited in this document but which may be useful references .
AS 1160 1996 Bitumen emulsions for the construction and maintenance of pavements AS/NZS 1163 2016 Cold formed structural steel hollow sections AS 1231 2000 Aluminium and aluminium alloys – Anodic oxidation coatings AS/NZS 1252 1996 High strength steel bolts with associated nuts and washers for structural engineering AS 1273 1991 Unplasticised PVC ( UPVC ) downpipe and fittings for rainwater AS 1289 ( set ) - Methods of testing soils for engineering purposes AS 1289.0 2014 - Definitions and general requirements AS 1289.1.1 2001 - Sampling and preparation of soils – Preparation of disturbed soil samples for testing ( Includes Amdt 1:2002 and Amdt 2 : 2008 ) AS 1289.2.1.1 2005 ( R2016 ) - Soil moisture content tests – Determination of the moisture content of a soil - Oven drying method ( standard method ) AS 1289.3.1.1 2009 - Soil classification tests - Determination of the liquid limit of a soil – Four point Casagrande method AS 1289.3.2.1 2009 - Soil classification tests - Determination of the plastic limit of a soil - Standard method AS 1289.3.3.1 2009 - Soil classification tests - Calculation of the plasticity index of a soil AS 1289.3.4.1 2008 - Soil classification tests - Determination of the linear shrinkage of a soil – Standard method AS 1289.3.6.1 2009 Soil classification tests - Determination of the particle size distribution of a soil – Standard method of analysis by sieving AS 1289.3.7.1 2002 ( R2016 ) - Soil classification tests - Determination of the sand equivalent of a soil using a power-operated shaker AS 1289.5.1.1 2003 - Soil compaction and density tests - Determination of the dry density/moisture content relation of a soil using standard compactive effort AS 1289.5.2.1 2003 - Soil compaction and density tests - Determination of the dry density/moisture content relation of a soil using modified compactive effort AS 1289.5.4.1 2007 ( R2016 ) - Soil compaction and density tests - Compaction control test - Dry density ratio , moisture variation and moisture ratio AS 1289.5.8.1 2007 - Soil compaction and density tests - Determination of field density and field moisture content of a soil using a nuclear surface moisture density gauge – Direct transmission mode AS 1289.6.1.1 2014 - Soil strength and consolidation tests - Determination of the California Bearing Ratio of a soil – Standard laboratory methods for a remoulded specimen AS 1289.7 ( set ) - - Soil reactivity tests - Determination of the shrinkage index of a soil AS 1345 1995 Identification of the contents of pipes , conduits and ducts AS 1348 2002 Road and traffic engineering - Glossary of terms ( available withdrawn ) REFERENCED AUSTRALIAN STANDARDS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 236 Table – Referenced Australian Standards Use Standards , and their amendments , current 3 months before the date for the close of tenders except where different editions and/or amendments are required by statutory authorities , including , but not limited to , NATA and the National Construction Code including the Building Code of Australia .
Dates entered like this ( R2013 ) indicate that a Standard was reviewed and re-issued unaltered in the year cited in the parentheses .
Entries in Times New Roman italics indicate Standards not cited in this document but which may be useful references .
AS 1379 2007 Specification and supply of concrete ( Includes Amdt 1 : 2009 , Amdt 2 : 2015 & Supp 1 : 2009 ) AS 1397 2011 Continuous hot-dip metallic coated steel sheet and strip - Coatings of zinc and zinc alloyed with aluminium and magnesium ( Includes Amdt 1:2012 ) AS/NZS 1477 2006 PVC pipes and fittings for pressure applications ( Includes Amdt 1:2009 ) AS 1478.1 2000 Chemical admixtures for concrete , mortar and grout – Admixtures for concrete AS/NZS 1554 ( set ) - Structural steel welding AS 1579 2001 Arc-welded steel pipes and fittings for water and waste-water AS 1580 ( set ) - Paints and related materials - Methods of test AS/NZS 1580.108.1 1994 - Determination of dry film thickness on metallic substrates – Non- destructive methods AS/NZS 1580.205.4 1998 ( R2013 ) - Application properties – Airless spraying AS/NZS 1594 2002 Hot rolled steel flat products AS 1597 ( set ) - Precast reinforced concrete box culverts AS 1597.1 2010 - Small culverts ( not exceeding 1200 mm span and 1200 mm height ) AS 1597.2 2013 - Large culverts ( exceeding 1200 mm span or 1200 mm height and up to and including 4200 mm span and 4200 mm height ) AS 1604.1 2012 Specification for preservative treatment – Sawn and round timber AS 1627 ( set ) - Metal finishing—Preparation and pre-treatment of surfaces ( Code of Practice for Preparation and Pre-treatment of Metal Surfaces prior to Protective Coating ) AS 1627.1 2003 - Removal of oil , grease and related contamination AS 1627.2 2002 - Power tool cleaning AS 1627.4 2005 - Abrasive blast cleaning of steel AS 1627.9 2002 - Pictorial surface preparation standards for painting steel surfaces AS 1672.1 1997 ( R2016 ) Limes and limestones – Limes for building AS 1678 ( set ) - Emergency procedure guide – Transport AS 1678.3A1 2004 ( R2016 ) - Group text EPGs for Class 3 substances – Flammable liquids AS 1722 1992 Pipe threads of Whitworth form - Fastening pipe threads AS 1725 ( set ) 2010 Chain link fabric fencing AS/NZS 1734 1997 Aluminium and aluminium alloys - Flat sheet , coiled sheet and plate AS 1742 ( set ) - Manual of uniform traffic control devices AS 1742.3 2009 - Traffic control for works on roads REFERENCED AUSTRALIAN STANDARDS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 237 Table – Referenced Australian Standards Use Standards , and their amendments , current 3 months before the date for the close of tenders except where different editions and/or amendments are required by statutory authorities , including , but not limited to , NATA and the National Construction Code including the Building Code of Australia .
Dates entered like this ( R2013 ) indicate that a Standard was reviewed and re-issued unaltered in the year cited in the parentheses .
Entries in Times New Roman italics indicate Standards not cited in this document but which may be useful references .
AS 1742.6 2014 - Tourist and services signs AS 1742.9 2000 - Bicycle facilities AS 1742.10 2009 - Pedestrian control and protection AS 1743 2001 Road signs – Specifications AS 1744 2015 Standard alphabets for road signs AS 1906 ( set ) - Retroreflective materials and devices for road traffic control purposes AS/NZS 1906.1 2007 - Retroreflective sheeting ( Includes Amdt 1:2014 ) AS 1906.3 1992 - Raised pavement markers ( retroreflective and non-retroreflective ) AS 1940 2004 The storage and handling of flammable and combustible liquids ( Includes Amdt 1:2004 & Amdt 2:2006 ) AS 2001.2.3.2 2001 ( R2016 ) Methods of test for textiles - Physical tests - Determination of maximum force using the grab method ( ISO 13934-2:1999 , MOD ) AS 2008 2013 Bitumen for pavements AS/NZS 2009 2006 Glass beads for pavement-marking materials ( Includes Amdt 1:2007 ) AS/NZS 2041 ( set ) - Buried corrugated metal structures AS/NZS 2041.1 2011 - Design methods AS/NZS 2041.2 2011 - Installation AS/NZS 2041.4 2010 - Helically formed sinusoidal pipes AS/NZS 2053.1 2001 ( R2016 ) Conduits and fittings for electrical Installations – General requirements AS 2106.2 2005 ( R2016 ) Methods for the determination of the flash point of flammable liquids ( closed cup ) - Determination of flash point - Pensky-Martens closed cup method AS 2144 2014 Traffic signal lanterns AS 2150 2005 Hot mix asphalt – A guide to good practice AS 2157 1997 Cutback bitumen AS/NZS 2276 ( set ) - Cables for traffic signal installations AS/NZS 2276.1 2004 - Multicore power cables AS/NZS 2276.2 1998 - Feeder cable for vehicle detectors AS/NZS 2276.3 2002 - Loop cables for vehicle detectors AS/NZS 2299 ( set ) - Occupational diving operations AS/NZS 2299.1 2015 - Standard operational practice ( Includes Supp 1:2015 ) AS/NZS 2299.2 2002 - Scientific diving AS/NZS 2299.3 2003 - Recreational industry diving and snorkelling operations AS/NZS 2299.4 2005 - Film and photographic diving AS/NZS 2310 2002 Glossary of paint and painting terms REFERENCED AUSTRALIAN STANDARDS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 238 Table – Referenced Australian Standards Use Standards , and their amendments , current 3 months before the date for the close of tenders except where different editions and/or amendments are required by statutory authorities , including , but not limited to , NATA and the National Construction Code including the Building Code of Australia .
Dates entered like this ( R2013 ) indicate that a Standard was reviewed and re-issued unaltered in the year cited in the parentheses .
Entries in Times New Roman italics indicate Standards not cited in this document but which may be useful references .
AS/NZS 2311 2009 Guide to the painting of buildings AS/NZS 2312 ( set ) - Guide to the protection of structural steel against atmospheric corrosion by the use of protective coatings AS/NZS 2312.1 2014 - Paint coatings AS 2339 1997 Traffic signal posts and attachments ( Note - DR AS 2339:2016 ) AS 2341 ( set ) - Methods of testing bitumen and related roadmaking products AS/NZS 2341.2 2015 - Determination of dynamic viscosity by vacuum capillary viscometer AS 2341.3 1993 - Determination of kinematic viscosity by flow through a capillary tube AS/NZS 2341.4 2015 - Determination of dynamic viscosity by rotational viscometer AS 2341.6 1992 - Determination of density using a hydrometer AS 2341.9 1992 - Determination of water content ( Dean and Stark ) AS 2341.12 1993 - Determination of penetration ( available obsolescent - approximately equivalent to ASTM D5 ) AS/NZS 2341.13 1997 ( R2013 ) - Long-term exposure to heat and air AS 2341.18 1992 - Determination of softening point ( ring and ball method ) AS/NZS 2350.0 1999 ( R2016 ) Methods of testing portland and blended cements - General introduction and list of methods AS/NZS 2350.1 2006 ( R2016 ) Methods of testing portland , blended and masonry cements – Sampling AS 2353 1999 Pedestrian push button assemblies AS 2423 2002 Coated steel wire fencing products for terrestrial , aquatic and general use AS/NZS 2433 1994 Plastics - Method for exposure to ultraviolet lamps AS 2439.1 2007 Perforated plastics drainage and effluent pipe and fittings - Perforated drainage pipe and associated fittings AS 2698.2 2000 Plastics pipes and fittings for irrigation and rural applications - Polyethylene rural pipe AS 2698.3 1990 Plastics pipes and fittings for irrigation and rural applications - Mechanical joint fittings for use with polyethylene micro-irrigation pipes AS 2700 ( set ) 2011 Colour Standards for general purposes AS 2703 2008 Vehicle loop detector sensors AS 2758.1 2014 Aggregates and rock for engineering purposes - Concrete aggregates AS 2758.2 2009 Aggregates and rock for engineering purposes - Aggregate for sprayed bituminous surfacing AS 2758.5 2009 Aggregates and rock for engineering purposes - Coarse asphalt aggregates AS 2809.5 2001 Road tank vehicles for dangerous goods - Tankers for bitumen based products AS 2815 ( set ) - Training and certification of occupational divers REFERENCED AUSTRALIAN STANDARDS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 239 Table – Referenced Australian Standards Use Standards , and their amendments , current 3 months before the date for the close of tenders except where different editions and/or amendments are required by statutory authorities , including , but not limited to , NATA and the National Construction Code including the Building Code of Australia .
Dates entered like this ( R2013 ) indicate that a Standard was reviewed and re-issued unaltered in the year cited in the parentheses .
Entries in Times New Roman italics indicate Standards not cited in this document but which may be useful references .
AS 2815.1 2008 - Occupational SCUBA diver - Standard AS/NZS 2815.2 2013 - Surface supplied diving to 30 m AS 2815.3 1992 - Air diving to 50 m AS 2815.4 1992 - Bell diving AS/NZS 2815.5 2013 - Dive supervisor AS 2865 2009 Confined Spaces AS 2870 2011 Residential slabs and footings AS 2876 2000 Concrete kerbs and channels ( gutters ) - Manually or machine placed ( available withdrawn ) AS 2891 ( set ) - Methods of sampling and testing asphalt AS/NZS 2891.1.1 2013 - Sampling – Loose asphalt AS 2891.1.2 2008 - Sampling – Coring method AS 2891.1.3 2008 - Sampling – Asphalt from slabs AS/NZS 2891.3.1 2013 - Bitumen content and aggregate grading - Reflux method AS/NZS 2891.3.2 2013 - Bitumen content and aggregate grading - Centrifugal extraction method AS/NZS 2891.3.3 2013 - Bitumen content and aggregate grading - Pressure filter method AS/NZS 2891.5 2015 - Compaction of asphalt by Marshall method and determination of stability and flow – Marshall procedure AS/NZS 2891.7.1 2015 - Determination of maximum density of asphalt – Water displacement method AS/NZS 2891.7.3 2014 - Determination of maximum density of asphalt – Methylated spirits displacement AS/NZS 2891.8 2014 - Voids and volumetric properties of compacted asphalt mixes AS/NZS 2891.9.1 2014 - Determination of bulk density of compacted asphalt – Waxing procedure AS/NZS 2891.9.2 2014 - Determination of bulk density of compacted asphalt – Presaturation method AS/NZS 2891.9.3 2014 - Determination of bulk density of compacted asphalt – Mensuration method AS 2979 1998 Traffic signal mast arms AS/NZS 3000 2007 Electrical installations ( known as the Australian/New Zealand Wiring Rules ) ( Includes Amdt 1:2009 , Amdt 2:2012 ) AS/NZS 3100 2009 Approval and test specification - General requirements for electrical equipment ( Includes Amdt 1:2010 , Amdt 2:2012 , Amdt 3:2014 , Amdt 4:2015 ) AS/NZS 3108 1994 Approval and test specification - Particular requirements for isolating transformers and safety isolating transformers AS/NZS 3191 2008 Electric flexible cords REFERENCED AUSTRALIAN STANDARDS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 240 Table – Referenced Australian Standards Use Standards , and their amendments , current 3 months before the date for the close of tenders except where different editions and/or amendments are required by statutory authorities , including , but not limited to , NATA and the National Construction Code including the Building Code of Australia .
Dates entered like this ( R2013 ) indicate that a Standard was reviewed and re-issued unaltered in the year cited in the parentheses .
Entries in Times New Roman italics indicate Standards not cited in this document but which may be useful references .
AS/NZS 3500.1 2003 Plumbing and drainage – Water services AS 3568 1999 Oils for reducing the viscosity of residual bitumen for pavements AS 3600 2009 Concrete structures ( Includes Amdt 1:2010 , Amdt 2:2013 , Supp 1:2014 ) AS 3610.1 2010 Formwork for concrete – Documentation and surface finish A/NZSS 3661.1 1993 Slip resistance of pedestrian surfaces - Requirements ( Superseded by AS/NZS 4586:1999 and AS/NZS 4663:2002 ) AS/NZS 3661.2 1994 Slip resistance of pedestrian surfaces – Guide to the reduction of slip hazards AS/NZS 3678 2016 Structural steel - Hot-rolled plates , floor plates and slabs AS/NZS 3679.1 2016 Structural steel - Hot rolled bars and sections AS 3706 ( set ) - Geotextiles – Methods of test AS 3706.1 2012 - General requirements , sampling , conditioning , basic physical properties and statistical analysis AS 3706.2 2012 - Determination of tensile properties – Wide strip and grab method AS 3706.3 2012 - Determination of tearing strength – Trapezoidal method AS 3706.4 2012 - Determination of bursting strength – California bearing ratio ( CBR ) – Plunger method AS 3706.9 2012 - Determination of permittivity , permeability and flow rate AS 3706.11 2012 - Determination of durability - Resistance to degradation by light , heat and moisture AS/NZS 3725 2007 Design for installation of buried concrete pipes ( Includes Supp 1:2007 ) AS 3727 1993 Guide to residential pavements AS 3730.14 2006 ( R2016 ) Guide to properties of paints for buildings - Undercoat - Solvent borne - Exterior/interior AS/NZS 3750.9 2009 Paints for steel structure - Organic zinc-rich primer AS/NZS 3750.22 2008 Paints for steel structures – Full gloss enamel – Solvent-borne AS/NZS 3845 ( set ) 2015 Road safety barrier systems and devices AS/NZS 3845.1 2015 - Road safety barrier systems AS 3894 ( set ) - Site testing of protective coatings AS 3894.3 2002 ( R2013 ) - Determination of dry film thickness AS 3894.5 2002 ( R2013 ) - Determination of surface profile AS 3894.10 2002 - Inspection report- daily surface and ambient conditions AS 3894.11 2002 - Equipment report AS 3894.12 2002 - Inspection report – coating AS 3894.13 2002 - Inspection Report – Daily blast and paint AS 3894.14 2002 - Inspection Report – Daily painting REFERENCED AUSTRALIAN STANDARDS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 241 Table – Referenced Australian Standards Use Standards , and their amendments , current 3 months before the date for the close of tenders except where different editions and/or amendments are required by statutory authorities , including , but not limited to , NATA and the National Construction Code including the Building Code of Australia .
Dates entered like this ( R2013 ) indicate that a Standard was reviewed and re-issued unaltered in the year cited in the parentheses .
Entries in Times New Roman italics indicate Standards not cited in this document but which may be useful references .
AS 3972 2010 General purpose and blended cements AS 4049 ( set ) - Paints and related materials - Pavement marking materials AS 4049.1 2005 ( R2016 ) - Solvent borne paint - For use with surface applied glass beads AS 4049.2 2005 ( R2016 ) - Thermoplastic pavement marking materials - For use with surface applied glass beads AS 4049.3 2005 ( R2016 ) - Waterborne paint - For use with surface applied glass beads AS 4049.4 2006 ( R2016 ) - High performance pavement marking systems AS/NZS 4058 2007 Precast concrete pipes ( pressure and non-pressure ) AS 4133 ( set ) - Methods of testing rocks for engineering purposes AS 4191 2015 Portable traffic signal systems AS 4373 2007 Pruning of amenity trees AS 4419 2003 Soils for landscaping and garden use AS 4454 2012 Composts , soil conditioners and mulches ( Includes Amdt 1:2012 ) AS/NZS 4586 2013 Slip resistance classification of new pedestrian surface materials AS/NZS 4663 2002 Slip resistance measurement of existing pedestrian surfaces AS/NZS 4671 2001 Steel reinforcing materials ( Includes Amdt 1:2003 ) AS/NZS 4680 2006 Hot-dip galvanized ( zinc ) coatings on fabricated ferrous articles AS 4742 2003 Earth-moving machinery - Machine-mounted forward and reverse audible warning alarm - Sound test method ( withdrawn ) ( See ISO 9533 ) AS/NZS 5000.1 2005 Electric cables – Polymetric insulated – For working voltages up to and including 0.6/1 ( 1.2 ) kV ( Includes Amdt 1:2006 ) AS 5100.5 2004 Bridge design - Concrete ( Includes Amdt 1:2010 , Amdt 2:2010 , Supp 1:2008 ) AS/NZS ISO 9000 2016 Quality management systems - Fundamentals and vocabulary AS/NZS ISO 31000 2009 Risk Management – Principles and guidelines AS/NZS 61558 ( set ) - Safety of power transformers , power supplies , reactors and similar products for supply voltages up to 1 100 V AS/NZS 61558.2.4 2009 - Particular requirements for isolating transformers for general use ( IEC 61558-2-4 : Ed 2 , SDT ) ( Includes Amdt 1:2012 ) AS/NZS 61558.2.6 2009 - Particular requirements for safety isolating transformers for general use ( IEC 61558-2-6 : Ed 2 , MOD ) ( Includes Amdt 1:2012 ) ISO 9533 2010 Earth-moving machinery - Machine-mounted audible travel alarms and forward horns - Test methods and performance criteria OTHER REFERENCED AUTHORITIES AND DOCUMENTS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 242 OTHER REFERENCED AUTHORITIES AND DOCUMENTS 23 .
Table - Other Referenced Authorities And Documents AAPA Australian Asphalt Pavement Association - Guide to the manufacture , storage and handling of polymer modified binders APAS Australian Paint Approval Scheme APAS AP-S0041/3 Pavement marking materials – cold applied plastic APAS AP-S0042 Glass beads for use in pavement marking paints APVMA Australian Pesticides and Veterinary Medicines Authority AGBT Austroads Guide to Bridge Technology AGPT Austroads Guide to Pavement Technology AGPT04B-14 - Part 4B Asphalt AGPT04H-08 - Part 4H : Test Methods AGPT04K-09 - Part 4K : Seals AGPT-T Austroads Guide to Pavement Technology - Test methods AGPT-T103-06 - Pre-treatment and Loss on Heating of Bitumen Multigrade and polymer Binders ( rolling thin film oven [ RTFO ] test ) AGPT-T111-06 - Handling Viscosity of Polymer Modified Binders ( Brookfield Thermosel ) AGPT-T112-06 - Flash Point of Polymer Modified Binders AGPT-T121-14 - Shear Properties of Polymer Modified Binders ( ARRB ELASTOMETER ) AGPT-T122-06 - Torsional Recovery of Polymer Modified Binders AGPT-T124-16 - Toughness of Polymer Modified Binders ( ARRB Extensiometer ) AGPT-T131-06 - Softening Point of Polymer Modified Binders AGPT-T132-06 - Compressive Limit of Polymer Modified Binders AGPT-T141-06 - Laboratory protocol for the preparation of crumb rubber modified binders AGPT-T190-14 - Specification Framework for Polymer Modified Binders and Multigrade Bitumens AGPT-T231-06 - Deformation Resistance of Asphalt Mixtures by the Wheel Tracking Test .
AGRD Austroads Guide to Road Design AP-C87-15 Austroads Glossary of Terms AP-G41-15 Bituminous Material Sealing Safety Guide AP-T68-06 Update of Austroads Sprayed Seal Design Method AP-T235-13 Guide to the Selection and use of Polymer Modified Binders and Multigrade Bitumens AP-T236-13 Update of Double/Double Design for Austroads Sprayed Seal Design Methods ARRB Specification for Recycled Crushed Glass as an Engineering Material ASTM American Society for Testing and Materials ASTM D86 Standard Test Method for Distillation of Petroleum Products at Atmospheric Pressure ASTM D445 Standard Test Method for Kinematic Viscosity of Transparent and Opaque Liquids ( and Calculation of Dynamic Viscosity ) ASTM D1298 Standard Test Method for Density , Relative Density , or API Gravity of Crude Petroleum and Liquid Petroleum Products ASTM D5064 Standard Practice for Conducting a Patch Test to Assess Coating Compatibility CASA Civil Aviation Safety Authority OTHER REFERENCED AUTHORITIES AND DOCUMENTS STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 243 ISSA International Slurry Surfacing Association NATA National Association of Testing Authorities NTCP Northern Territory Code of Practice NTMTM Northern Territory Materials Testing Manual NTTM Northern Territory Testing Methods https : //infrastructure.nt.gov.au/technical-information WA 730.1 Main Roads Western Australia , Bitumen Content and Particle Size Distribution of Asphalt and Stabilised Soil : Centrifuge Methods - NTEPA Fact Sheet “ Guidelines for Water Extraction as they relate to Road Construction and Maintenance. ” SPECIFICATIONS Electronically available : https : //infrastructure.nt.gov.au/specification-services/technical- specifications Standard Specification for Environmental Management Standard Specification for Small Building Works Standard Specification for Road Works ACTS , REGULATIONS AND CODES STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 244 ACTS , REGULATIONS AND CODES 24 .
Acts , Regulations and Codes applicable to the works and authorities with jurisdiction over the works include , but are not limited to ; ACTS & REGULATIONS Aboriginal Sacred Sites Act Bushfires Act Control of Roads Act Dangerous Goods Act and Regulations Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act Environmental Assessment Act Environmental Offences and Penalties Act Fair Work Act 2009 Fire and Emergency Act Food Act 2004 Heritage Conservation Act NT Building Act and Regulations NT Planning Act and Regulations NT Rail Safety Act Poisons and Dangerous Drugs Act and Regulations Public Health ( General Sanitation , Mosquito Prevention , Rat Exclusion and Prevention ) Regulations Soil Conservation and Land Utilisation Act Territory Parks and Wildlife Act Territory Parks and Wildlife Conservation Act Traffic Act and Regulations Waste Management and Pollution Control Act Water Act Weeds Management Act Work Health and Safety ( NUL ) Act and Regulations CODES AND GUIDELINES Building Code of Australia ( BCA ) CASA Directives CASA Manual of Standards Code of Practice , Abrasive Blasting , Safe Work Australia Code of Practice , Managing the Risk of Falls at Workplaces , NT WorkSafe NT Code of Practice for Small On-site Sewage and Sullage Treatment Systems and the Disposal or Re-use of Sewage Effluent .
NT Deemed to Comply Manual NT Health and Safety Guidelines for Commercial Kitchens AUTHORITIES Aboriginal Areas Protection Authority ( AAPA ) Development Consent Authority of the NT ( DCA ) NT Department of Health NT Department of Environment and Natural Resources ( DENR ) NT Environment Protection Authority ( NTEPA ) NT Fire and Rescue Service ( NTFRS ) NT WorkSafe PowerWater Corporation of the NT ( PWC ) Requirements of the engaged Building Certifier ( if applicable ) Requirements of the Local Municipal or Shire Councils CIVIL STANDARD DRAWINGS FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 245 CIVIL STANDARD DRAWINGS FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE 25 .
Table – Standard Drawings for Road Maintenance Note : Use the most recently issued versions of drawings .
CS 0016 Cross Section – Shared Path Railing at Culvert Crossing CS 0601 Northern Territory Regions Map CS 0602 Road Network – Darwin Region CS 0603 Road Network – East Arnhem Region CS 0604 Road Network – Katherine Region CS 0605 Road Network – Tennant Creek Region CS 0606 Road Network – Alice Springs Region – West CS 0607 Road Network – Alice Springs - East CS 1203 Standard Kerb Profiles CS 1204 Cyclists ’ Hold Rail CS 1300 Flexible Guide Posts CS 1301 Flood Gauge Posts CS 1303 Standard Security Fence CS 1306 Stock Fence Design and Details CS 1310 Steel Beam Guard Rail CS 1311 Standard Typical Approach Guardrail at Bridges CS 1312 Standard Approach Guardrail Details for Single Lane Bridges CS 1313 Standard Cattle Grid Plan and Sections with Approach Slab CS 1314 Standard Cattle Grid Plan and Sections without Approach Slab CS 1315 Standard Cattle Grid Details CS 1316 Vehicle Movement Barriers CS 1317 Standard Stock Fence Swinging Floodgate for Stream Crossings CS 1500 Signal Details - Ducting CS 1501 Signal Details - Pole Foundation CS 1502 Signal Details - Mast Arm Foundation CS 1503 Signal Details - Controller Foundation CS 1504 Signal Details - Communication Isolation Pillar CS 1505 Signal Detail Lantern Mounting Details CS 1506 Pedestrian Push Button CS 1507 Signal Detail Detector Installation CIVIL STANDARD DRAWINGS FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 246 Table – Standard Drawings for Road Maintenance CS 1520 Line Marking CS 1521 Chevrons and RRPM ’ s CS 1550 Standard Traffic Counting Station Post Mounted Detector Loop and Pit Details CS 1551 Standard Traffic Counting Station Post Mounted Detector Loop Layout CS 1552 Standard Traffic Counting Station Post Mounted Piezo Tube Layout CS 1553 Standard Traffic Counting Station Post Mounted Foundation Details CS 1554 Standard Traffic Control Station Post Mounted Cabinet Wiring Details CS 1555 Standard Traffic Counting Station Post Mounted Post Assembly CS 1556 Standard Traffic Counting Station Post Mounted Traffic Cabinet Details CS 1557 Traffic Signal Advanced Warning Sign CS 2100 8.0m Gravel Pavement Resurfacing - Typical Cross Section CS 2101 Shoulder Maintenance Works - Gravel Pavement – Typical Cross Section B CS 2102 Shoulder Maintenance on Various Width Sealed Pavement - Typical Cross Section CS 2103 Shoulder Maintenance on Various Width Sealed Pavement - Typical Cross Section D CS 2104 Road Maintenance Works 9m Gravel Pavement - Typical Cross Section CS 2105 Road Maintenance Works 10m Gravel Pavement - Typical Floodway Cross Section CS 2106 Road Maintenance Works 7m Sealed Pavement - Typical Floodway Cross Section G CS 2107 Road Maintenance Works 9m Sealed Pavement - Typical Floodway Cross Section CS 2108 Standard Specification 10m Carriageway with 8.0m seal – Typical Cross Section J CS 2109 Standard Drawing 10.0m Carriageway with 8.0m seal – Typical Cross Section RU3A ( B95-2284 ) Crow Guard Lid for 200L Drum Civil Standard Drawings Available : https : //infrastructure.nt.gov.au/specification-services/standard-drawings CIVIL STANDARD DRAWINGS FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 247 CIVIL STANDARD DRAWINGS FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 248 CIVIL STANDARD DRAWINGS FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 249 CIVIL STANDARD DRAWINGS FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 250 CIVIL STANDARD DRAWINGS FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 251 CIVIL STANDARD DRAWINGS FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 252 CIVIL STANDARD DRAWINGS FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 253 NORTHERN TERRITORY CLIMATE ZONES TABLE STANDARD SPECIFICATION FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE NTG REFERENCE TEXT – DECEMBER 2016 Page 254 NORTHERN TERRITORY CLIMATE ZONES TABLE 26 .
