Department of Transportation and Infrastructure Standard Specifications for Highway Construction January 2015 JA The as p prep will n It is to-da of A Stan the C Bid I of W cons Requ shal entir The as d The gove spec Qua Intro Stan Spec and Con ANUARY USE O standards pre-printed pared as de not compet the respon ate copy of Agreement , ndard Spec Crown Con tems in the Work and cle struction pro uirements o l form part rety .
Standard S efined in th Standard ern the pe cifically not ntity are oduction ; D ndard Cond cifications requisite tract .
Y 2015 OF NEW BR in the DTI componen esign aids ently serve sibility of th f the Stand Terms of cifications .
struction C e Standard early identif ovisions to of the Notic t of the C Specificatio he Definition Specificatio rformance ed as a bid found und ivision 800 ditions .
It understand behaviour FORE RUNSWICK Standard S nts of a co or as a ma e those purp he Bidder/C dard Constr Payment `` The Stand Contracts Ac Specificatio fy the scop produce th ce of Tend ontract as ns rely on t ns ( Item 00 ons form p of the Con d Quantity .
der the fo 0 - Paymen t is impera d this inter of the C EWORD K PROVINC Specificatio onstruction anual of de poses .
Contractor t ruction Con '' A '' , Genera dard Specif ct. ons are inte e , material he specified er are inco if they ha the use of s 03 ) .
part of the ntractor ev Items wh ollowing D nt & Adjust ative that r-relationsh ontractor w CIAL STAN ns are inte Contract .
esign proce to ensure th ntract includ al Conditio fications are ended to be requireme d end produ orporated b ad appeare specific wo Contract ven though hich are not Divisions : tments ; and users of hip to the o within the DARDS nded to be They are edures and hey have a ding the Ar ons `` B '' , an e complian e complete nts , and sp uct .
by reference ed here in rds and ph Documents an Item i t noted as Division 0 d Division these Stan overall Co context o used e not d they an up- rticles d the t with units pecific e and their rases s and s not a bid 000 - 900 - ndard ntract of the DEPA Janua 100 101 102 103 106 107 108 116 121 130 131 136 137 200 201 203 204 205 208 210 231 259 ARTMENT ary , 2015 Table of Co Clearing Grubbing Removing Common E Unclassifie Solid Rock Ditching Borrow Metal Pipe Metal Pipe Subdrain Subdrain O Table of Co Production Aggregate Shoulder M Fine Gradin Cold Milling Shoulder R Shoulder S Bituminous STAN of TRANS 0 0 0 0 0 0 ontents Isolated Tree Excavation d Excavation Excavation - Large Outlet ontents of Highway A Base/Subbas Material ng g - Asphalt Co Rumble Strips Subdrain s Tack Coat NDARD SP PORTATIO TA STANDA DIVISIO 000 Table o 001 Termino 002 Abbrev 003 Definitio 005 Authorit 006 Permits DIVI s DIVISION 20 Aggregates se oncrete ECIFICATI ON and INF ABLE OF CON ARD SPEC ON 000 - INTR of Contents ology iations ons ty of the Engi s ISION 100 - G 00 - PAVEME IONS FRASTRUC NTENTS CIFICATION RODUCTION ineer GRADING 140 Con 141 Con 142 Prec 161 Foun 166 Bac 167 Bac 169 Indu 182 Cha 186 Rem 191 App 199 Stan ENT STRUCT 260 Asp 261 Asp 262 Part 263 Full 264 Micr 265 Chip 267 Pulv 284 Sho 299 Stan CTURE NS N ncrete Pipe ncrete Pipe - L cast Concrete ndation Exca kfilling Around kfill For Struc uced Trench ain Link Fence moval of Fenc lication of Wa ndard Drawing TURE halt Concrete halt Concrete tial Depth Rec Depth Recyc ro Surfacing p Seal verizing ulder Process ndard Drawin Large e Box Culvert vation d Structures ctures e ce ater gs e - Method Sp e - ( ERS ) cycling cling sing gs Page 1 of 5 pecification DEPA Janua 300 301 302 304 305 311 312 321 322 331 332 335 341 342 400 401 404 406 407 408 409 410 ARTMENT ary , 2015 Table of Co Portland Ce Concrete in Reinforcing Tension Sp Steel H Pile Steel Pipe Steel Shee Excavation Precast Pre Post-Tensio Steel Supe Steel Lamin Bridge Pot Table of Co Storm Sew Precast Ca Sluice Box Frame With Adjustment Relocation Paving Cat STAN of TRANS ontents ement Concre n Structures g Steel plices es Piles et Pile Cofferd Within Coffe estressed Co oning System erstructure nated Bearing Bearings ontents wer Pipe atch Basin h Grate or Co t of Catch Bas of Catch Bas tch Basin Apr NDARD SP PORTATIO TA DIVISI ete dams erdams ncrete Beams m gs DIVIS over sins and Man sin on ECIFICATI ON and INF ABLE OF CON ON 300 - STR s SION 400 - M nholes IONS FRASTRUC NTENTS RUCTURES 343 Sea 344 Fing 345 Stee 346 Guid 348 Serv 351 Wat 361 Sho 365 Eng 366 Free 371 Rem 372 Rem 381 Rem 399 Stan MUNICIPAL 415 Pipe 416 Curb 419 Con 420 Asp 423 Rem 424 Rem 425 Rem 499 Stan CTURE led Expansio ger Joint Asse el Ballastwall de Rail Syste vice Duct - St terproofing oring ineered Fill e-Draining Ba moval of Asph moval of Conc moval of Struc ndard Drawin e Zone Materi b and Gutter ncrete Sidewa halt Sidewalk moval of Curb moval of Sidew moval of Unde ndard Drawin on Joint Assem emblies Angle m - Structure tructures ackfill halt Concrete crete ctures gs ial alk k and Gutter walk erground Serv gs Page 2 of 5 mblies es - Structures vices DEPA Janua 500 510 511 512 513 515 516 520 529 530 531 532 533 534 538 539 540 600 601 602 603 604 605 606 607 608 609 610 611 612 ARTMENT ary , 2015 Table of Co Guide Post Removal of Guide Rail Removal of Energy-Abs Removal of Terminal Cast-in-Pla Concrete E Under Roa Undergroun Undergroun Power Poin Removal of Screw Base Removal of Sign or Lig Table of Co Geotextile Sediment C Filter Scree Jute Mats Erosion Co Removal of Gabions Random R Rock Weir Armour Sto Individual R Gravel for F STAN of TRANS DI ontents ts f Guide Posts f Guide Rail sorbing Guide f Energy-Abs ace Concrete Encased Road dbed Duct nd Duct nd Junction B nt f Power Point e f Screw Base ht Base ontents Control Fence en ontrol Structur f Erosion Con iprap one Protection Rock Placeme Fish Habitat NDARD SP PORTATIO TA IVISION 500 s e Rail Termin orbing Guide Barrier dbed Duct Box t e DIVISION e re ntrol Structure n ent ECIFICATI ON and INF ABLE OF CON - TRAFFIC C al Rail N 600 - ENVI e IONS FRASTRUC NTENTS CONTROL DE 541 Rem 542 Ligh 543 Rem 544 Med 545 Rem 550 Sign 551 Rem 552 Roa 553 Rem 554 Ove 555 Ove 556 Rem 557 Ove 558 Rem 571 Pave 576 Con 599 Stan RONMENTA 613 Tops 614 Hyd 615 Fert 616 Mulc 617 Roo 618 Tree 620 Tem 621 Tem 622 Fish 623 Culv 630 Soil 699 Stan CTURE EVICES moval of Sign ht Standard moval of Light dian Flashing moval of Medi n Post moval of Sign adside Sign moval of Road erhead Sign S erhead Sign S moval of Over erhead Sign moval of Over ement Markin nstruction Traf ndard Drawin AL soil roseeding tilizing ching ot Wads es and Shrub mporary Wate mporary Wate h Rescue vert Erosion P Reinforceme ndard Drawin or Light Base t Standard Light an Flashing L Post dside Sign Structure Foun Structure rhead Sign St rhead Sign ngs ffic Control gs s r Barrier r Control Wor Protection ent gs Page 3 of 5 e Light ndation tructure rks DEPA Janua 800 801 802 806 807 808 900 905 906 907 908 912 913 916 917 918 919 921 922 926 927 928 931 932 933 ARTMENT ary , 2015 Table of Co Haulage - S Haulage - A Overhaul - Overhaul - Overhaul - Table of Co Scheduling Work Sche Subcontrac Supply of M Hiring Prac Insurance S Signs Traffic Con Detours Maintenanc Constructio Pits and Qu Examinatio Asphalt Co Geotechnic Scales and Private Tru Heavy Equ STAN of TRANS DI ontents Soil , Rock and Asphalt Conc Common Exc Unclassified Solid Rock E ontents g edule ctors Materials ctices Schedule trol Persons ce of Traffic F on Roads uarries on of Soils Info oncrete Core D cal Instrumen d Weighing Pr cks ipment NDARD SP PORTATIO TA DIV IN IVISION 800 d Aggregate rete cavation Excavation Excavation DIVISION 90 Flow ormation Data tation rocedures ECIFICATI ON and INF ABLE OF CON ISION 700 - L LIBRAR NTERNAL US - PAYMENTS 00 - STANDA IONS FRASTRUC NTENTS LIBRARY RY SE ONLY S & ADJUST 810 Fixe 811 Forc 812 Extr 820 Pay 821 Adju 825 Mob ARD CONDIT 934 Bac 936 Com 941 Line 946 Wor 947 Disp 948 Env 951 Wor 952 Safe 953 Aud 956 Con 957 Fals 958 Form 961 Part 962 Valu 971 Adv 996 Limi 997 Spe 998 Com 999 Stan CTURE TMENTS ed Rates ce Account ra Work ment Adjustm ustment for As bilization TIONS k - Up Alarms mpaction es and Grades rk Progressio posal Areas ironmental Re rking Conditio ety Support S ited Safety P nstruction Dra sework mwork tnering ue Engineerin isements ited Funds cified Work mpletion Date ndard Drawin ments sphalt Binder s s n equirements ons Systems rogram awings and Ca ng gs Page 4 of 5 r Price alculations DEPA Janua ARTMENT ary , 2015  Sho  Sta - Ar - Te - G  Ins  For  Pla  Affi STAN of TRANS ort Form Cont andard Constr rticles of Agre erms of Paym eneral Condit urance Sched rm of Tender “ ans and Stand idavit “ I ” NDARD SP PORTATIO TA tract ruction Contra eement ment “ A ” tions “ B ” dule “ E ” “ F ” dard Specificat S STANDA ECIFICATI ON and INF ABLE OF CON APPEND act tions “ G ” SUBJECT IN ARD DRAW IONS FRASTRUC NTENTS DIX NDEX WING INDE CTURE EX Page 5 of 5 DEPA TABLE Janua IT 0 0 0 0 0 ARTMENT E OF CONTE ary , 2015 TEM 001 T 002 A 003 D 005 A 006 P STAN of TRANS ENTS Terminology .
Abbreviations Definitions .... Authority of th Permits ......... NDARD SP PORTATIO DESCR ..................... .................... ..................... e Engineer .. ..................... ECIFICATI ON and INF INTRODUCTIO RIPTION ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... IONS FRASTRUC ON ............ ............ ........... .............. .......... CTURE NUMBE PAGE 2 4 5 1 1 DI R OF ES VISION 000 Page 000-1 DEPA TERM Janua 001.1 001.2 001.3 001.4 001.5 ARTMENT INOLOGY ary , 2015 TERMINOL .1 This do .1 Item to t .2 Arti .2 Whene that any “ reques “ unacce “ design followed .3 Unless shall re GENDER N .1 Working pronou intende HEADINGS .1 The he conven meanin PARTICULA .1 Particul this doc .2 Particul CONFLICT .1 Whene any oth practice .2 In the e betwee STAN of TRANS LOGY ocument is div m is generally the Work .
icle is used to ver in the Co ything is , don sted ” , “ deem eptable ” , “ sati nated ” , and su d by the word otherwise sp fer to this doc NOTATION g titles havin ns such as he ed to refer to p S , TITLES and adings , titles ience and for ng of the Stand AR SPECIFIC lar Specificati cument and a lar Specificati S IN CODES ver a conflict her reference e , the most str event of a con en the choices NDARD SP PORTATIO vided into spec y used with te o reference an ontract Docum e or to be do med neces isfactory ” , “ un uch similar ex ds “ by the Eng pecified in the cument .
ng a mascul e , his and him persons of eith d CAPTIONS and captions r the ease of r dard Conditio CATIONS ions are defin re particular a ons shall prev AND STAND in interpretat ed document ringent require nflict the Eng s of action as n ECIFICATI ON and INF INTRODUCTIO cific Items .
ext that conta ny subsection ments and in d one , if , as , wh sary ” , “ perm nsatisfactory ” , xpressions the gineer ” or “ to t e text , all refe line gender , m are utilized her sex and a s appearing in reference only ns , Specificat ned as Specif and specific to vail over those DARDS tion , applicatio , including b ement shall a ineer shall be noted to be in IONS FRASTRUC ON ains reference of an Item .
documents re en , or where mitted ” , “ su “ suspended ” en the expres he Engineer ” erences to Sp such as wo in these Spe re gender neu n this docume y and in no wa tions and/or th fications adop o a Contract .
e published h on or directio but not limite apply to the W e the sole jud n conflict betw CTURE e to payment esulting during “ contemplate uitable ” , “ ap ” , “ sufficient ” , ssion shall ha as the case m pecifications , orkman , work ecifications fo utral .
ent have been ay define , lim he Particular S pted subsequ erein whenev on occurs betw ed to related Work .
dge of the mo ween the docu and performa g the Work it ed ” , “ required ” pproved ” , “ a “ authorized ” , ave the same may be .
Items , Tables kmen and fo r the sake of n inserted as it or enlarge t Specifications uent to the pu ver in conflict t ween this doc codes and/o ost stringent re ments .
ITEM : 001 Page 001-1 ance related is provided ” , “ directed ” , acceptable ” , “ specified ” , e force as if s or Figures oreman and brevity , are a matter of he scope or s. ublication of therewith .
cument and or standard equirement , TER Pag 001 RMINOLOGY ge 001-2 1.6 CROSS .1 Cros and .1 .2 .3 Y -REFERENC ss-references can be categ Inclusive – re ( xxx.2 ) or Co of the work u for the adher of the Item .
Separate Item portion of the with… ” or “ to Item ( Item x appears as s Standard Dra DEPARTM ES s form an imp gorized as follo eference to a onstruction ( xx under the Item rence to or th m – referenc e work under the requirem xx ) indicates uch in the “ Lis awing – refere STAN MENT of TR INTRODUC portant role in ows : a portion of a xx.4 ) section , m where the r e performanc ce to another the Item whe ents of… ” the that the cro st of Approxim ence to the ap DARD SPE RANSPORT CTION the interpreta another Specif indicating tha eference is n ce of the requ r Specification re the referen e cross-refere oss-referenced mate Quantitie pplicable draw ECIFICATIO TATION an ation of the S fication Item , at the cross-re oted .
There w uirements of t n Item ( Item nce is noted is nced Item .
Th d Item is a s es ” of the tend wing .
ONS nd INFRAS Standard Spec in general to eferenced sec will be no sep he cross-refe xxx ) , indicat s carried out he cross-refer separate unit der documents TRUCTUR ITEM : 00 January , 20 cification Item o the Materia ction forms pa parate payme erenced sectio ting that som “ in accordanc rence to the fu t payment an s. RE 01 15 ms als art nt on me ce ull nd DEPA ABBR Janua 002.1 ARTMENT REVIATIONS ary , 2015 ABBREVIA .1 Wherev Contrac AA AC AIS AN AP AS AS AW BP CG CA CS CW DE DT DF MT OP PC PC SS TR SI AA CH CA CE CH CS CS DR EM EO EP ESA GC LO PC PE PV RA RC RO SP STAN of TRANS ATIONS ver the follow ct Documents SHTO CI SI SI EGNB CE TM WS R GSB AN/CSA SA WB ELG I O TO PSS CI CA PC B DT W AP BDC P PA R MM OS P AL C C P C AP CP OW CAP NDARD SP PORTATIO ing abbreviati s , their intent a American As American Co American Iro American Na Association o American So American So American We Bureau of Pu Canadian Ge Canadian Sta Canadian Sta Canadian We Department o Department o Department o Ministry of Tr Ontario Provi Prestressed C Portland Cem Steel Structu Transportatio International Average Ann Creosote Har Corrugated A Common Exc Canadian Hig Aluminum Co Aluminum Co Dimension R Environmenta Equivalent O Environmenta Equivalent Si General Cond Limit of Contr Pre-cast Con Polyethylene Polyvinyl Chl Reclaimed As Reinforced C Right of Way Structural Pla ECIFICATI ON and INF INTRODUCTIO ions or terms and meaning s Org sociation of S oncrete Institut n and Steel In ational Standa of Professiona ociety of Civil E ociety for Testi elding Society ublic Works , D eneral Standa andards Asso andards Asso elding Bureau of Environmen of Transportat of Fisheries a ransportation incial Standar Concrete Inst ment Associat res Painting C on Research B System of Un ual Daily Traf rdwood Aluminum Allo cavation ghway Bridge oated Corruga orrugated Stee atio for plastic al Manageme pening Size al Protection P ingle Axle Loa ditions “ B ” of t ract ncrete Pipe oride sphalt Pavem Concrete Pipe ate Corrugate IONS FRASTRUC ON are used in t shall be as fo ganizations State Highway te nstitute ards Institute al Engineers a Engineers ing and Mater y Department of ards Board ociation ociation u nt and Local G tion and Infras and Oceans of Ontario rd Specificatio titute tion Council Board nits Terms ffic oy Pipe e Design Code ated Steel Pip el Pipe-Arch c pipe ent Manual ( D Plan ad the Contract ment d Aluminium A CTURE the Specificat ollows : y and Transpo and Geoscien rials f Commerce Government ( structure ( New on e pe DTI ) Alloy Pipe tions , the Pla ortation Officia ntists of New B ( New Brunswi w Brunswick ) ITEM : 002 Page 002-1 ns , or other als Brunswick ick ) AB Pag 002 002 BBREVIATION ge 002-2 2.2 PUBLIC .1 Whe the t 2.3 SI TERM .1 The out .2 Oth are .3 Wh of m Ph Are De En Fo Le NS SPCSP SPCAPA SPCSPA SRE UNE WATCM ATIONS AND en publication time of the sig MS e following ta t under the te her terms and e used .
here no units measure shal hysical Quan ea ensity nergy orce ngth DEPARTM Structural Structural Structural Solid Roc Unclassifi Work Area D REGULATIO ns or regulatio gning of the C ble of commo rms of the Sta d abbreviation are indicated ll be millimetr tity STA MENT of TR INTRODUC Plate Alumin Plate Corrug Plate Alumin k Excavation ed Excavation a Traffic Cont ONS ons are referre Contract .
on metric term andard Speci ns may be use on the Plans res unless oth C square square hectar square gram p kilogra tonne joule ( kilojou megaj Newto kilonew megan micron ANDARD S RANSPORT CTION Terms um Coated C ated Aluminiu um Coated C n trol Manual ( D ed to , the refe ms and abbrev ifications .
ed if they are s for the meas herwise noted Common SI u e millimetre e metre re e kilometre per cubic met am per cubic per cubic me Newton metre ule oule on wton newton n SPECIFICA TATION an Corrugated Ste um Alloy Pipe Corrugated Ste DTI ) erence is to th viations shall referenced in surement of le d. units tre metre etre e ) ATIONS nd INFRAS eel Pipe -Arch eel Pipe-Arch he latest versi apply to all W n the context ength or dista SI Sym mm m2 ha km g/m3 ( m kg/m t/m J kJ MJ N kN MN m TRUCTUR ITEM : 00 January , 20 ion available Work carried in which they ance , the unit mbol m2 2 a m2 mg/L ) m3 m3 J J N N m RE 02 15 at y DEPA ABBR Janua ARTMENT REVIATIONS ary , 2015 Physi Light Mass Perme Powe Press Stress Temp Time Torqu Unit W STAN of TRANS ical Quantity eability r sure s perature ue Weight NDARD SP PORTATIO y ECIFICATI ON and INF INTRODUCTIO Com millimetre metre kilometre lux kilolux milligram gram kilogram tonne metre per metre per watt kilowatt pascal kilopasca megapasc newton pe kilonewto meganew degree ce second minute hour day year newton m kilonewto IONS FRASTRUC ON mmon SI unit e r second r year l cal er square me on per square wton per squa elsius metre on per cubic m CTURE ts etre metre are metre metre SI Symbo mm m km lx klx mg g kg t m/s m/a W kW Pa kPa MPa N/m2 kN/m2 MN/m2 C s min h d a N•m kN/m3 ITEM : 002 Page 002-3 ol AB Pag BBREVIATION ge 002-4 Ph Ve Vis Vis Vo Vo Vo NS hysical Quan elocity scosity Dyna scosity Kine olume solid olume fluid olume Rate o DEPARTM tity amic matic f Flow STA MENT of TR INTRODUC C metre kilome pascal millipa square square cubic m cubic d cubic m millilitr litre kilolitre cubic m cubic m litre pe ANDARD S RANSPORT CTION Common SI u per second etre per hour l second ascal second e millimetre p e metre per se millimetre decimetre metre re e metre metre per sec er minute SPECIFICA TATION an units er second econd cond ATIONS nd INFRAS SI Sym m/s km/ Pa• mPa mm2 m2/ mm dm m3 mL L kL m3 m3/ L/m TRUCTUR ITEM : 00 January , 20 mbol s /h •s a•s 2/s /s m3 m3 3 L L 3 /s in RE 02 15 DEPA DEFIN Janua 003.1 003.2 ARTMENT NITIONS ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 The fol meanin .2 Where meanin of a cap .3 Where standar having DEFINITIO Actual Basi mark-u employ Addendum Aggregate Paveme Aggregate and the Backslope - Bidder - a represe Borrow - an of-Way Bridge - any Bridge Leng backs o Bridge Wid betwee railing .
Change Or Contrac basis of Completion comple STAN of TRANS TION llowing words ng ascribed to it is intende ngs ascribed in pital letter for t words and p rd dictionary d regard to the NS ic Rate - rate ps for the C yee and not di - see Tender Base - the ent .
Subbase - th e Subgrade .
- Slope betwe a person , pa entative , subm n excavated m . y Structure in gth - the grea of abutment w th - the clea en the bottom rder - a writte ct Documents f payment and Date - the eted .
NDARD SP PORTATIO s and phrase them set out ed that words n this definitio the first letter phrases are definition , Com context in wh e per hour pa Contractor ’ s o rectly accrued Addendum layer of crus e layer of agg een the back-o artnership or mitting a tende material used excess of 3 m ater dimension walls or betwee r width of a m of curbs or , en order issue s or Quantities d time adjustm date specifie ECIFICATI ON and INF INTRODUCTIO es , wherever below in orde s and phrase ons item such of each word not defined i mpilation of A hich such word id to the Con overhead , pro d to that empl shed aggrega gregate place of-ditch and o r corporation er for the Work in constructio m in span leng n of a Structu en ends of Br Structure me if curbs are ed by the En s or both , wit ments for the W d in the Con IONS FRASTRUC ON used in the er to provide c es used in th words and p or each word n this item t ASTM Standar ds or phrases ntractor ’ s emp ofit or other oyee .
ate placed as ed as a distin riginal ground , acting dire k. on ; the source gth carrying ve re measured ridge deck .
easured at rig not used , be ngineer to the thin the scope Work affected ntract Docum CTURE Contract Doc consistency a he Contract D hrases shall b d of a phrase .
then reliance rd Definitions s are used .
ployee exclus administrativ s a distinct ct layer betw d. ectly or thro e of which is lo ehicular and/o along the cen ght angles to etween the in e Contractor , e of the Cont d by the chan ents on whic cuments , sha nd clarity of in Documents a be designated should be p and/or ASTM ive of any all ve costs rela layer directly een the Aggr ough a duly ocated outsid or pedestrian ntre of the de o the centre o nner faces of covering cha ract and esta ge .
ch the Contra ITEM : 003 Page 003-1 all have the ntent .
are to have d by the use placed on a M D653 , and owances or ated to the y below the regate Base authorized e the Right- traffic .
eck between of the deck f parapet or anges in the ablishing the act is to be DE Pag FINITIONS ge 003-2 Conform whe mea Contract Contract emp paym Contract Gen Add such ame Culvert - for t Day - a c Daylight on a Dust - th teste the w Enginee of N sect This unde thro expl will b Equipme main com Finished Foreslop grou Highway boun extra Initial Wo D m - complianc ere working to ans complianc t - as per the A tor - the party ployees , who ment of all leg t Documents neral Conditio enda incorpo h other docu endments to t - any Structur he passage o calendar day t – shall refer a daily basis fr he fine partic ed by standar whole sample er - the Chief New Brunswic tion 1 ( 1 ) of the s shall include er the Contra ugh authoriz lanations and be given .
ent - all mac ntenance , and mpletion of the d Grade - the g pe - the Slope und in case of y - the whole nded by the a land which t ork Schedule DEPARTME ce with reaso olerances are ce with such to Articles of Ag y of the first is primarily lia gal debts perta - the execu ons `` B ” , Sta orated into the uments as m he Contract m re , not classifi of water under and shall incl to the hours rom the Enviro cles of a mas rd sieve analy e passing the Engineer of th ck otherwise e Contract .
e any person ct and shall i zed assistant directions ne chinery , and d also tools a Work .
grade to indic e between the f a fill .
strip of land Right of Way the Owner ma - the Work sc STA ENT of TRA INTRODUC onable and c e not specified olerances .
reement of th part to the C able for the ac aining to the W ted Articles andard Speci e Contract be may be liste made pursuan ed as a Bridg r any Roadwa ude all days w between sun onment Cana s defined by ysis methods 100 mm sieve he Departme named as th n authorized b include withou ts , such as ecessary for th vehicles , tog nd apparatus cate the finishe e Shoulder an reserved for a y lines , as at ay from time t chedule subm ANDARD S ANSPORTA CTION ustomary ma d. Where wo e Standard C Contract acting cceptable perf Work .
of Agreemen ifications , Pa efore the exe ed in the A nt to the prov ge , and/or dra ay or driveway without excep rise to sunset ada Weather w the percenta on a sample e size .
nt of Transpo he Engineer-A by him/her to ut being limite Engineers , he satisfactory gether with th necessary fo ed Pavement nd the ditch , o and secured present , or a o time acquire mitted per Item SPECIFICA ATION and anufacturing a orking toleran Construction C g directly or formance of t nt , the Tende articular Spec cution of the Articles of Ag isions of the A ainage system y. tion .
t. Sunrise and website .
age passing t ed prepared a ortation and In Architect as p o perform on ed to any pers Technicians , y prosecution he necessary or the proper c elevation of t or between th for the use o as said lines e during the p m 906 .
ATIONS d INFRAST and construct nces are spec Contract .
indirectly thro the Contract a er , Terms of cifications , P Articles of A greement an Articles of Ag m which provid d sunset time he 75 micron and tested on nfrastructure o per General her/his beha sons acting e Inspectors , and completi y supplies fo construction a the centre line he Shoulder a of the travellin may be chan progress of the TRUCTURE ITEM : 00 January , 20 tion tolerance cified , Confor ough agents o and also for th Payment `` A Plans and an greement , an nd subseque greement .
des an openin es are availab n size sieve a the fraction o of the Provinc Conditions “ B alf any functio ither directly o by whom a ion of the Wo or upkeep an and acceptab e. and the origin g public , bein nged to includ e Contract .
E 03 15 es m or he A '' , ny nd nt ng le as of ce B ” on or all rk nd le al ng de DEPA DEFIN Janua ARTMENT NITIONS ary , 2015 Laboratory by the O Lane - the p Lump Sum inclusiv althoug Overbreak the esta any roc Overburden exclusiv Overexcava Enginee Owner - sha Pavement - Pavement Subbas load to Plans - sha and ot dimens Professiona practice and Co Profile - a c excava distinct Progress E the Ter Public Holid New Br Quantity - th to be u actual Docum Right-of-Wa Roadbed - ( referen STAN of TRANS - any official t Owner .
portion of a tra Price - a Co ve for the com gh a Quantity m - the portion ablished paym ck formation e n - any materi ve of the grub ation - all exc er .
all be as state - surface and/ Structure - a se , Aggregate the Subgrade all include all ther drawings sions and deta al Engineer – e in the Provin ode of Ethics .
charted line in tion and grad from a plan o stimate - sha ms of Payme day - shall inc runswick Day , he amount pr sed as an est aggregate of ents as determ ay - the land s that portion nced from cen NDARD SP PORTATIO testing facility avelled way fo ontract item f mpletion of the may be given of any rock w ment lines reg ncountered , o al that must b bbed material .
cavation beyo ed in the Gene /or base mixes all material p e Base and P e. graphical rep s , or exact ails of the Wor – shall mean nce of New B ndicating grad ding Work ; tak or overhead vi ll have the sa nt `` A '' and the clude the follo , Labour Day , resented on th timate of the f Work perfo mined by mea secured and re of the Road ntreline ) .
ECIFICATI ON and INF INTRODUCTIO maintained b or the moveme for which pay e Work define in the Contra which is exca ardless of wh or to any othe be removed to ond that spe eral Condition s whether Por placed above Pavement prov presentations reproductions rk .
n a qualified Brunswick , an des and dista ken along a c iew .
ame meaning e General Con owing Days o Remembran he Tender Fo Work .
Final p ormed or ma asurements m eserved to the dway between IONS FRASTRUC ON by the Owner ent of a single yment will be ed .
Payment act Documents avated , displac hether the exc r cause .
o access unde ecified , perform ns “ B ” section rtland cement e the Subgra viding suppor including but s thereof , w Professional nd as defined ances and usu centreline or o g as “ progress nditions “ B ” .
only : New Ye ce Day , and C orm is to be co payment to the terial furnishe made by the E e public for Hi n the inside CTURE or any other t e line of vehic made at a s is not based o s. ced , or loose cess is due to erlying suitab med without 1 ( 1 ) .
t , asphalt con ade which w rt for , and the not limited to which show l Engineer re and bound b ually depth of other designa s claim ” as at ear ’ s Day , Go Christmas Da onsidered as e Contractor ed in accord Engineer .
ighway purpo edges of Slo testing facility cles .
single tendere on a measure ened outside a the inherent c le constructio the written o crete and/or c would include e distribution o o Profiles , cro the location , egistered or by the APEGN f cut and heig ated line .
A si ttributed to it b ood Friday , Ca ay .
approximate will be made dance with th oses .
opes of ditch ITEM : 003 Page 003-3 y designated ed price , all ed Quantity , and beyond character of on materials , order of the chip seal .
Aggregate of the traffic oss-sections character , licensed to NB By-Laws ght of fill for de view , as by usage in anada Day , only , and is only for the he Contract es and fills DE Pag FINITIONS ge 003-4 Roadwa the appe Shoulde ( refe Sidewalk Skew or the case Slope - r Soil Par mate Specifica that base Statutory Mon birth proc Chri Stripping rem Structure struc foun clas Subgrad surfa Substan acce rem D ay - that portio Slopes ( refe ertaining to th er - that portion erenced from k - that portion r Skew Angle Roadway with e of Culverts w run to rise exp rticle Sizes - erial ; bo co gr sa sil cla ations - the s define the p ed .
y Holiday – nday , the day hday of the S clamation of t istmas Day , a g - either the oval of the as e ( s ) - Bridges ctures , concr ndation drains sed herein .
de - the layer ace which for ntial Completio eptance and o ediation of oth DEPARTME on of the Righ erenced from he Work .
n of the Road centreline ) of n of the Road - the acute a h a line paralle with the centre pressed as a r the following oulder aver obble aver ravel part and part t part exh ay fine to ex cons 2 µm statements , p products , mate shall include y fixed by pro Sovereign , Ca the Governor and Boxing Da e removal of sphalt cement s , Culverts , c rete barriers , s and other fe r , whether in ms the finishe on - The con occupancy , e her deficiencie STA ENT of TRA INTRODUC ht-of-Way req centreline ) , way from the f the Slopes of way construc ngle formed b el to the face e line of the b ratio .
soil particles rage dimensio rage dimensio ticle passing a ticle passing a ticle passing a ibits no streng grained soil o xhibit plasticit siderable stre m. rovisions and erials and wo the following oclamation o anada Day , in Council as ay .
topsoil and/o from the agg catch basins , , cribbing , w eatures which cut or fill , as ed elevation o ndition of the xcept for the es as defined ANDARD S ANSPORTA CTION quired for cons and includin outside edge f ditches and cted for the us by the interse of the abutme barrel .
sizes shall a on greater tha on between 7 a 75 mm sieve a 4.75 mm sie a 75 µm sieve gth when air d or the fine gra ty within a ran ength when air d requirement orkmanship u g Days only : f the Govern New Brunsw s a general d or Overburden regate .
drop inlets , m walls , building h may be enc prepared to of this layer , de Work when performance by the Engine SPECIFICA ATION and struction , limi g ditches , ch es of the Lane fills .
e of pedestria ction of a line ents , the cent apply for the an 300 mm .
5 and 300 mm e and retained eve and retain e and is non-p dried .
ained portion o nge of water c r dry .
Also de ts contained i upon which th New Year ’ s nor in Counci wick Day , Lab day of thanks n or the actio manholes , ret gs , sewers , countered in t support the efined at the c the Work Sit of any clean eer .
ATIONS d INFRAST ited by the ou hannels and e or Lanes to t ans .
e normal to th tre line of the terms used t m. d on a 4.75 m ned on a 75 µm plastic to slight of a soil that c contents and e efined as parti in the Contra he Contract fo Day , Good il for the cele bour Day , the sgiving , Reme on of water r taining walls , service pipe the Work and Pavement St centreline .
te is ready fo nup and/or fin TRUCTURE ITEM : 00 January , 20 utside edges o all Structure the inside edg e centre line o piers , or in th to describe th mm sieve .
m sieve .
tly plastic and can be made exhibits icle finer than act Document for the Work Friday , Easte ebration of th e day fixed b embrance Da resulting in th overhead sig es , sub-drain d not otherwis tructure ; or th or the Owner ishing , and th E 03 15 of es ge of he he d ts , is er he by y , he gn s , se he r ’ s he DEPA DEFIN Janua ARTMENT NITIONS ary , 2015 Substructur skewba wingwa cast in Superintend Work .
Superstruct bearing Tender Add has the compon docume Ticket - see Unit Price - Equipm necess Utility - a fa is not l televisio Weight Cer delivere describ informa Work - incl supplie Work Area Work Site interest STAN of TRANS re - all that p ack of arches alls and wing place box culv dent - the Co ture - all that gs of simple an dendum - a c e effect of mo nent of the te ents to which e Weight Certi - the amount ment , materia ary to comple acility maintain imited to san on services .
rtificate - a vou ed to and ve e the Quantit ation pertinent udes all labo d and installe - the location - the lands a t , upon which NDARD SP PORTATIO part of the S and tops of f protection ra verts and cas ontractor ’ s au t part of the nd continuous change in a te odifying the te nder and sha the Addendum ficate .
t stated in the ls , transporta ete the Work a ned by a mun nitary sewer , ucher , issued erified by the ty of material t and necessa our , material a d or erected c in the Work S and premises the Work is to ECIFICATI ON and INF INTRODUCTIO Structure below footings of rig ailings , and fo st in place con uthorized repr Structure sup s spans , and t ender issued ender .
A Ten all be deemed m refers .
e Contract re ation costs a and does not i nicipality , publ storm sewer , by the Owne Owner ’ s rep upon which p ary for the eva and services complete at th Site on which W owned by th o be performe IONS FRASTRUC ON ow the bearin gid frames ; in or the expres ncrete arches .
resentative of pported on p the deck slab prior to the ti nder Addendu d to take prece epresenting th nd expenses include the HS ic authority or , water , elect r at the point presentative a payment of th aluation of the required , as he place of bu Work is being he Owner or ed and as defi CTURE ngs of simple ncluding but n sed purposes f record in re iers or abutm of rigid frame me and date um shall be c edence over he price per s , and any a ST. r regulated au tric , gas , stea of origin of a at the Work he load is to b e load by the E shown or de uilding .
g carried out .
r in which the ined in the Co e and continu not limited to s of winter co esponsible ch ments located es .
of tender clo considered as those parts o unit for all la and all other uthority and in am , telephone load to a truc Site .
This vo be based and Engineer and escribed in th e Owner has ontract Docum ITEM : 003 Page 003-5 uous spans , ; backwalls , oncreteing - harge of the d above the osing , which s an integral of the tender abour , tools , incidentals ncludes , but e and cable k driver and oucher shall d shall show others .
he Contract , proprietary ments .
DEPA AUTH Janua 005.1 005.2 005.3 ARTMENT ORITY OF TH ary , 2015 ORDERS O .1 The Co given a .2 If the C Engine accorda CONSTRU .1 Equipm Docum .2 The En which f UNAUTHO .1 Any W descrip notifica .2 Upon o replace .1 If t Eng acc STAN of TRANS HE ENGINEE OF THE ENG ontractor shal at any time by Contractor di er , the Cont ance with term CTION METH ment and meth ents .
ngineer reserv fails to consis RIZED WOR ork done or ptions detaile ation , shall be order of the ed by the Con the Contracto gineer may ca cordance with NDARD SP PORTATIO ER INEER ll promptly an y the Enginee sagrees with tractor shall ms set out in HODS AND E hods used sh ves the right t tently produc RK material supp d in the Co considered a Engineer , un ntractor , at his or fails to co ause unautho h the terms of PECIFICAT ON and INF INTRODUCTIO nd efficiently r with respect any order , perform the the General C EQUIPMENT hall be approp to order the d e satisfactory plied by the ontract Docum as unauthorize nauthorized W s/her own exp omply prompt orized Work o f the General TIONS FRASTRUC ON comply with a t to the Work direction or i Work as in Conditions .
priate to perfo discontinuance y results .
Contractor w ments , or es ed and may n Work or mate pense .
tly with any or material to Conditions .
CTURE all orders , dir or the condu instruction gi nstructed and orm the Work e or use of an which is beyo stablished by not be measu erial shall be order made be remedied rections and ct thereof .
ven at any t d shall serve k outlined in th ny Equipmen ond the lines , y the Owner ured for paym e remedied , r under this S , removed or ITEM : 005 Page 005-1 instructions time by the e notice in he Contract t or method grades , or by written ent .
removed or Section , the replaced in DEPA PERM Janua 006.1 ARTMENT MITS ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 The Co Item 94 .2 All othe requisit expens STAN of TRANS TION ontractor sha 48 and the Co er permits req te for the car se , unless oth NDARD SP PORTATIO ll review all p ontract Docum quired , but no rrying out of erwise specif ECIFICATI ON and INF INTRODUCTIO permits in for ments .
ot forming pa the Work sha fied .
IONS FRASTRUC ON rce for the W art of the Con all be obtaine CTURE Work and the ntract Docum ed by the Co conditions as ments but nec ontractor , at h ITEM : 006 Page 006-1 s set out in cessary and his/her own DEPA TABLE Janua IT 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 ARTMENT E OF CONTE ary , 2015 TEM 01 C 02 G 03 R 06 C 07 U 08 S 16 D 21 B 30 M 31 M 36 S 37 S 40 C 41 C 42 P 61 F 66 B 67 B 69 In 82 C 86 R 91 A 99 S 106 - 1 108 - 1 136 - 1 137 - 1 140 - 1 161 - 1 161 - 2 161 - 3 161 - 4 161 - 5 161 - 6 161 - 7 182 - 1 182 - 2 STAN of TRANS ENTS Clearing ........ Grubbing .......
Removal of Is Common Exca Unclassified E Solid Rock Ex Ditching ........
Borrow .......... Metal Pipe .... Metal Pipe – L Subdrain ........ Subdrain Outl Concrete Pipe Concrete Pipe Precast Concr Foundation Ex Backfilling Aro Backfill For St nduced Trenc Chain Link Fe Removal of Fe Application of Standard Draw Shaping Solid Ro Subdrain Subdrain Tension Case 1.1 Case 1.2 Case 2.1 Case 2.2 Case 3.1 Foundati Foundati Chain Lin Chain Lin NDARD SP PORTATIO DESCR ..................... ..................... olated Trees .
avation ......... Excavation .... xcavation ...... ..................... ..................... ..................... Large ............. ..................... et ................. e .................... e - Large ....... rete Box Culv xcavation ..... ound Structure tructures ....... ch ................. ence .............. ence ............. Water .......... wings of Overburde ck Transitions n n Outlet Rod/Bar Asse 1 - Cross Culv 2 - Cross Culv 1 - Cross Culv 2 - Cross Culv 1 - Storm Drai ion Excavatio ion Excavatio nk Fence nk Gate ECIFICATI ON and INF GRADING RIPTION ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... vert ............... ..................... es ................ ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... en at Top of S s ( longitudina embly vert : Subgrad vert : Subgrad vert : Original vert : Original inage Culvert on for Footing on for Footing IONS FRASTRUC ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... .................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... .....................
Solid Rock Ba al ) de Above Orig de Above Orig Ground Abov Ground Abov t Longitudinal s - Solid Roc s - Common CTURE NUMBE PAGE .. 2 ... 2 .... 1 .... 5 .... 2 ... 5 .... 2 ... 4 .... 4 .... 2 ... 2 .... 2 ... 4 .... 9 ... 8 ... 3 .... 2 .... 2 .... 2 .... 3 .... 1 .... 1 ackslope ginal Ground ginal Ground ve Subgrade ve Subgrade l to the Centre k and Commo over Solid Ro DI R OF ES - Trench  1 - Trench > 1 - Trench  2 - Trench > 2 eline of Road on Cases ock Case VISION 100 Page 100-1 .2 m .2 m 2.2 m .2 m dway DEPA CLEA Janua 101.1 101.2 101.3 101.4 ARTMENT RING ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite brush , a .2 Mercha market MATERIAL .1 None id SUBMITTA .1 The Co CONSTRU .1 The Co specific .2 The En .3 Mercha materia the Com .4 Before licence .1 The Pro .2 If th Wo .5 The dri Transpo .1 In f No sha .6 Trees s the eve .7 Non-me 101.4.6 .1 No of a .2 All eve STAN of TRANS TION em consists of and slash .
antable Timbe in the genera S dentified .
ALS ontractor shall CTION ontractor sha cally directed b gineer shall id antable timber al shall becom mpletion Date commencing , the Contract e price shall b oducts Market he former lice ork to the form iver of any ve ortation Certif filling out the . ''
shall be `` xx all be identified shall be cut so ent of significa erchantable tr 6 ) using Equip shredding , ch a watercourse other non-me enly distribute NDARD SP PORTATIO f cutting and s er is defined a al vicinity of the submit , upon all carry out t by the Engine dentify clearin r shall be sa me the propert e. g clearing on tor shall offer t be the curren ting Board res ensee decide mer licensee ’ s ehicle transpo ficate ( TC ) for TC , `` Other '' x-xxxx '' ( the C d. o that stump h ant snow cove rees not felle pment designe hipping , or pla e or wetland .
erchantable tr d over the gro ECIFICATI ON and INF GRADING salvaging Me as any timbe e Contract .
n request , a co the Work as er .
ng limits and b lvaged , unles ty of the Cont any part of to sell to the f nt price negot sponsible for t es to purchas specifications orting wood f r `` Crown Land ( in the top rig Contract num height is not gr er , to a height d by cutting ed for that pur acement of sh rees , and all b ound within th IONS FRASTRUC rchantable Ti r for which th opy of any pe indicated in buffer zone lim ss otherwise tractor and sh the Work Sit former license tiated betwee the area in wh e the cut tim s. from the Wor d Permit Harve ght corner ) us mber ) ; and the reater than 0. as agreed wit may be shred rpose , but sha hredded or ch brush and sla he clearing lim CTURE mber , and dis he Contractor rmit ( s ) require the Contrac mits with ribbo approved by hall be remove te that had b ee all merchan en the former hich the timbe mber , the Con rk Area ( s ) sha est '' for each se `` DTI ROW e place name .3 m above av th the Enginee dded in place all not be bulld hipped materia ash shall be s mits .
sposing of all r can find an ed to carry ou ct Documents ns or similar m the Enginee ed from the W been Crown ntable timber licensee and er is harvested ntractor shall all have in th load .
W '' ; under `` Ha e of the clear verage ground er .
e ( to a stump dozed down .
al shall occur shredded or c ITEM : 101 Page 101-1 other trees , established t the Work .
s and/or as means .
r. Salvaged Work Site by Land under involved .
d the Forest d. perform the he vehicle a arvest Block ring location d level , or in p height per within 30 m chipped and CL Pag 101 101 101 EARING ge 101-2 1.4.7 .3 .4 .8 Orna .9 The sedi .1 .10 Clea exce .11 The do c .12 Initia Plan rem .1 .13 The skid .1 .2 .14 Stoc as a 1.5 MEASU .1 The acco .1 .2 The mea 1.6 BASIS O .1 Pay Disposal by b Notwithstand disposed of s top of slope a amental trees Contractor imentation of Directional ha for access by be made to a aring shall no ept to provide Contractor sh cutting therein al clearing of ns , and any o oval of merch Non merchan re shall be no ding trees acr Where clearin by the Engine cease Work i In the case of complete clea ckpiling or load approved by th REMENT FO Quantity to ordance with t All measurem areas of remo asured for pay OF PAYMENT ment for Work DEPARTM burning is proh ing 101.4.7.1 such that the and toe of slop s and shrubs s shall limit g watercourses and felling and y heavy Equip avoid rutting so ot be performe access throu hall not use h by hand or b merchantable other waterco hantable timbe ntable timber s o long skids o ross a waterc ng of a steep eer or a repre mmediately .
f Work suspen aring on the af ding of merch he Engineer .
OR PAYMENT be measured this Item .
ments shall be oval of merch yment as clear T k under this Ite STA MENT of TR GRADIN hibited .
to 101.4.7.3 , Engineer can pe ; and surve shall not be di ground distur s and wetlands d harvesting s pment .
When oft ground are ed within wetl ugh the buffers eavy Equipm y Equipment e timber withi ourses identifie er .
shall be remo f timber on st ourse .
slope in snow esentative of W nsion per 101 ffected area .
antable timbe T d for payment e made in a ho antable trees ring .
em shall be at ANDARD S RANSPORT NG , all non-merc n set and gra y cross-sectio isturbed witho rbance to m s. shall be used cable skidde eas .
land buffer zo s , as approve ent for clearin able to `` reach n 5 m of eith ed during the oved at the tim eep slopes ad w or ice condit Work Safe NB .4.13.1 , the C er or waste ma t shall be the orizontal plane within 5 m of t the Unit Pric SPECIFICA TATION an chantable tree ade stakes for ons .
out written per minimize the where ground rs are used , t ones unless s ed by the Engi ng within 30 m h in '' to cut an her side of wa e course of th me of the Struc djacent to wa tions is suspe B for safety re Contractor sha aterials , adjac e number of e. watercourses ce .
ATIONS nd INFRAS es , brush and r cut and fills , rmission from potential for d conditions a the full range such areas ar neer .
m of stream ba d yard out the atercourses id he Work , sha cture installati atercourses , a nded through easons , the C ll not be respo cent to the high hectares of l s per 101.4.12 TRUCTUR ITEM : 10 January , 20 d slash shall b , set stakes fo the Engineer r erosion an are not suitab of cables sha re frozen har anks and sha e timber .
dentified on th all be limited t ion .
nd no felling o a written orde Contractor sha onsible to hway , shall be and cleared 2 shall be RE 01 15 be or r. nd le all d , all he to or er all e in DEPA GRUB Janua 102.1 102.2 102.3 102.4 ARTMENT BBING ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite .2 This Ite operatio MATERIAL .1 None id SUBMITTA .1 The Co CONSTRU .1 The Co specific .1 The of t .2 The Co .3 Grubbin stumps .1 In c gru the .4 Grubbin original diversio .1 Gru to b .5 The Co necess extra sh have fa STANDA of TRANS TION m consists of em also consis on done by ot S dentified .
ALS ontractor shall CTION ontractor sha cally directed b e Work shall i timber lying on ontractor shall ng shall be ca are removed cut sections , a ubbing shall be Engineer .
ng shall not be ground , exc ons for Structu ubbing shall n be wasted , as ontractor shall ary to redress haping , hydro allen as a resu ARD SPECI PORTATIO f the removal a sts of removal hers .
submit , upon all carry out t by the Engine nclude dealing n the ground , carry out the arried out with and topsoil is and in fill sect e carried out e carried out cept as appro ures are to be not be carried indicated in t be responsib s any areas g oseeding and/ lt of root seve FICATION ON and INF GRADING and disposal o of shredded a request , a co the Work as er .
g with stump due to clearin Work in accor h root rakes o s left for salvag tions where th to a width 2 m in fill sections oved by the carried out .
out in swamp he Contract D ble , at his/her grubbed beyo /or mulching o erance due to S FRASTRUC of roots and st and/or chippe opy of any per indicated in height over 0 ng by others .
rdance with Ite or similar Equ ge under the e he Subgrade m from the cle s where the Su Engineer wh ps and other a Documents or own expense ond the speci of the expose the over-width CTURE tumps .
ed material left rmit ( s ) required the Contrac .3 m , and with em 946 and It uipment , such excavation ite is within 2.5 earing line or ubgrade is mo here foundatio areas where t by the Engine e , to carry out fied limits , inc ed ground , and h grubbing .
t behind from d to carry out ct Documents h brush , slash tem 948. h that only th em .
m of the orig as otherwise ore than 2.5 m on excavation the underlying eer .
t any remedia cluding but no d removal of ITEM : 102 Page 102-1 the clearing the Work .
s and/or as h and pieces e roots and inal ground , directed by m above the n or stream g material is al measures ot limited to trees which GR Pag 102 102 102 RUBBING ge 102-2 2.4 .6 Roo disp .1 .2 .3 .7 Whe root disp .1 .8 No m Brid 2.5 MEASU .1 The in ac .1 2.6 BASIS O .1 Pay ots and stump posed of within The materials spread out an original groun Where Roadb grubbed mat material or B 102.4.6.1 .
Burying may Documents a covered with accordance w ere the dispos s and stumps posed of outsid Burning of gr materials rem ge or any oth REMENT FO Quantity to b ccordance wit All measurem OF PAYMENT ment for Work DEPARTM s , with or with n the Work Sit s may be plac nd tramped fla nd , using a cra bed fills excee erials either o Borrow , and be permitted and/or as appr excavated m with 614.4. sal measures s , with or witho de the Work S ubbed materia moved during er Structure .
OR PAYMENT be measured f th this Item .
ments shall be T k under this Ite STA MENT of TR GRADIN hout non-merc te by tub-grind ced under fills at in a uniform awler tractor o ed 6 m in heig on the existin shall tramp t at other loca roved by the E aterial as dire s of 102.4.6 a out non-merc Site in accorda als shall not b grubbing sha T for payment s made in a ho em shall be at ANDARD S RANSPORT NG chantable tree ding , or by bu s over 5 m in m layer to a c of 20 t or heav ght to Subgrad ng ground , or the materials tions within th Engineer , if th ected by the E are determine hantable timb ance with Item be permitted .
all be permitte shall be the nu orizontal plane t the Unit Pric SPECIFICA TATION an es , brush and urial as follows n height to Su compact mass vier .
de , the Contra r on the first l s to a 0.6 m he Work Site he materials a Engineer , and ed by the Eng ber , brush and m 947. ed to be place umber of hect e. ce .
ATIONS nd INFRAS d slash as per s : ubgrade , if the s no more tha actor may pla lift of compac thickness as as indicated are spread out the surface h gineer to be d slash as per ed within 30 m tares of grubb TRUCTUR ITEM : 10 January , 20 r 101.4 shall b e materials ar an 0.6 m abov ace one layer o cted excavate s described in the Contra t , tramped , an hydroseeded unfeasible , th r 101.4 may b m of a Culver bing carried o RE 02 15 be re ve of ed in ct nd in he be rt , ut DEPA REMO Janua 103.1 103.2 103.3 103.4 103.5 103.6 ARTMENT OVAL OF ISO ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite isolated .1 An mm .2 An MATERIAL .1 None id SUBMITTA .1 None id CONSTRU .1 The Co specific .2 Isolated .3 Orname .4 The Co property .5 The Co MEASURE .1 The Qu stumps BASIS OF P .1 Payme ST of TRANS OLATED TRE TION em consists o d stumps .
isolated tree m above the ex isolated stum S dentified .
ALS dentified .
CTION ontractor sha cally directed b d trees and st ental trees an ontractor shal y resulting fro ontractor shall MENT FOR P uantity to be m s removed and PAYMENT nt for Work un TANDARD PORTATIO ES of the remova is defined as xisting ground mp is defined a all carry out t by the Engine umps shall be nd shrubs sha l be respons om the Work .
carry out the PAYMENT measured for d disposed of nder this Item SPECIFIC ON and INF GRADING al and dispos a tree having d surface .
as a stump ha the Work as er .
e clearly ident ll not be distu ible to repair , removal in ac r payment sha in accordance shall be at th CATIONS FRASTRUC sal of isolated g a minimum aving a minim indicated in tified as such rbed without w , at her/his o ccordance wit all be the num e with this Ite he Unit Price .
CTURE d trees comp diameter of 1 um top diame the Contrac in the field , by written permis own expense th 101.4 and 1 mber of isola m. lete with stum 00 mm meas eter of 300 mm ct Documents y the Enginee ssion from the , any damag 102.4. ted trees and ITEM : 103 Page 103-1 mps , and/or sured at 300 m. s and/or as er .
e Engineer .
e to private d/or isolated DEPA COMM Janua 106.1 106.2 106.3 106.4 106.4 ARTMENT MON EXCAVA ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite Work S MATERIAL .1 For tem meeting SUBMITTA .1 Submitt CONSTRU .1 Genera .1 The spe .2 The .3 The det .4 Pol dire .1 .5 The em .1 .6 If a ma .1 .7 Wh con Sub .1 .8 Tra ind STANDA of TRANS ATION TION em consists o Site , of soil and S mporary stream g the requirem ALS tals are requir CTION al e Contractor ecifically direct e Contractor s e Contractor tailed in the Co lyethylene lin ection of flow a The Contrac e Contractor s bankments .
Low spots a Day ’ s Work at any time du ake all necess The depth r compacted t here the Roa nduct operatio bgrade , unles Any surface shall be mai limit posted f ansitions in cu icated on Stan ARD SPECI PORTATIO of the excavat d all other mat m diversion ch ments of CGSB red in accorda shall carry ou ted by the Eng shall carry out shall constru ontract Docum ners for temp and overlaps ctor shall be re shall maintain and ruts that c or , if rain is im uring the Work sary repairs to utted and/or to meet the re adbed being ons so that th s approved by e constructed intained in a c for the Work A ut and fill co ndard Drawing FICATION ON and INF GRADING tion and place terials not clas hannels , clea B 51.34 shall ance with any ut the Work a gineer .
the Work in a ct offtakes an ments .
porary stream shall be a min esponsible for n surface drai could pond wa mminent , as W k the surface o reinstate the displaced sha equirements o constructed hrough-traffic y the Enginee or exposed condition suc Area .
nditions , at th g 108-1 .
S FRASTRUC ement within ssified as solid r polyethylene be supplied b cross-referen as indicated i accordance w nd stream div m diversions nimum of 300 r maintenance nage during e ater shall be r Work progresse becomes rut e surface grad all be scarifie of this Item .
is subject to does not trav er .
by the Contr ch that traffic c he ends of b CTURE the Work Site d rock .
e liners a min by the Contrac nced Item form in the Contra ith Item 946 a version chan shall be ins mm in the dir e and removal excavation of removed no la es during the tted or displac de .
ed , moisture c o through-traff vel directly on ractor and su can safely tra bedrock cuts , e or disposal nimum of 6 mi ctor .
ming part of th act Documents and Item 948. nels as ident talled transve rection of flow of the liners .
f cuts and con ater than the e Day .
ced , the Cont conditioned , s ffic , the Cont n an undercut bjected to th avel along it a shall be car ITEM : 106 Page 106-1 outside the ils thick and is Item .
s and/or as tified and/or erse to the .
nstruction of end of each tractor shall shaped and tractor shall t surface or rough-traffic at the speed rried out as CO Pag 106 OMMON EXCA ge 106-2 6.4 .2 Exca .1 .2 .3 AVATION avation The Contract been complet The Contract optimum usag .1 Any mat shall be s .1 The time .2 Stoc comp or be .3 Stock assu .4 Tops .2 The Con requirem the top 60 .3 The Con common placemen .1 Borro place .4 Common stockpiled Engineer .1 Stock supp to en .2 Stock mate all co main .3 Stock shall over .4 Work Where the Su depth below S DEPARTM tor shall not co ted for the Wo tor shall contr ge of the exca erial suitable salvaged and depth of exca of excavation kpile ( s ) shall pletion of ditc e a potential s kpiling shall b red .
soil stockpiles ntractor shall ents of 121.2 00 mm of the ntractor shall excavation e nt of any mate ow shall not b ed at a lesser n material salv d such that th r. kpiling of com porting the ent nsure maximu kpiles shall no erials , nor nea ommon mater ntained at all ti kpiles shall be be shaped to the edge of st k will involve th ubgrade requi Subgrade on a STANDA MENT of TR GRADIN ommence any ork Area involv rol the excava avated materia for topsoil , f d stockpiled at avation of the n , between th not be locat ches and slop source of silta be carried ou s shall be mul separately e - Borrow A/A Subgrade .
conduct ope either has be erial under Item be placed in a cost to the Ow vaged by the he material do mmon material tire weight and m recovery of ot be placed ar property line rial is not pos mes .
e built in layer o maintain sur tockpiles shal he re-handling ires undercutt a plane parall ARD SPECI RANSPORT NG y excavation u ved .
ation and han als is achieved from cuts , an t the location ( topsoil layer e Contractor ted where the pes as per Ite ation to waterc ut such that th ched in accor xcavate or o A1 , as indicate erations such een used or m 121. areas where e wner , unless o e Contractor f es not becom shall be done d dimension o f the stockpile near a quarry es , tree lines ssible or pract rs not exceedi rface drainage l not be perm g of excavated ting , subexcav el to the Subg FICATION TATION an until the origin ndling of the d , as follows : nd from fill ar ( s ) approved shall be as d and the Engi ey shall inhib em 946 , block courses .
he maximum rdance with It otherwise salv ed in the Con that all usa shall be used excavated ma otherwise auth for re-use oth me saturated a e on a well-dr of the stockpil d materials .
y/pit face , Stri or drainage d tical and acce ing one metre e before the n itted .
d material from vation shall be grade cross-sl S nd INFRAS nal cross-sect common mat reas that sha by the Engin determined in neer .
bit orderly co k or inhibit na recovery of tem 616. vage materia ntract Docume able material d in the Wor aterials could horized by the her than as t at a location a rained , level b les and in suc ipping piles o ditches such t ess to the sto e in thickness next layer is be m stockpiles .
e carried out t lope .
TRUCTUR ITEM : 10 January , 20 tion survey ha terial such th all be stripped eer .
the field at th onstruction an atural drainage the material ls meeting th ents , for use resulting fro rk , prior to th be hauled an e Engineer .
topsoil shall b pproved by th base capable ch a manner a or piles of othe that retrieval ockpile shall b and each laye egun .
Dumpin to the specifie RE 06 15 as at d , he nd e , is he in m he nd be he of as er of be er ng ed DEPA COMM Janua 106.4.2 106.4 ARTMENT MON EXCAVA ary , 2015 2 .4 Hau aut .5 The tha .6 In c be wou .7 Wh bed .8 Exc pro dire .9 Exc Con .10 Bou Item .3 Placem .1 The con .2 The sur .3 Em For lift .
.1 .4 Ma mm .1 .5 Ma 121 in 1 .1 .6 Wh tha as 1 m STANDA of TRANS ATION uling of comm thorized by the e Contractor s t would cause cuts , the area shaped to eli uld impede na here common drock Backslo cavated mate operty of the ected by the E cavated mate ntractor and s ulders 1 m3 , o m 108. ment e placement nform to lines e placement rface drainage mbankments s reslopes and e On ungrubb approved by aterial placed t m. The lift thickn proof that the aterial placed 1.2 - Borrow A 106.4.3.4 .
In backfilling by the Engin here embankm n 3:1 , for the t each lift of fill m. ARD SPECI PORTATIO mon excavatio e Engineer .
shall shape dit e water to pon between the t iminate vertic atural drainage material is u opes shall be s erial designate Owner and s Engineer .
erial designate shall be dispos or larger , that a of excavated and grades p of material s e. shall be const each success bed areas , sw y the Engineer to within 600 ness may be e specified de in the top A/A1 , as indica g of undercuts neer .
ments are con top 2.5 m belo is placed so th FICATION ON and INF GRADING on over Aggre tches to the lin nd shall be rem top of the Bac al or overhan e. underlain by a shaped as ind ed by the En shall be eithe ed by the Eng sed of in acco are encounter d material sha provided .
hall be in lay tructed such t sive lift shall be wamps and r r. mm below Su increased to a ensity can be a 600 mm of ated in the Co deeper than structed again ow Subgrade hat the next lif S FRASTRUC egate Base/S nes and grade moved .
ckslope and th nging faces , e a deep bedro dicated on Sta ngineer as su er stockpiled gineer as wa ordance with It red in the Wo all be carried yers , and eac that the first l e completed t rough terrain ubgrade shall a maximum of achieved thro f the Subgra ontract Docum 600 mm , the nst an existing the spreading ft is “ keyed ” in CTURE ubbase shall es specified , a he edge of the exposed roots ock cut , the m andard Drawin urplus and us or otherwise ste , shall bec tem 947. ork shall be ha out in accor ch layer shal lift when shap to the full widt the initial lif have a maxi f 600 mm if th ughout the en ade shall me ments , and sha lift thicknesse g earth sidehil g Equipment s nto the sidehil not be permi and any grade e ungrubbed s s and any ma material at the ng 106-1. seable , shall placed in th come the pro andled in acco rdance with It l be shaped ped forms the h prior to plac ft thickness s mum lift thick he Contractor ntire lift .
eet the requi all be placed es shall be as l having a Slo shall cut into th l to a width no ITEM : 106 Page 106-3 itted , unless e conditions surface shall aterial which e top of the remain the e Work , as perty of the ordance with tem 941 , to to maintain e toe of the cing the next shall be as ness of 300 can provide irements of as specified determined ope steeper he sidehill ot less than CO Pag 106 106 106 106 OMMON EXCA ge 106-4 6.4.3 .7 .8 6.4 .4 Com .1 .2 .3 6.4 .5 Culv .1 6.4 .6 Driv .1 AVATION Where the W the other side the Roadbed side of the Ro Excavated m constructed s in the Contrac .1 Maximum limits sho .2 Maximum driven .
mpaction The Contract 936 .
.1 Any isola the spec quality m In cuts , the S by a test strip .1 If the Sub prior to b Documen Each lift of ex of 95 % of the verts Where excav any existing p .1 The Cont .2 Pipe dete and shall Maintena .1 Salva deter .3 Unsalvag disposed veways Driveways ex utilizing mate DEPARTM Work involves p e , the spread as each lift o oadbed or the material place shall be a mat ct Documents m 200 mm be own on the Pla m 300 mm wh tor shall carry ated soft spots cified compact atching the su Subgrade surfa p. bgrade has be being backfille nts , to Subgra xcavated mate e maximum dry vation involves pipe is not dam tractor shall no ermined by the l be re-used i ance Depot .
ageable pipe rmined by the geable pipe a of outside the xcavated und rial excavated STANDA MENT of TR GRADIN placement of m ing Equipmen of material is p existing Road ed behind S terial meeting s , and shall ha hind abutmen ans ; or here Structure y out moisture s , or other are tion criteria s urrounding ma ace shall be c een undercut , ed with Borro ade .
erial , after pla y density .
s removal of maged and is otify the Engin e Engineer to in the Work S e that is dam Engineer , sha nd waste sha e Work Site .
der this Item d from the cros ARD SPECI RANSPORT NG material firstly nt shall cut int placed , so tha dway Slope to tructures or the requirem ave lift thicknes nt breastwalls es shall be co conditioning eas within the hall be excav aterial , as dire compacted to , the undercut ow A/A1-quali cement per 1 Culverts , the salvaged for r neer prior to e be salvageab Site under Item maged as a all be replace all become the shall be repl ssing whereve FICATION TATION an y along one si to the edge o at the next lift o a width not l in areas wh ents of 121.2 sses as follow or other earth onstructed or t and compact e top 1.2 m of vated and ba ected by the E 97 % of the co t surface shal ity material , a 06.4.3 , shall b Contractor sh re-use .
exposing any e ble shall rema m 140 , or tra result of th d by the Cont e property of laced the sam er possible .
S nd INFRAS de of the Roa of the previous t is “ keyed ” in ess than 0.5 m here Structur - Borrow A/A ws : h-retaining St through which tion in accord f the Subgrad ackfilled with Engineer .
ontrol density l be rolled wit as indicated i be compacted hall take care existing pipe .
ain the propert nsported to th he Contractor tractor .
the Contracto me Day they TRUCTUR ITEM : 10 January , 20 adbed and the sly built side o to the adjace m. res are to b A1 , as indicate ructures , to th h piles shall b dance with Ite de , not meetin material of th y as determine th a static rolle n the Contra d to a minimu e to ensure th ty of the Owne he nearest DT r ’ s actions , a or and shall b y are remove RE 06 15 en of nt be ed he be m ng he ed er ct m at er TI as be d , DEPA COMM Janua 106.4.6 106.5 106.6 ARTMENT MON EXCAVA ary , 2015 6 .2 Wh Pav avo .1 .2 MEASURE .1 The Qu excavat .2 The vol on “ orig .1 In t pay .3 Excava as defin BASIS OF .1 Paymen excavat STANDA of TRANS ATION here excavatio vement shall oid damage to The Contrac beyond the d own expense The excavat use in emb disposed of o MENT FOR P uantity to be m ted and place lume shall be ginal ground ” c the areas to b yable under th ation of soft sp ned by this Ite PAYMENT nt for Work u tion , as identif ARD SPECI PORTATIO on involves pa be cut to a n o the adjacent ctor shall be designated lim e , of the areas ted Pavement ankment con outside the W PAYMENT measured for p ed , stockpiled a e as measured cross-sections be grubbed , th his Item shall pots , deleterio m shall be me under this Item fied under the FICATION ON and INF GRADING aved drivewa neat straight l lands and Ro responsible mits of the exc s affected .
t shall be brok nstruction , unl Work Site .
payment shall and/or dispos d in situ and c s surveyed by he cross-sectio include mater ous materials , easured for pa m shall includ e Contract .
S FRASTRUC ays , parking lo line and edge oadbed .
for damage t xcavation and ken down into less designat be the numb sed of in accor computed by y the Engineer ons shall be t rial in the grub offtakes , stre ayment .
de a separate CTURE ots or other a e , and remove to the Pavem for the repair pieces small ted by the E er of cubic me rdance with th the average r on the natura taken before g bbed layer rem eam diversion e Unit Price fo abutting privat ed in a mann ment and oth r or restoration enough to be Engineer as w etres of comm his Item .
end area met al ground .
grubbing , and moved under channels and or each type ITEM : 106 Page 106-5 te lands the ner so as to her surfaces n , at his/her e suitable for waste to be mon material thod , based the volume Item 102. d driveways of common DEPA UNCLA Janua 107.1 107.2 107.3 107.4 107.5 ARTMENT ASSIFIED EX ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite Work S compos MATERIAL .1 For tem meeting SUBMITTA .1 Submitt CONSTRU .1 The Co specific .2 The Co .3 The Co in the C .4 Polyeth flow and .1 The .5 The Co excavat .6 The Co excavat MEASURE .1 The Qu materia .2 The vol on “ orig .1 In t pay .3 Excava the exc STAN of TRANS XCAVATION TION em consists o Site , of materia sed of a mixtu S mporary stream g the requirem ALS tals are requir CTION ontractor sha cally directed b ontractor shall ontractor shall Contract Docu hylene liners fo d overlaps sh e Contractor s ontractor sha tion in accord ontractor sha tion in accord MENT FOR P uantity to be al excavated a lume shall be ginal ground ” c the areas to b yable under th ation , per 106. avation of driv NDARD SP PORTATIO of the excavat als classified ure and variab m diversion ch ments of CGSB red in accorda all carry out t by the Engine carry out the construct offt ments .
or temporary all be a minim shall be respo all handle m ance with 106 all handle ma ance with 108 PAYMENT measured for and either plac e as measured cross-sections be grubbed , th his Item shall 4 , of offtakes , veways shall b PECIFICAT ON and INF GRADING tion and place under neither le and undete hannels , clea B 51.34 shall ance with any the Work as er .
Work in accor takes and stre stream divers mum of 300 mm nsible for mai material which 6.4. aterial which 8.4. r payment sh ced , stockpiled d in situ and c s surveyed by he cross-sectio include mater stream divers be measured TIONS FRASTRUC ement within r common exc ermined distrib r polyethylene be supplied b cross-referen indicated in rdance with Ite eam diversion sions shall be m in the direct ntenance and h would othe would other hall be the nu d or disposed computed by y the Engineer ons shall be t rial in the grub rsion channels for payment .
CTURE the Work Site cavation nor bution of both .
e liners a min by the Contrac nced Item form the Contrac em 946 and It n channels as installed tran ction of flow .
d removal of th erwise be cla rwise be clas umber of cub of in accorda the average r on the natura taken before g bbed layer rem s , soft spots , d e or disposal solid rock exc .
nimum of 6 mi ctor .
ming part of th ct Documents tem 948. identified and nsverse to the he liners .
assified unde ssified under ic metres of ance with this I end area met al ground .
grubbing , and moved under deleterious ma ITEM : 107 Page 107-1 outside the cavation but ils thick and is Item .
s and/or as d/or detailed direction of er common r solid rock unclassified Item .
thod , based the volume Item 102. aterials , and UN Pag 107 CLASSIFIED ge 107-2 7.6 BASIS O .1 Pay exca D D EXCAVATIO OF PAYMENT ment for Wor avation , as ide DEPARTM ON T k under this It entified under STAN ENT of TR GRADIN tem shall inclu the Contract .
NDARD SPE RANSPORT NG ude a separat ECIFICATI TATION an te Unit Price f ONS d INFRAST for each type TRUCTURE ITEM : 10 January , 20 of unclassifie E 07 15 ed DEPA SOLID Janua 108.1 108.2 108.3 108.4 108.4 ARTMENT D ROCK EXC ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite Work S .2 Solid ro volume MATERIAL .1 None id SUBMITTA .1 Submitt .2 The Co informa .1 Cop the .2 Cop Occ .3 The Co .1 A le bla app .2 A le CONSTRU .1 Genera .1 The spe .2 The .3 The em .1 .4 Any be for STAN of TRANS CAVATION TION em consists o Site , of solid ro ock is defined .
S dentified .
ALS tals are requir ontractor shall ation : py of Insuran rein .
py of the bl cupational Ce ontractor shall etter signed b sting sequen propriate code etter indicating CTION al e Contractor ecifically direct e Contractor s e Contractor s bankments .
Low spots a Day ’ s Work y surface con maintained in the Work Are NDARD SP PORTATIO f the excavat ock .
as in situ bed red in accorda submit to the nce Policy as aster 's certifi ertification Act .
submit upon r by the certified ces and cha es .
g anticipated t shall carry ou ted by the Eng shall carry out shall maintain and ruts that c or , if rain is im nstructed or ex n a condition s a. ECIFICATI ON and INF GRADING ion and place drock , and na ance with any e Engineer , in s it relates to cation per R . request the fo d blaster or a arges have be time ( s ) of the ut the Work a gineer .
the Work in a n surface drai could pond wa mminent , as W xposed by the such that traffi IONS FRASTRUC ement within t aturally occurr cross-referen n advance of o blasting , an Regulation 97 ollowing inform Professional een designed Day at which as indicated i accordance w nage during e ater shall be r Work progresse e Contractor , ic can safely t CTURE the Work Site ring boulders nced Item form any drilling a nd any pre-bl 7-125 under mation : Engineer , sta d and perform blasts shall ta in the Contra ith Item 946 a excavation of removed no la es during the and subjecte travel along it e , or disposal that are 1 m3 ming part of th nd blasting , th ast survey re the Apprenti ating that drill med in accor ake place .
act Documents and Item 948. f cuts and con ater than the e Day .
ed to through- at the speed ITEM : 108 Page 108-1 outside the 3 or larger in is Item .
he following equirements iceship and pattern and rdance with s and/or as nstruction of end of each -traffic , shall limit posted SO Pag 108 108 OLID ROCK E ge 108-2 8.4.1 .5 .6 .7 8.4 .2 Blas .1 .2 .3 EXCAVATION Transitions in indicated on S Rock cuts an Blasting sha sunset .
.1 Blasting between Holiday , sting Near We The Contract Insurance Po Notwithstand conducting i sampling for .1 Any well during th Contracto The Contract controlled , an B DEPARTM N n cut and fill c Standard Draw nd fills shall be ll be permitte within 500 m 7:00 p.m. a without prior ells or Structu tor shall carry olicy submitte ding 108.4.2.1 nspections o water quality ls adversely he course of or is required tor shall carry nd do no exce Allowabl Based on Dis STA MENT of TR GRADIN conditions , at wing 108-1. e shaped in a ed only betwe of any reside and 7:00 a.m notification to ures y out a pre-bla d per 108.3.2 1 , the Owner on residential .
affected by t the Work , a for any wells y out the Wo eed the requir le Instantane stance from B Figure ANDARD S RANSPORT NG the ends of t accordance w een 30 minut ence or busin m. Monday to o and approva ast survey in 2. will , before a wells within the Work , th nd/or will det s found to be ork such that rements of Fi eous Charge Blast and Wa 108-A SPECIFICA TATION an the bedrock c with Item 941. tes after sunr ness shall not o Friday , or o al by the Eng accordance w and during th n 500 m of e Owner will termine if rep permanently vibrations fro igure 108-A .
e Limits ave Velocity ATIONS nd INFRAS cuts , shall be rise and 30 m t be permitted on any week ineer .
with the requi he Work unde area of blas l provide wat pair or replac damaged .
om drilling an TRUCTUR ITEM : 10 January , 20 carried out a minutes befor d to take plac kend or Publ irements of th er this Item , b sting , includin ter temporari cement by th nd blasting ar RE 08 15 as re ce ic he be ng ily he re DEPA SOLID Janua 108.4 ARTMENT D ROCK EXC ary , 2015 .3 Excava .1 The enc .1 .2 The roc .1 .2 .3 .3 In Sub .4 Prio dep len .5 The roc .6 Wh bac .1 .2 .3 .7 Loo saf STAN of TRANS CAVATION ation e Contractor countered .
The area ide top of bedroc e Contractor s ck such that op Fracturing per 108.4.4 The Contra requiremen the top 600 Where the conduct ope has been u Item 121 .
.1 Borrow lesser co cuts in bedr bgrade and o or to backfillin pth specified , gth of the bed e Contractor s ck to meet the here soil is e ckfilling shall b Isolated poc subexcavate If the Subgr than pockets specified sol .1 The sa Docume Where the S of the bedro Drawing 108 osened rock s fe condition an NDARD SP PORTATIO shall notify t entified shall b ck elevation fo shall be respo ptimum usage of bedrock s 4.1. actor shall s nts of 121.2 - 0 mm of the Su Contract inc erations such used or shall b shall not be p ost to the Own rock , the Ro on a plane par g a bedrock u and the ditch drock cut or 50 shall fill any ov tolerances sp encountered be carried out ckets of soil ed as directed ade cross-sec s of soil in a lid rock subex me type of ents , shall be u Subgrade line ock and the 8-1. shall be remov nd the rock so ECIFICATI ON and INF GRADING the Engineer be stripped of or cross-sectio onsible to cont e of the excava hall be carrie separately ex Borrow A/A1 , ubgrade .
cludes Borrow that all usable be used in the placed in area ner , unless oth adbed shall rallel to the S undercut the R es shall be ex 0 m longitudin verexcavated pecified in Item below Subgr as follows : encountered by the Engine ction is partly bedrock Subg xcavation .
Borrow A/A used to backfi ( longitudinally soil at the tra ved from the B o removed sha IONS FRASTRUC r when mate f Overburden oning .
trol the fractur ated materials ed out so as t xcavate or o as indicated w to be place e material res e Work , prior t as where exca herwise autho be subexcav ubgrade cros Roadbed shal xcavated to at nally , whicheve areas in the m 941. rade in a be below Subg eer and backf y in bedrock a grade , the so A1-quality ma ill both the bed y ) is in and ou ansition point Backslope of b all be utilized i CTURE rial appearing and the Eng ring , excavatio s is achieved , to produce s otherwise sal in the Contra ed in the Wo sulting from so to the placem avated mater orized by the E vated to the ss-Slope .
l be subexcav t least the sam er is the lesse bedrock unde edrock cut a grade within filled with finel and partly in s oil shall be sub terial , as ind drock and soi ut of solid rock ts shall be a bedrock cuts s n embankme g to be bedr ineer shall de on and handli as follows : hattered rock vage rock m act Documents ork , the Cont olid rock excav ent of any ma ials could be Engineer .
e specified d vated to the fu me grade , ove er .
ercut with fine area , subexca a bedrock c ly shattered ro soil and const bexcavated to dicated in th l undercuts .
k and soil , sub s indicated o so as to leave nt constructio ITEM : 108 Page 108-3 rock is first etermine the ing the solid k for use as meeting the s , for use in tractor shall vation either aterial under hauled at a epth below ull width and er the entire ely shattered avation and cut shall be ock .
titutes more o match the he Contract bexcavation on Standard e a neat and n. SO Pag 108 108 OLID ROCK E ge 108-4 8.4.3 .8 .9 .10 .11 8.4 .4 Plac .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 EXCAVATION The Contract and/or fill any Naturally occ directed by th Excavated m property of th directed by th Excavated m Contractor an cement Rock emban friable rock , fo .1 Large roc over the between .2 Rock pla Subgrade contain n be filled w Embankment Foreslopes a lift .
.1 On ungr approved Each lift of r repositioned t .1 Rock suit 15 t or pla .2 Friable ro Where emba than 3:1 , for t as each lift of 1 m. Where the W the other side the Roadbed the Roadbed Excavated m constructed s in the Contrac DEPARTM N tor shall shap y low spots wit curring boulde he Engineer .
material design he Owner an he Engineer .
material design nd shall be dis kments shall or which lift th cks and bould surface of the them .
aced as backf e in an emba no fragments g with rock spall ts shall be co nd each succ ubbed areas , d by the Engin rock shall be to minimize vo table to be pla aced and tram ock shall be co nkments are c the top 2.5 m f fill is placed s Work involves p e , the spread as each lift o to a width not material place shall be a mat ct Documents STA MENT of TR GRADIN pe the ditches th finely shatte ers , after be nated by the nd shall be e nated by the sposed of in ac be constructe ickness shall ders shall not e layer onto w fill over an un ankment , sha greater than 4 ls .
onstructed suc essive lift sha , swamps an neer .
compacted s oids and bridg aced in a 1 m mped by a craw ompacted with constructed a below Subgra so that the ne placement of m ing Equipmen f material is p t less than 0.5 ed behind S terial meeting s , and shall ha ANDARD S RANSPORT NG , remove any ered rock , to a ing measured Engineer as either stockpile Engineer as ccordance wit ed in lifts not not exceed 60 be placed in hich they are ndercut in so all be the roc 400 mm in any ch that the fir all be complete nd rough terr such that roc ging , and to co lift shall be co wler tractor of h a vibratory ro gainst an exis ade , the sprea ext lift is “ keye material firstly nt shall cut int placed so that 5 m. tructures or the requirem ave lift thicknes SPECIFICA TATION an y rock knobs t achieve the sp d by the En s surplus and ed or otherw waste , shall th Item 947. t exceeding 1 00 mm .
clusters or n pushed and f oil or rock , or ck salvaged u y dimension , a rst lift when s ed to the full w rain , the initia k fragments onsolidate the ompacted with f at least 30 t m roller of a mini sting earth sid ading Equipm ed ” into the sid y along one si to the edge o the lift is “ key in areas wh ents of 121.2 sses as follow ATIONS nd INFRAS that would im pecified width gineer , shall d useable , sh wise placed in become the 1 m in thickne nests but shal finer rock plac r as the top 6 under 108.4.3 and voids in th shaped forms width prior to p al lift thicknes are further b e embankment h a vibratory r mass .
mum 11 t ma dehill having a ment shall cut dehill to a widt de of the Roa of the previous yed ” into the a here Structur - Borrow A/A ws : TRUCTUR ITEM : 10 January , 20 mpede drainag and grade .
be placed a hall remain th n the Work , a property of th ess , except fo l be distribute ced in the void 600 mm of th 3.2.2 and sha he surface sha the toe of th placing the ne ss shall be a roken down o t. roller of at lea ss .
a Slope steepe into the sideh th not less tha adbed and the sly built side o adjacent side o res are to b A1 , as indicate RE 08 15 ge as he as he or ed ds he all all he ext as or ast er hill an en of of be ed DEPA SOLID Janua 108.4.4 108.5 108.6 ARTMENT D ROCK EXC ary , 2015 4.6 .1 .2 .7 No tren MEASURE .1 The Qu excavat .2 The vo method noted in .1 If th line .2 The 108 .3 Boulder .4 Where , the Ov calculat .1 Thi sec larg Qu BASIS OF .1 Paymen excavat STAN of TRANS CAVATION Maximum 20 limits identifi Maximum 30 driven .
excavated ro nch shall be c MENT FOR P uantity to be ted and either olume of bedr d , based on th n 108.4.3.1. he Contractor e to be used to e payline for 8.4.3.3 , to the rs greater tha in the opinion erbreak shall ted within the s percentage ctional area fo ge percentage antity is useab PAYMENT nt for Work u tion , as identif NDARD SP PORTATIO 00 mm behind ed on the Pla 00 mm where ck shall be pla onstructed un PAYMENT measured fo r placed , stock rock shall be he top-of-rock fails to give n o calculate the the rock un intercept of th n 1 m3 in volu n of the Engin be measure lines staked b may be incre or which the e of the area ble material .
under this Item fied under the ECIFICATI ON and INF GRADING d abutment br ns ; or e Structures s aced within 4 nder Item 169. or payment s kpiled or dispo as measured k sections surv notice under 10 e Quantity of s ndercut surfac he Foreslope a ume shall be m eer , Overbrea ed for payme by the Enginee eased at the d width of Ove a of solid roc m shall include e Contract .
IONS FRASTRUC reastwalls or shall be const m of either sid .
hall be the n osed of in acc d in situ and veyed by the 08.4.3.1 , then solid rock exca ce shall be as excavated measured ind ak in ditches a ent up to but er at the statio discretion of th rbreak is not ck excavation e a separate CTURE other earth-re tructed or thro de and for the number of cu cordance with computed b Engineer , aft n the Enginee avation .
the theoretic .
ividually for p and Backslope t not exceedi ons at which t he Engineer fo excessive bu n staked , and Unit Price fo etaining Struct ough which pi e depth where bic metres o this Item .
by the averag ter the bedroc r shall determ cal undercut ayment .
es has been u ng 10 % of th the Overbreak or stations of s ut represents d if all of the or each type o ITEM : 108 Page 108-5 tures , to the iles shall be e an induced of solid rock ge end area ck exposure mine the rock line as per unavoidable , he Quantity k occurs .
small cross- a relatively e Overbreak of solid rock DEPA DITCH Janua 116.1 116.2 116.3 116.4 ARTMENT HING ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite MATERIAL .1 None id SUBMITTA .1 None id CONSTRU .1 The Co specific .2 Ditching existing continu directio .1 The dire .3 The Co .4 The Co in the fi .5 The Co from the .6 The ma shall be .7 A drive ditch an .8 Drivewa accorda possible .1 Wh ens .1 .2 STAN of TRANS TION em consists o S dentified .
ALS dentified .
CTION ontractor sha cally directed b g shall consis g ditch such th ous smooth g n. e tendered Q ected by the E ontractor shall ontractor shall nished Work .
ontractor shal e Work .
aterials excav e disposed of o way crossing nd Slopes rem ays with a cu ance with Item e. here excavatio sure that any e The Contrac Any pipe de Owner .
NDARD SP PORTATIO f the excavat all carry out t by the Engine t of removing hat the width o grade providin Quantity includ Engineer .
not excavate shape ditche l repair any d vated from wit outside the W designated t maining after e ulvert designa m 130 and/or on involves re existing pipe i ctor shall notify etermined by t ECIFICATI ON and INF GRADING ion and dispo the Work as er .
vegetal matte of the bottom ng positive gra des cleaning or undermine es to a uniform damage , at h thin the ditche Work Site .
to be remove excavation ma ated for replac Item 140 utiliz emoval of dri s not damage y the Enginee the Engineer IONS FRASTRUC osal of materia indicated in er and up to a of the ditch is avity drainage ends of driv e the Foreslop m cross-sectio is/her own ex es shall becom ed and not rep atch the adjace cement shall zing material e iveway Culve ed and is salva er prior to expo to be salvage CTURE al from existin the Contrac a maximum o s not less than e , without pond veway culvert pe during the c on , with no go xpense , to ad me the prope placed shall b ent ditch and be replaced excavated fro erts , the Cont aged for re-us osing any exis eable shall re ng ditches .
ct Documents of 300 mm of n 1 m and the ding , in the sp ts and cross course of the W ouges or ridge djacent prope erty of the Con be excavated Slopes .
in the same om the crossin tractor shall ta se .
sting pipe .
emain the pro ITEM : 116 Page 116-1 s and/or as soil from an e ditch has a pecified flow culverts as Work .
es remaining rty resulting ntractor and so that the workday in ng wherever ake care to operty of the DIT Pag 116 116 116 TCHING ge 116-2 6.4.8.1 .9 Ditc 616 6.5 MEASU .1 The out i 6.6 BASIS O .1 Pay .3 Salvagea Site or t stockpiled .4 Unsalvag disposed .5 If the pip Engineer hes shall be .3 , and 616.4 REMENT FO Quantity to b in accordance OF PAYMENT ment for Work DEPARTM able pipe shal transported , d as directed geable pipe a of outside the pe is damage r , the Contract stabilized ag 4 , at the end o OR PAYMENT be measured f e with this Item T k under this Ite STA MENT of TR GRADIN ll be re-used by the Contr by the Engine nd waste sha e Work Site .
ed as a resu tor shall be res gainst erosion of each day 's T for payment s m. em shall be at ANDARD S RANSPORT NG in accordanc ractor , to the eer .
all become the ult of the Co sponsible to r n with hay or ditching .
shall be the n t the Unit Pric SPECIFICA TATION an ce with Item 1 e nearest DT e property of ntractors acti replace the pip straw mulch umber of line ce .
ATIONS nd INFRAS 30 or Item 14 TI Maintenan the Contracto ions , as dete pe .
, in accordan ar metres of d TRUCTUR ITEM : 1 January , 20 40 in the Wo ce Depot an or and shall b ermined by th nce with 616.2 ditching carrie RE 16 15 rk nd be he 2 , ed DEPA BORR Janua 121.1 121.2 121.3 ARTMENT ROW ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite Work S MATERIAL .1 All mate .2 Borrow substan .1 Dus .2 Bor exc .1 .2 .3 Bor test .1 .4 Mu .5 Bor .6 Bor .3 Borrow the max SUBMITTA .1 The Co 14 Days .2 Submitt STANDA of TRANS TION em consists o Site .
S erials shall be shall consist nces , and sha st content sha rrow A1 shal ceeding 50 % w Borrow A1 s tested in acc Borrow A1 s rrow A shall h t per 10 000 t If successive reduced at th .1 Sedimen greater LS-618 ,  Para  Para Perce dstone , clayst rrow A shall h rrow B shall h shall be subj ximum particle ALS ontractor shall s in advance o tals are requir ARD SPECI PORTATIO f supply of m supplied by t t of soil and/o all meet the fol all be determin l be pit run g when tested p shall not cont cordance with hall have a m have a Dust co . e test results he discretion o ntary rock pro than 60 % A Grading , m . 5.6- The Mic .
5.7 and 5.8 ent Loss calcu tone and/or si ave a maximu ave a Dust co ject to the app e size shall no notify the En of obtaining m red in accorda FICATION ON and INF GRADING material from o he Contractor or rock free o lowing require ned in accorda gravel , quarri per MTO LS-6 tain more tha ASTM C136 maximum Plast ontent not exc indicate a D of the Enginee oposed for us when test modified as foll cro-Deval abra 8- A 75 μm s ulation .
iltstone shall n um Plasticity I ontent not exc proval of the ot exceed two- ngineer , in wri material from th ance with any S FRASTRUC outside the W r. of roots , stum ements : ance with AST ed or ripped 618. n 10 % of par and C117 .
ticity Index of ceeding 25 % ust content b er .
se as Borrow ted in acco lows : asion machine sieve shall be not be accepta ndex of 5. ceeding 50 % .
Engineer at t -thirds of the l iting , for appro he proposed B cross-referen CTURE Work Site , and mps , organics TM C117 .
rock , having rticles passing 5. tested at a m below 15 % the w A shall have ordance with e shall run 30 e added to de able as Borrow he time of pla ift thickness b oval of the so Borrow source nced Item form d its placemen and/or other g a Micro-Dev g the 75 μm minimum frequ e test frequen e a Micro-Dev h Test Me minutes .
etermine Mas w A/A1 .
acement in th being placed .
ource of mate e. ming part of th ITEM : 121 Page 121-1 nt within the deleterious val loss not sieve when ency of one ncy may be val loss not thod MTO ss ' B ' in the e Work and erial , at least is Item .
BO Pag 121 ORROW ge 121-2 1.4 CONST .1 The spec .2 The .3 The .4 Borr .5 If at mak .1 .6 The unde plac .7 Ove disp .8 The with .1 .9 The .1 RUCTION Contractor s cifically directe Contractor sh Contractor sh row placemen t any time du ke all necessa The depth ru requirements Contractor s er Items 106 , cement of any ersize stones posed of so tha Contractor sh Item 936 .
Any isolated specified com matching the placement of Material plac 121.2 - Borro .1 Soil Borro 121.4.9.2 .2 Rock Bo using a fragment reposition .3 In backfil the Engin DEPARTM shall carry o ed by the Eng hall carry out t hall carry out o nt shall be carr uring the Wor ary repairs to utted and/or d s of this Item .
shall conduct 107 and/or 1 material unde ( per 121.2.3 at the Roadwa hall carry out soft spots or mpaction crite surrounding m f Borrow shall ced in the w A/A1 , as ind ow A/A1 , as i 2.1. rrow A/A1 , as vibratory rolle s and spalls , a ned to minimiz ling of underc neer .
STAN MENT of TR GRADIN ut the Work gineer .
the Work in ac operations at t ried out in acc rk the surfac reinstate the displaced sha the Work su 108 either has er this Item .
3 ) and unsuit ay is left in a n moisture con other areas w eria shall be material , and a be in lifts and top 600 m dicated in the ndicated in th s indicated in er of at least and compacte ze voids and b cuts deeper th NDARD SP RANSPORT NG as indicated ccordance wit the Borrow so cordance with e becomes r surface grad all be scarifie uch that all u s been used o table material neat and tidy c ditioning and within the top excavated an as directed by d shall conform m to Subgr Contract Doc he Contract Do n the Contrac t 11 t mass .
ed such that r bridging , and t an 600 mm , t PECIFICAT TATION an d in the Cont th Item 946 an ource in accor Item 941. rutted or disp e. ed , shaped a sable materia or shall be us ls from the B condition .
compaction o p 1.2 m of the nd backfilled y the Enginee m to lines and rade shall m cuments , and ocuments , sh ct Documents Surface void rock fragments to consolidate he lift thicknes TIONS nd INFRAS tract Docume nd Item 948. rdance with Ite placed , the C and compacte al resulting fr sed in the Wo Borrow place of soil Borrow e Subgrade n with material r. grades provid meet the re shall be place hall be placed s , shall be pla ds shall be f s are further b e the lift .
ss shall be as TRUCTUR ITEM : 12 January , 20 ents and/or a em 922 .
Contractor sha ed to meet th rom excavatio ork , prior to th ement shall b w in accordanc not meeting th l of the quali ded .
equirements o ed , as follows : as specified aced in one l filled with roc broken down o s determined b RE 21 15 as all he on he be ce he ty of : in ift ck or by DEPA BORR Janua 121.4.9 ARTMENT ROW ary , 2015 9 .2 Ma .1 .2 .3 Bor soil and pla .1 .2 .10 Emban Foreslo .1 On thic .11 The Co .1 Low Wo .12 Where 3:1 , for lift of fill .13 Where other s Roadbe Roadbe .14 Any Bo can saf STANDA of TRANS aterial placed t Soil Borrow compacted t .1 The lift t provide Rock Borrow compacted s voids and br rrow placed b l meeting the d shall be co ced as follows Material beh identified in Material ove driven shall kments shall opes and each ungrubbed a ckness in 121. ontractor shall w spots and ru ork or , if rain is embankments the top 2.5 m is placed so t the Work invo ide , the spre ed , as each li ed to a width n orrow surface fely travel alon ARD SPECI PORTATIO to within 600 m shall have to a minimum thickness ma proof that the w shall have such that rock ridging , and to behind Structu requirements mpacted to a s : hind abutmen the Contract er which Stru have a maxim be construct h successive l areas , swamp .4.9.2.2 as ap maintain surfa uts that could s imminent , as s are construc m below Subg that the next l olves placeme ading Equipm ft of material not less than 0 subjected to ng it at the spe FICATION ON and INF GRADING mm below Sub a maximum of 95 % of the y be increase specified den a maximum k fragments a o consolidate t ures or in area of 121.2 - Bo a minimum of nt breastwalls Documents , uctures shall mum lift thickn ted such tha ift shall be com ps and rough proved by the ace drainage pond water s s Work progre cted against a grade the spre ift is “ keyed ” in ent of materia ment shall cu is placed so 0.5 m. through-traffic eed limit poste S FRASTRUC bgrade shall b lift thickness e maximum dr ed to a maxim nsity can be ac m lift thickness are further bro the lift , using a as where Stru orrow A/A1 , as f 95 % of the s or other ea shall have a m be construc ness of 300 m at the first lift mpleted to the h terrain , the e Engineer .
during the pla hall be remov esses during th an existing ear eading Equipm nto the sidehi al firstly along t into the edg that the lift is c shall be ma ed for the Wor CTURE be placed as f s of 300 mm ry density .
mum of 600 m chieved throu s of 600 mm oken down or a vibratory roll uctures are to s indicated in maximum dr arth-retaining maximum lift cted or throug mm .
t when shape e full width prio e initial lift thic acement of Bo ved no later th he Day .
rth sidehill hav ment shall cut ll to a width no one side of th ge of the pre s “ keyed ” into intained in a c rk Area .
follows : , and each mm if the Con ghout the ent m , and each repositioned ler of at least o be construct the Contract D ry density for Structures , t thickness of 2 gh which pile ed forms the or to placing t ckness may orrow .
han the end of ving a Slope s t into the side ot less than 1 he Roadbed a eviously built o the adjacent condition suc ITEM : 121 Page 121-3 lift shall be ntractor can ire lift .
lift shall be to minimize 11 t mass .
ted shall be Documents , r each layer to the limits 200 mm .
es shall be toe of the the next lift .
exceed the f each Day ’ s steeper than ehill as each m. and then the side of the t side of the h that traffic BO Pag 121 121 ORROW ge 121-4 1.5 MEASU .1 The plac .2 If th usea so w .1 1.6 BASIS O .1 Pay iden REMENT FO Quantity to b ced in accorda he Contractor able excavate wasted shall b This volume OF PAYMENT ment for Wor ntified under th DEPARTM OR PAYMENT be measured ance with this places more ed materials u e calculated a of material sh T k under this It he Contract .
STAN MENT of TR GRADIN T for payment s Item .
e Borrow than under Items 1 and that Quan hall be conver tem shall inclu NDARD SP RANSPORT NG shall be the n n the tendere 06 , 107 and/o ntity deducted rted to tonnes ude a separat PECIFICAT TATION an number of ton ed Quantity , t or 108 , the vo from the total s using 2.0 t/m te Unit Price f TIONS nd INFRAS nnes of Borrow thereby causi olume of exca l Quantity of B m3 .
for each class TRUCTUR ITEM : 12 January , 20 w supplied an ing a waste o avated materi Borrow .
s of Borrow , a RE 21 15 nd of al as DEPA META Janua 130.1 130.2 ARTMENT AL PIPE ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite pipe-arc 1200 m MATERIAL .1 All pipe .2 All pipe and sha .1 Bol STAN of TRANS TION em consists o ch ( CSPA ) an mm or less .
S e materials sha e and appurte all meet the re lts and nuts sh Culvert/Stru Aluminum c ( pip Aluminu ( pip Aluminum ( pipe & CSP/CAP Diameter ( mm ) 150 200 250 300 400 500 600 700 800 900 1000 1200 NDARD SP PORTATIO of supply and nd corrugated all be supplied enances shall equirements o hall be of the Mat ucture Type coated steel pe ) um alloy pe ) Structures & arch ) Stand Equiv Spa 4 5 6 8 9 10 11 13 ECIFICATI ON and INF GRADING d installation d aluminum a d by the Cont l be manufac of Table 130-1 same materia Table terial/Fabrica Material Sta CSA G40 AASHTO M2 ASTM B2 ASTM B2 ASTM B2 AASHTO M2 Tab dard CSP/CS valent CSPA an x Rise ( mm ) 50 x 340 560 x 420 80 x 500 00 x 580 10 x 660 030 x 740 50 x 820 390 x 970 IONS FRASTRUC of aluminum alloy pipe ( CA ractor .
ctured of alum 1 and Table 1 al as the pipe .
130-1 ation Standa andard Fab 01-01 274-87 AS 209 AST 209 221 219-92 AS AS AS ble 130-2 SPA/CAP Dim Wall Thi Aluminum 1.6 1.6 1.6 1.6 2.0 2.0 2.8 2.8 2.8 2.8 2.8 3.5 CTURE coated corru AP ) , having a minum coated 30-2. . ards brication Sta CSA G401-0 STM A929/A9 TM B790/B79 STM B746/B7 STM B789/B7 STM B790/B7 mensions ickness ( mm m Aluminu Coated N/A N/A 1.6 1.6 1.6 1.6 2.0 2.0 2.0 2.0 2.8 2.8 ugated steel n equivalent steel or alum ndard 01 929M 90M-97 746M 789M 790M m ) Corr um d P ( 38 38 38 68 68 68 68 68 68 68 68 68 ITEM : 130 Page 130-1 pipe ( CSP ) diameter of minum alloy rugation rofile mm ) 8 x 6.5 8 x 6.5 8 x 6.5 8 x 13 8 x 13 8 x 13 8 x 13 8 x 13 8 x 13 8 x 13 8 x 13 8 x 13 ME Pag 130 130 130 ETAL PIPE ge 130-2 0.2 .3 Cou faste E D 15 30 .4 Heli corr .5 All c acco .6 Bac .1 .2 0.3 SUBMIT .1 The supp .1 .2 The mate .3 If th shal adva .4 Sub 0.4 CONST .1 The spec .2 If fis reinf uplers shall be ening systems quivalent Diameter ( mm ) 50 to 250 00 to 1200 cal corrugate ugations for c cut edges an ordance with C kfill material s Backfill mater If sufficient q determined b accordance w TTALS Contractor s plied meet the If fish weirs/b each Culvert Contractor s erial from with e source of th ll identify the ance of obtain mittals are req RUCTION Contractor s cifically directe sh weirs/baff forcement .
DEPARTM e aluminum c s as indicated C Type Cou Flat , D Corru Annular C d pipe greate coupling purpo d any damag CSA G401 .
shall meet the rial shall be ob quantities of s by the Engin with Item 167 shall submit , e specified req baffles are spe in accordance shall submit , hin the Work S he supply of t proposed sou ning backfill m quired in acco shall carry o ed by the Eng fles are spec STA MENT of TR GRADIN coated steel o d in Table 130 Table 1 CSP/CSPA/CA e ( s ) of upler imple or ugated Corrugated er than 250 m oses .
ge to aluminu requirements btained from w suitable backf neer , addition from a source upon reques quirements as ecified for a C e with 131.3. upon reques Site .
the backfill ma urce , in writing aterial from th ordance with a ut the Work gineer .
cified for a C ANDARD S RANSPORT NG or aluminum 0-3 .
130-3 AP Couplers Minimum Thickness ( mm ) 1.3 1.6 mm diameter s um coatings s s of 167.2. within the Wo fill material ar nal backfill s e approved by st , the manuf detailed on th Culvert , the C st , the propos aterial is locat g , for the appr he proposed s any cross-refe as indicated Culvert , the SPECIFICA TATION an alloy and sh s Minimum Width ( mm ) 150 300 shall have en shall be grou ork Site as app re not availab shall be impo y the Enginee facturer ’ s cer he Contract D Contractor sha sed source o ted outside th roval of the E source .
erenced Item f d in the Cont hook bolts s ATIONS nd INFRAS hall have conf m Typ Fas Wedg B nds re-corruga nd smooth a proved by the ble within the orted by the er .
rtification that Documents .
all submit sho of the supply he Work Site , Engineer , at le forming part o tract Docume shall be isol TRUCTUR ITEM : 13 January , 20 figurations an pes ( s ) of steners ge or Bolts Bolts ated to annula nd recoated Engineer .
Work Site , a Contractor t the materia op drawings fo of the backf the Contracto east 14 Days f this Item .
ents and/or a ated from th RE 30 15 nd ar in as in als or fill or in as he DEPA META Janua 130.4 130.5 ARTMENT AL PIPE ary , 2015 .3 The En selected .4 The Co grades .5 The pip .6 Trench on the S .7 If Over- excava compac .8 Installa .9 Backfill to 161-5 .10 No bac Enginee materia .1 Ma .2 Bac ram .3 Bac ma .11 Backfilli is not m .1 On pip .12 No traff backfilli and/or i .13 Shoring Work s .14 The Co accorda MEASURE .1 The Qu supplied .1 The STAN of TRANS ngineer shall p d locations or ontractor shal for the Work a pe sections sh excavation s Standard Dra -excavation o ation with an cted to 95 % o ation shall pro shall be plac 5. kfill material s er , including b als .
aterial over 75 ckfill shall be mmer-type com ckfill shall be aximum dry de ing of metal p more than one ly compactors es .
fic or construc ng above the in the Contrac g , bracing , sh hall be emplo ontractor shal ance with Item MENT FOR P uantity to be d and installed e measureme NDARD SP PORTATIO provide contro as may be re l be responsi as shown on t all be joined in shall be carrie awings 161-1 occurs , the Co n approved b of the maximu ceed upgrade ced and shape shall be placed but not limited mm in size sh placed in lift mpactors and e compacted ensity .
pipes shall pro lift of backfill .
s recommend ction equipme e pipe has be ct Documents .
heeting , pump yed , maintain l construct , m m 918 .
PAYMENT measured fo d in accordan ent shall be tak ECIFICATI ON and INF GRADING ol points in th equired .
ible for the la the Plans .
n a straight lin ed out in acc to 161-5. ontractor sha backfill mate um dry densit e. ed to lines an d in the excav d to the dimen hall not be pla ts of not mor not more than in accordanc oceed such tha ded by the pip ent shall be pe een attained a . ps , temporary ned and remov maintain and r r payment sh ce with this Ite ken along the IONS FRASTRUC he field to pro ayout and ma ne using stand cordance with ll , at her/his o rial , placed ty .
nd grades as i vation until the nsions of exca aced within 30 re than 200 m n 300 mm in t ce with Item at the differen pe manufactu ermitted to pa as indicated o y roads and/o ved by the Co remove suitab hall be the nu em .
invert of the p CTURE ovide vertical aintenance of dard industry m h 161.4 and t own expense in accordanc indicated on S e excavation h avation and th 00 mm of any mm in thickne thickness for v 936 , to a m ntial in elevatio urer shall be u ss over the m on Standard D or bridges tha ontractor .
ble temporary umber of line pipe .
and horizonta f control for a methods .
to the limits a , repair and f ce with Item Standard Draw has been appr e character o metal pipe .
ess for vibrato vibratory roller minimum of 9 on between th used within 1 metal pipe unti Drawings 161 at are necess y construction ear metres of ITEM : 130 Page 130-3 al control at all lines and as indicated ill the Over- m 936 , and wings 161-1 roved by the f foundation ory plate or rs .
95 % of the he two sides m of metal il the limit of 1-1 to 161-5 sary for the n detours in f metal pipe ME Pag 130 ETAL PIPE ge 130-4 0.6 BASIS O .1 Pay meta .2 The Site .1 OF PAYMENT ment for Wor al pipe , as ide Owner shall .
Partial payme yard .
DEPARTM T rk under this entified under t make partial p ent shall be m STA MENT of TR GRADIN Item shall inc the Contract .
payment in ac made for spec ANDARD S RANSPORT NG clude a separ ccordance wit cialized meta SPECIFICA TATION an rate Unit Pric th 908.7 for m l pipe accepta ATIONS nd INFRAS ce for each si metal pipe stor ably stored a TRUCTUR ITEM : 13 January , 20 ze and type red at the Wo at the supplier RE 30 15 of rk r 's DEPA META Janua 131.1 131.2 ARTMENT AL PIPE - LAR ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite includin mm , str pipe ( C MATERIAL .1 All pipe .2 All pipe galvaniz .1 Bol Cul Alu Al Al .3 Helical purpose .4 All cut e and rec .5 Backfill .1 Bac .2 If s det acc STAN of TRANS RGE TION em consists ng but not lim ructural plate AP , SPCAP , S e materials sha e and appurte zed steel and lts and nuts sh vert/Structur uminum coate ( pipe ) Aluminum al ( pipe ) luminum Struc ( pipe & arc luminum Struc ( box ) Galvanized s ( plate arch corrugated es .
edges and an coated in acco material shal ckfill material sufficient quan termined by cordance with NDARD SP PORTATIO of the supply ited to , all CS CSP or CSPA SPCAPA ) , an all be supplied enances shall shall meet th hall be of the Mat re Type ed steel lloy ctures h ) ctures steel h ) pipe shall ha ny damage to ordance with C l be Class “ A ” shall be obtai ntities of suita the Enginee Item 167 from ECIFICATI ON and INF GRADING y and placem SP and CSPA A ( SPCSP or nd any other ty d by the Cont be manufact he requiremen same materia Table terial/Fabrica Materia CS AASH AST AST AST AASH AST AST AASH CS ave ends re- o aluminum co CSA G401 .
” per 167.2. ined from with able backfill m r , additional m a source ap IONS FRASTRUC ment of alum A having an e r SPCSPA ) , s type of metal p ractor .
tured of alum nts of Table 13 al as the pipe .
131-1 ation Standa al Standard SA G401 HTO M274 TM B209 TM B209 TM B221 HTO M219 TM B209 TM B221 HTO M219 SA G401 -corrugated t oatings or gal hin the Work S material are n backfill shal pproved by th CTURE minum coated equivalent dia structural plate pipe .
minum coated 31-1. . ards Fa A A A A A A to annular co lvanized steel Site as approv not available l be importe e Engineer .
corrugated ameter greate e arches , alum steel , alumin abrication St CSA G40 ASTM A929/A ASTM B790/B ASTM B746/B ASTM B789/B ASTM B790/B ASTM B864/8 ASTM B746/B CSA G40 orrugations f l shall be grou ved by the En within the Wo ed by the Co ITEM : 131 Page 131-1 metal pipe , r than 1200 minum alloy num alloy or andard 01 A929M B790M B746M B789M B790M 864M B746M 01 for coupling und smooth ngineer .
ork Site , as ontractor in ME Pag 131 131 ETAL PIPE - L ge 131-2 1.3 SUBMIT .1 The cont .1 .2 .3 .4 .2 The certi deta .3 The mate .4 If th shal adva .5 Sub 1.4 CONST .1 The spec .2 The sele .3 The grad .4 Exca Draw .1 .5 The .6 Pipe .7 Bac 161 .8 No Eng foun LARGE TTALS Contractor s taining but no Station ( s ) of p General layou Length and w Itemized supp Contractor s ification that th ailed in the Co Contractor s erial from with e source of th ll submit the p ance of obtain mittals are req RUCTION Contractor s cifically directe Engineer sha ected locations Contractor s des for the Wo avation shall b wings 161-1 to If Overexcav Overexcavati compacted to pipe sections es shall be as kfill shall be p -1 to 161-5. backfill shall ineer , includ ndation mater DEPARTM shall submit , t limited to , th pipe ( s ) , name ut showing pip weight ( mass ) ply list .
shall submit , i he materials to ontract Docum shall submit , hin the Work S he supply of t proposed sou ning backfill m quired in acco shall carry o ed by the Eng all provide co s or as may be shall be respo ork as shown o be carried out o 161-5 , or as vation occurs , on with an ap o 95 % of the m s shall be joine ssembled and placed and sh be placed in ing but no rials .
STA MENT of TR GRADIN in accordan e following inf e ( s ) of waterco pe and appurt of individual s n advance of o be supplied ments .
upon reques Site .
the backfill ma rce , in writing aterial from th ordance with a ut the Work gineer .
ontrol points in e required .
onsible for the on the Plans .
t in accordanc s specified in t the Contrac pproved back maximum dry ed in a straigh d/or erected a haped to the n the excava limited to th ANDARD S RANSPORT NG ce with Item formation : ourse ( s ) , and tenances ; sections ; and f the commen , for the fabric st , the propos aterial is locat g , for the appr he proposed s any cross-refe as indicated n the field to e layout and ce with 161.4 the Contract D ctor shall , at kfill material , p density .
ht line using st s shown on th lines and gra tion until the e dimension SPECIFICA TATION an m 956 , shop DTI contract ncement of th cation , meet th sed source o ted outside th roval of the E source .
erenced Item f d in the Cont provide vertic maintenance and to the lim Documents .
his/her own e placed in acc tandard indust he manufactu ades as indica excavation ns of excava ATIONS nd INFRAS drawings for number and d he Work , the he specified re of the supply he Work Site , Engineer , at le forming part o tract Docume cal and horizo e of control fo mits as indicate expense , rep cordance with try methods .
urer ’ s drawing ated on Stan has been ap ation and the TRUCTUR ITEM : 13 January , 20 each Culver description ; manufacturer equirements a of the backf the Contracto east 14 Days f this Item .
ents and/or a ontal control or all lines an ed on Standar pair and fill th Item 936 , an gs .
dard Drawing pproved by th e character o RE 31 15 rt , r ’ s as fill or in as at nd rd he nd gs he of DEPA META Janua 131.4 .
131.5 131.6 ARTMENT AL PIPE - LAR ary , 2015 8 .1 Ma .2 Bac ram .3 Bac ma .9 Backfill and sha .10 No traff cover i been p .11 Shoring Work s .12 The Co Structu MEASURE .1 The Qu supplied .1 The the BASIS OF .1 Paymen identifie .2 The Ow STAN of TRANS RGE aterial over 75 ckfill shall be mmer-type co ckfill shall be aximum dry de ing of metal all never exce fic or constru ndicated on S laced .
g , bracing , sh hall be emplo ontractor shal re in accorda MENT FOR P uantity to be d and placed e measureme connection to PAYMENT nt for Work un ed under the C wner shall mak NDARD SP PORTATIO 5 mm in size s placed in lift mpactors and e compacted ensity .
pipe shall pro eed 600 mm i ction equipm Standard Dra heeting , pump oyed , maintain l construct , m ance with Item PAYMENT measured fo in accordance ent shall be ta o the foundatio nder this Item Contract .
ke partial paym ECIFICATI ON and INF GRADING shall not be p ts of not mor d not more tha in accordan oceed simulta in differential ent shall be p awings 161-1 ps , temporary ned and remo maintain and r m 918. r payment sh e with this Item ken along the on .
shall include ment for meta IONS FRASTRUC laced within 3 re than 200 m an 300 mm in nce with Item aneous and e elevation .
permitted to p to 161-5 an y roads and/ oved by the C remove tempo hall be the nu m. e invert of the a separate Un al pipe in acco CTURE 300 mm of the mm in thickne n thickness fo m 936 , to a m evenly on bot pass over the nd/or in the C /or bridges th Contractor .
orary constru umber of line pipe or the b nit Price for ea ordance with 9 e Culvert .
ess for vibrato or vibratory ro minimum of 9 th sides of th e Culvert until Contract Docu hat are neces ction detours ear metres of bottom edge o ach size of me 908.7 .
ITEM : 131 Page 131-3 ory plate or ollers .
95 % of the he Structure the backfill uments has ssary to the around the f metal pipe of an arch at etal pipe , as DEPA SUBD Janua 136.1 136.2 136.3 136.4 ARTMENT RAIN ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite MATERIAL .1 All mate .2 Subdra Contrac .1 Ga req .2 PV per .3 Co F66 .3 All elbo .4 Geotex .5 Free dr SUBMITTA .1 The Co the Wo requirem .2 Submitt CONSTRU .1 The Co specific .2 A trenc with ge free dra .3 Rock e 161 .
.4 The sub .5 The su coupler recomm .1 The STAN of TRANS TION em consists o S erials shall be ain pipe shall ct Documents lvanized CSP quirements of C pipe and rforated as pe rrugated poly 67. ows , caps and xtile shall be T raining backfi ALS ontractor shall ork , the ma ments .
tals are requir CTION ontractor sha cally directed b ch shall be ex otextile of a w aining backfill w ncountered w bdrain pipe sh ubdrain shall rs compatible mendations .
e Contractor s NDARD SP PORTATIO f the supply a e supplied by be 150 mm s , and shall m P and appurt CAN/CSA G4 appurtenanc er CAN/CSA B yethylene pipe d reducer sec Type N2 in ac ll shall be sup submit to the nufacturer ’ s red in accorda all carry out t by the Engine xcavated to de width sufficien with a minimu within the limit hall be installe be installed e with the shall be respo ECIFICATI ON and INF GRADING and installatio the Contracto and/or 200 m meet the follow tenances sha 401 ; or ces shall be B182.1 ( Claus e and appurte ctions shall ma ccordance wit pplied in acco e Engineer , at certification t ance with any the Work as er .
epths as indic nt to fit the bo um overlap of ts of the exca d as indicated as a contin pipe supplie onsible for all IONS FRASTRUC on of subdrain or .
mm diameter wing : all be galvani e DR 35 co se 4.1.5 ) ; or enances conf atch the grad th 601.2. ordance with 3 least 14 Days that the ma cross-referen indicated in cated in the C ottom and side 200 mm .
avation shall b d on Standard nuous line w ed and in a cutting and f CTURE n pipe .
r perforated p ized steel ma nforming to forming to AS de and quality 366.2. s in advance aterials suppl nced Item form the Contrac Contract Docu es and , after be excavated d Drawing 136 with all joints ccordance w fitting of pipes pipe , as spec anufactured t CAN/CSA B STM F405 an y of the pipe s of the comme ied meet th ming part of th ct Documents ments and sh backfilling , th in accordanc 6-1. being const with the man s in the Work .
ITEM : 136 Page 136-1 cified in the to meet the B182.2 and nd/or ASTM supplied .
encement of e specified is Item .
s and/or as hall be lined e top of the ce with Item tructed with nufacturer ’ s .
SU Pag 136 136 136 BDRAIN ge 136-2 6.4.5 .2 .6 The .1 .7 The .8 The emb the p 6.5 MEASU .1 The insta .1 6.6 BASIS O .1 Pay pipe The Contract in accordanc ends of each Where the su make an ope indicated on S trench shall material ex bankments , or property of the REMENT FO Quantity to alled in accor The measure continuous s OF PAYMENT ment for Wor e , as identified DEPARTM tor shall cut h ce with 404.4. h continuous ubdrain is to b ening in the c Standard Draw be backfilled xcavated from r , if it is consid e Contractor a OR PAYMENT be measured rdance with th ement shall be ection of insta T rk under this d under the C STA MENT of TR GRADIN holes in catch line of subdra be connected catch basin at wing 136-1. to match the m the trench dered by the E and shall be d T d for payment his Item .
e taken along allation .
Item shall inc Contract .
ANDARD S RANSPORT NG h basins , whe ain shall be ca to a precast c t the required surrounding g h shall be Engineer to be isposed of ou t shall be the g the centrelin clude a separ SPECIFICA TATION an n required , at apped , as req catch basin , t d elevation , a grade .
spread on t e unsuitable f utside the Wor e linear metre ne of the pipe rate Unit Pric ATIONS nd INFRAS t the required quired .
the Contracto and make the the Foreslop for such use , rk Site .
es of subdrain e from end to ce for each si TRUCTUR ITEM : 13 January , 20 d elevation an r shall careful connection a pes , placed it shall becom n supplied an o end for eac ze and type o RE 36 15 nd lly as in me nd ch of DEPA SUBD Janua 137.1 137.2 137.3 137.4 ARTMENT RAIN OUTLE ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite MATERIAL .1 All mate .2 Subdra subdra .1 Ga req .2 PV .3 Co .3 Geotex .4 Pipe zo .5 Free dr SUBMITTA .1 The Co the Wo requirem .2 Submit CONSTRU .1 The Co specific .2 The Co Aggreg .3 The su .4 The su T-sectio recomm .1 The STAN of TRANS ET TION em consists o S erials shall be ain outlet pip in pipe suppli lvanized CSP quirements of C pipe shall b rrugated poly xtile shall be T one material s raining backfi ALS ontractor shall ork , the ma ments .
tals are requi CTION ontractor sha cally directed b ontractor sha gate Subbase bdrain outlet ubdrain outle ons compatib mendations .
e Contractor s NDARD SP PORTATIO f the supply a e supplied by e shall be n ed and instal P and appurt CAN/CSA G4 be DR 35 con yethylene pipe Type N2 in ac shall conform ll shall be sup submit to the nufacturer ’ s red in accord all carry out t by the Engine all construct t . shall be cons et shall be in ble with the shall be respo ECIFICATI ON and INF GRADING and installatio the Contracto on-perforated led under Item tenances sha 401 ; or nforming to CA e and appurte ccordance wit to the require pplied in acco e Engineer , at certification t dance with an the Work as er .
he subdrain structed as de nstalled with pipe supplie onsible for all IONS FRASTRUC on of subdrain or .
d pipe of a m 136. all be galvani AN/CSA B18 enances confo th 601.2. ements of 415 ordance to the least 14 Days that the ma y cross-refere indicated in outlet Structu etailed in Stan all joints be ed and in a cutting and f CTURE n outlets .
size , type an ized steel ma 2.2 ; or orming to AS 5.2. e requirement s in advance aterials suppl enced Item fo the Contrac ure in advan ndard Drawin eing construc accordance w fitting of pipes nd quality to anufactured t TM F667 .
ts of 366.2. of the comme ied meet th orming part of ct Documents nce of any pl g 137-1. cted with co with the man s in the Work .
ITEM : 137 Page 137-1 match the to meet the encement of e specified f this Item .
s and/or as acement of ouplers and nufacturer ’ s .
SU Pag 137 137 137 BDRAIN OUT ge 137-2 7.4 .5 Mat Sub .1 .2 .3 .6 If th back Site .1 7.5 MEASU .1 The insta 7.6 BASIS O .1 Pay pipe TLET erial excavat bgrade .
Pipe zone a Item 936 , to up to 600 mm Trench backf 95 % of its ma The trench sh he material ex kfill , it shall be .
Replacemen Engineer .
REMENT FO Quantity to b alled in accor OF PAYMENT ment for Wor e , as identified DEPARTM ted from the and trench a minimum of m below Subg fill shall be pla aximum dry d hall be backfi xcavated from ecome the pro t backfill ma OR PAYMENT be measured rdance with th T rk under this d under the C STA MENT of TR GRADIN outlet trench backfill shall f 95 % of its m grade .
aced in 300 m density , within lled to match m the trench operty of the terial shall b T for payment his Item .
Item shall inc Contract .
ANDARD S RANSPORT NG h shall be us be placed maximum dry mm lifts in acc n the last 600 the surround is considere Contractor an be obtained f shall be the n clude a separ SPECIFICA TATION an sed for backf in 300 mm density , from cordance with mm below S ding grade .
ed by the En nd shall be di from the Wo number of su rate Unit Pric ATIONS nd INFRAS fill above the m lifts in acc m the base of h Item 936 , to ubgrade .
gineer to be isposed of ou rk Site as d ubdrain outlet ce for each si TRUCTUR ITEM : 13 January , 20 e pipe zone t cordance wit the excavatio o a minimum o unsuitable fo utside the Wo irected by th s supplied an ze and type o RE 37 15 to th on of or rk he nd of DEPA CONC Janua 140.1 140.2 ARTMENT CRETE PIPE ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite diamete MATERIAL .1 All pipe .2 All rein A257.3 .3 Pipe of centre protrud .4 Pipe m the pipe weir .
.5 Tension specific .6 Tee-ba the Con .1 Tee Doc .2 We Eng bee .1 .2 .7 Backfill .1 Cla .2 Cla .3 Bac .4 If s det acc ST of TRANS TION em consists of er ( ID ) of 1200 S e materials sha nforced concre .
1050 mm an of gravity , an e beyond the ade with ellipt e , and for pipe n rod/bar ass cally identified se sections , e ntract Docume e-bases shall cuments , the eirs/baffles sha gineer and m en reached .
When drilled shall be drill epoxy or acr Reinforceme material shal ass `` A '' shall b ass `` B '' shall b ckfill material sufficient quan termined by cordance with TANDARD PORTATIO f supply and in 0 mm or less .
all be supplied ete pipe sha nd 1200 mm n nd shall be e inside wall of tical reinforce e having baffl semblies shall in the Contra elbow section ents .
be fabricated catch basin s all be reinforc moist cured fo d holes and d led to a minim rylic adhesive ent shall be pl l meet the req e used for bac e used for bac shall be obtai ntities of suita the Enginee Item 167 from SPECIFIC ON and INF GRADING nstallation of a d by the Cont ll meet the r nominal ID sh quipped with f the pipe .
ement shall ha les and weirs l be supplied act Documents ns and/or othe d such that w shaft on the Te ced and secur or a minimum dowels are us mum depth of such as Epco aced in both f quirements of ckfilling 1050 ckfilling concr ined from with able backfill m r , additional m a source ap CATIONS FRASTRUC all reinforced ractor .
requirements all have a min a tapered co ave the lift hol , such that it as indicated ts .
er appurtenan when installed ee-base is ve red to the pip of 72 hours , sed to attach f 75 mm , and on A7 or appr faces of weirs f Table 140-1. mm and 1200 rete pipes 900 hin the Work S material are n backfill shal pproved by th CTURE concrete pipe of CAN/CSA nimum 70 mm oncrete or ru le located so is centred ove in Standard nces shall be at the slope rtical .
pe invert by a , or until 70 % h weirs/baffles d the dowels s roved equivale s , baffles and 0 mm diamete 0 mm or small Site as approv not available l be importe e Engineer .
e having a nom A A257.2 and m diameter lift ubber plug tha as to establis er the top of t Drawing 140 supplied as indicated in t method appro % of design s s to the inver shall be secu ent .
cut-off walls .
er concrete pip er in diameter ved by the En within the Wo ed by the Co ITEM : 140 Page 140-1 minal inside d CAN/CSA t hole at the at does not sh the top of the baffle or -1 for pipes indicated in he Contract oved by the strength has rt , the holes ured with an pes .
r. ngineer .
ork Site , as ontractor in CO Pag 140 140 ONCRETE PIP ge 140-2 Cla A B 0.3 SUBMIT .1 The supp .1 .2 The mate .3 If the shal adva .4 Sub 0.4 CONST .1 The spec .2 The sele .3 The Wor .4 Tren on S .1 .5 The up g PE ass A Clas unco not m B Clas 10 % TTALS Contractor s plied meet the If fish weirs/b each Culvert Contractor s erial from with e source of th ll submit the p ance of obtain mittals are req RUCTION Contractor s cifically directe Engineer sha ected locations Contractor sh rk .
nch excavatio Standard Draw If Overexcav Overexcavat compacted to pipe section grade with be DEPARTM s “ A ” backfill oated particles more than 10 % s “ B ” backfill retained on th shall submit , e specified req baffles are spe in accordance shall submit , hin the Work S he supply of th proposed sou ning backfill m quired in acco shall carry o ed by the Eng all provide co s or as may be hall be respon on shall be ca wings 161-1 t vation occurs , ion with an ap o 95 % of the s shall be join ll end up grad STA MENT of TR GRADIN T Backf shall be a w s free of lump % retained on shall be a we he 100 mm si upon reques quirements as ecified for a C e with 141.3. upon reques Site .
he backfill mat rce , in writing aterial from th ordance with a ut the Work gineer .
ontrol points in e required .
nsible for the arried out in to 161-5 , or a , the Contrac pproved back maximum dry ned in a straig de .
ANDARD S RANSPORT NG Table 140-1 fill Classificat Descripti well graded g ps of clay or o the 100 mm s ell graded gra eve , and not m st , the manuf detailed on th Culvert , the C st , the propos terial is locate g , for the appr he proposed s any cross-refe as indicated n the field to layout and m accordance w as specified in ctor shall , at kfill material , p y density .
ght line using SPECIFICA TATION an tion on ranular mate other deleterio sieve , and not anular materia more than 35 % facturer ’ s cer he Contract D Contractor sha sed source o ed outside of th roval of the E source .
erenced Item f d in the Cont provide vertic maintenance of with 161.4 an n the Contract his/her own e placed in acc g standard ind ATIONS nd INFRAS rial composed ous material , t more than 10 al having not % Dust .
rtification that Documents .
all submit sho of the supply he Work Site , Engineer , at le forming part o tract Docume cal and horizo f all lines and nd to the limit t Documents .
expense , rep cordance with dustry method TRUCTUR ITEM : 14 January , 20 d of clean , and having 0 % Dust .
more than t the materia op drawings fo of the backf the Contracto east 14 Days f this Item .
ents and/or a ontal control d grades for th ts as indicate .
pair and fill th Item 936 , an ds , proceedin RE 40 15 als or fill or in as at he ed he nd ng DEPA CONC Janua 140.4 140.5 ARTMENT CRETE PIPE ary , 2015 .6 The ma .1 Wh spe .7 Tension the Con .8 All othe .1 Pip the .9 Backfill to 161-5 .1 If th pla .10 No bac Enginee materia .1 Ma .2 Bac ram .3 Bac ma .11 Backfilli and sha .12 No traff backfill has bee .13 Shoring Work s .14 The Co accorda MEASURE .1 The Qu concret .1 The ST of TRANS aximum joint g here the joint ecified toleran n rod/bar ass ntract Docum er appurtenan pe sections w e transverse d shall be plac 5. he pipe shall ced and shap kfill material s er , including b als .
aterial over 75 ckfill shall be mmer-type com ckfill shall be aximum dry de ing of concret all never exce fic or constru cover indicat en placed .
g , bracing , sh hall be emplo ontractor shal ance with Item MENT FOR P uantity to be te pipe supplie e measureme TANDARD PORTATIO gap between t gap exceed nce .
semblies sha ents .
nces shall be with weirs or b direction .
ced and shape have an indu ped as noted in shall be placed but not limited mm in size sh placed in lift mpactors and e compacted ensity .
te pipe shall p ed 600 mm in ction equipm ted on Standa heeting , pump yed , maintain l construct , m m 918 .
PAYMENT measured fo ed and installe ent shall be tak SPECIFIC ON and INF GRADING any two conc ds 13 mm , se ll be installed installed as in baffles shall b ed to lines an uced trench c n the Contract d in the excav d to the dimen hall not be pla ts of not mor not more than in accordanc proceed simult n differential e ent shall be ard Drawings ps , temporary ned and remov maintain and r or payment sh ed in accordan ken along the CATIONS FRASTRUC crete pipe sec ections shall d as indicated ndicated in th be installed w nd grades as i constructed ov ct Documents .
vation until the nsions of exca aced within 30 re than 200 m n 300 mm in t ce with Item taneously and levation .
permitted to 161-1 to 161 y roads and/o ved by the Co remove suitab hall be the n nce with this It invert of the p CTURE ctions shall be be removed d in Standard he Contract Do with the weir/ indicated on S ver it under It e excavation h avation and th 00 mm of any c mm in thickne thickness for v 936 , to a m d evenly on bo pass over the 1-5 and/or in or bridges tha ontractor .
ble temporary number of line tem .
pipe .
e 13 mm .
d and reset to d Drawing 14 ocuments .
/baffle tops h Standard Draw tem 169 , back has been appr e character o concrete pipe ess for vibrato vibratory roller minimum of 9 oth sides of th e concrete pi the Contract at are necess y construction ear metres o ITEM : 140 Page 140-3 o meet the 40-1 and in horizontal in wings 161-1 kfill shall be roved by the f foundation e. ory plate or rs .
95 % of the he Structure pe until the Documents sary for the n detours in of reinforced CO Pag 140 ONCRETE PIP ge 140-4 0.6 BASIS O .1 Pay conc .2 The store .1 PE OF PAYMENT ment for Wor crete pipe , as Owner shall ed at the Wor Partial payme supplier ’ s yar DEPARTM T rk under this identified und make partia k Site .
ent shall be m rd .
STA MENT of TR GRADIN Item shall inc der the Contra al payment in ade for specia ANDARD S RANSPORT NG clude a separa act .
accordance alized reinforc SPECIFICA TATION an ate Unit Price with 908.7 f ced concrete p ATIONS nd INFRAS e for each siz for reinforced pipe acceptab TRUCTUR ITEM : 14 January , 20 ze of reinforce concrete pip bly stored at th RE 40 15 ed pe he DEPA CONC Janua 141.1 141.2 ARTMENT CRETE PIPE - ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite diamete MATERIAL .1 All pipe .2 Pipe sh .3 All pipe .4 Appurte without Docum .1 Ten .2 Tee cat .3 Dow .4 The .5 Non-sh .6 For liftin .1 Pip cen pro .2 Pip equ .3 Pip est the .7 Weirs , b .8 Backfill .1 Bac .2 If s det acc STAN of TRANS - LARGE TION em consists of er ( ID ) greater S e materials sha hall meet the r es shall be sup enances , whic steel inserts ) ent and shop nsion bar asse e-bases shall ch basin shaf wels for attac e concrete for rink grout sha ng devices the pe up to 1800 ntre of gravity otrude beyond pe of 2100 m uivalent of suf pe made with ablish the top top of the we baffles and cu material shal ckfill material s sufficient quan termined by cordance with NDARD SP PORTATIO f the supply a r than 1200 m all be supplied referenced ma pplied with ga ch may includ ) , baffles , and drawings .
emblies shall be fabricated ft on the tee-b ching cut-off w r precast weirs all conform to e following sh mm diamete y of the pipe the inside wa mm diameter fficient capac elliptical rein p of the pipe , a eir or baffle .
ut-off walls sha l be Class “ A ” shall be obtain ntities of suita the Enginee Item 167 from ECIFICATI ON and INF GRADING and placemen mm .
d by the Cont anufacturing s skets ( confine de tension bar d/or bevelled be as shown d such that w base is vertica walls to pipe s s , baffles and ASTM C1107 all apply : r shall have a e section , wit all of the pipe , and larger s city to handle nforcement sh and for pipe h all be made w per 167.2. ned from with able backfill m r , additional m a source ap IONS FRASTRUC nt of all reinfor ractor .
standards .
ed `` O '' ring wi r assemblies , ends , shall b in Standard D when installed al .
shall be 25 M cut-off walls 7. a formed lift h h tapered co or shall be th shall use Da and place pip hall have the having weirs o with the same c in the Work S material are n backfill shall pproved by the CTURE rced concrete th lubricant , o tee-bases , cu be supplied as Drawing 140-1 at the slope deformed re shall have an ole ( minimum oncrete or rub e system des ayton Superio pe sections .
e lift hole or l or baffles , suc concrete requ Site as approv not available l be importe e Engineer .
e pipe of a nom or single offse ut-off walls , w s shown on th .
shown on the inforcing stee air content of m 70 mm diam bber plug tha scribed in 141. or Swift Lift S lift anchorage ch that it is ce uirements as th ed by the Eng within the Wo ed by the Co ITEM : 141 Page 141-1 minal inside t type ) .
weirs ( with or he Contract e Plans , the el bars .
f 5 to 8 % .
meter ) at the at does not .2.6.2 .
Systems or e located to entered over he pipe .
gineer .
ork Site , as ontractor in CO Pag 141 141 ONCRETE PIP ge 141-2 1.3 SUBMIT .1 The cont .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9 .10 .11 .2 The follo .1 .2 .3 .3 Thre diam .4 The conc .5 The the .6 The mat .7 If th Con 14 D .8 Sub 1.4 CONST .1 Gen .1 PE - LARGE TTALS Contractor s taining but no Station ( s ) of p General layou Length and w Joint details ; Details of rein wire sizes for Details of rein Concrete des Production sc Method of att PIPECAR de the Contract D .1 PIPECAR Contract Lap lengths a Contractor sh owing : All pipes 300 All pipes less All pipe desig ee-Edge Bear meter .
proposed mix crete producti manufacture Contract Doc Contractor s erial from with he source of ntractor shall s Days in advan mittals are req RUCTION neral The Contract specifically di DEPARTM shall submit , t limited to , th pipe ( s ) , name ut showing pip weight ( mass ) nforcing steel cages and st nforcing steel f sign strength , chedule ; taching concre sign input and Documents fo R design inpu Documents .
and welding pr hall submit , in 00 mm ID and s than 3000 m gns that are n ring Test resu x proportions on is due to s er ’ s certificatio cuments shall shall submit , hin the Work f the supply submit the pro nce of obtaini quired in acco tor shall carry rected by the STA MENT of TR GRADIN in accordan e following inf e ( s ) of waterco pe and appurt of individual s for each ind tirrups ; for weirs , baff age of test an ete weir ( s ) and d output , inclu or pipes ≥ 300 ut shall be in rocedure for p n accordance d larger ; mm ID of a cla not listed in th ults shall be s ( design ) , sha start .
on that the su be submitted upon reques Site .
of the back oposed sourc ng backfill ma ordance with a y out the Wo Engineer .
ANDARD S RANSPORT NG ce with Item formation : ourse ( s ) , and tenances ; sections ; ividual cage , fles and cut-of nd shipping str d baffle ( s ) to p uding printouts 0mm ID ; accordance pipes ≥ 3000m with Item 95 ass higher tha e design tabl submitted upo all be submitte upplied mate d upon reques st , the propos kfill material ce , in writing , aterial from th any cross-refe rk as indicate SPECIFICA TATION an m 956 , shop DTI contract including bar ff walls ; rength ; pipe ; s of outputs fo with the Sup mm ID .
56 , two sets o an 140-D ; and es in CAN/CS on request fo ed to the Engin rials meet the st. sed source o is located o for the appro he proposed s erenced Item f ed in the Con ATIONS nd INFRAS J drawings for number and d r spacing , bar or load cases a pplement to It of design calcu d SA A257 .
or pipes less neer at least 1 e specified re of the supply outside the W oval of the Eng source .
forming part o ntract Docum TRUCTUR ITEM : 14 January , 201 each Culver description ; r yield strengt as indicated o tem 141 of th ulations for th than 3000 m 14 Days befor equirements o of the backf Work Site , th gineer , at lea f this Item .
ents and/or a RE 41 5 rt , h , on he he m re of fill he st as DEPA CONC Janua 141.4 .
141.4 Pipe D ( m 1350 ≥ 3 ARTMENT CRETE PIPE - ary , 2015 1 .2 Eac .3 The sup .4 The ma .5 The to t .6 The .7 The pla .1 .2 .2 Pipe De .1 For CA PIP .2 The to t .1 .3 Pip suc Diameter mm ) to 2700 C C 3000 A STAN of TRANS - LARGE ch pipe sectio e Engineer sh pplied under th e Contractor s anufacture to a e Engineer sh the Plans , sho e manufacture e manufacture nt to accomm The office s chair , adequ approximate Convenient services sha esign & Fabric r pipe with an AN/CSA-S6 b PECAR , as pe e pipe reinforc the governing If the area reinforcing s Cl.7.8.8.1.1 pe design and ch that specifi Reinforc Applicable Standards CSA A257.2 , CSA A257.3 CSA-S6 ASTM C1417 NDARD SP PORTATIO on shall be clea hall have the r his Item .
shall notify the allow for sched hall have the a op drawings or er shall provid er shall provid modate the Eng space shall be uate lighting , ely 20ºC .
telephone , all also be pro cation n ID of 3000 y the Direct er the Contrac cing area and PIPECAR ou of reinforcing specified in PI to ensure it is d fabrication s ied installatio ced Concrete Additiona CSA A23.1 air content CSA A23.1 air content corrosion in ECIFICATI ON and INF GRADING arly labeled w right to inspec e Engineer at duling of the O authority to ord r Specification e safe workin de regular an gineer .
e clean and f and ventilatio internet , facs vided .
mm or greate Design Met ct Documents d spacing for p utput .
g specified b PECAR , the s less than the shall be in ac n tolerances a Table 141 e Pipe Desig al Standards / Concre 1 and A23.2 , e of 5 to 8 % .
1 and A23.2 , e of 5 to 8 % ; ca nhibitor at a ra IONS FRASTRUC with `` NBDTI '' o ct the manufa least 5 Days Owner ’ s inspe der production ns .
g conditions f nd practically furnished with on and heati simile , photo er , the pipe s thod , using t . pipe with an ID by the manu area must be e maximum al ccordance wit are attainable -1 n and Fabric Requirement ete exposure clas exposure clas alcium nitrite ate of 15 L/m³ CTURE on the inside .
acture of any p before comm ection .
n to stop if the for the Engine located office h a suitable s ng to provide ocopy , mail shall be analy the most rec D of 3000 mm facturer is g e verified per C llowable reinfo th Table 141- e. cation Requi ts for Dura ss C-1 ; Until of 20 ss C-1 ; ³ .
Until of 35 pipes and app mencing any p e Work does eer .
e space at the standard offic e a room tem and messag yzed in acco cent software m or greater sh reater than t CSA S6-06 C orcing area .
-1 and Table rements ation of Moist min .
concrete 0 MPa is attain min .
concrete 5 MPa is attain ITEM : 141 Page 141-3 purtenances phase of the not conform e fabrication ce desk and mperature of ge handling rdance with version of hall conform the area of Commentary 141-2 , and Curing e strength ned .
e strength ned .
CO Pag 141 141 ONCRETE PIP ge 141-4 Pipe Dia < 3000 m ≥ 3000 m 1.4 .3 Form .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 1.4 .4 Curi .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 PE - LARGE Requirement ameter Circ ( Pip mm 25 m mm 40 m ms Forms shall b Forms shall b Forms shall b permitted .
Permanently made of stee The minimum entire depth w ing and Prote Moist curing per Table 14 Artificially ac A23.4 and th .1 The conc that ens concrete .2 During t temperat For the next exceed 15oC .1 The temp Steam , radia initial set ; sha applied direc The exposed curing period than 10oC fro DEPARTM ts for Reinfo cumferential S pe ) mm ; min .
19 m mm ± 10 mm be a configura be clean and f be complete exposed shar l , plastic , or cl m cover over f with an approv ction of Conc of the concr 1-1. ccelerated cu e following : crete sections sures full circ sections with he initial cur ture shall be k t stage of cu C per hour , to perature diffe ant heat or for all provide ex ctly to the con d surfaces of d. Water app om the concre STA MENT of TR GRADIN Table 1 rcing Steel C & Appurte Concre Steel W W mm 50 50 tion to ensure free of mortar and inspected rp edges shal ear straight-g form snap-tie ved cement gr rete rete sections ring of the c s shall be ma culation of t h a minimum ring period ( t kept at approx ring , the enc a temperature rential within rced air used xcess moistur crete , forms o the concrete lied for this p ete temperatu ANDARD S RANSPORT NG 141-2 Cover for Rein enances te Cover Ove Weirs / Baffle Walls / Footing 0 mm ± 10 mm 0 mm ± 10 mm e compliance w prior to applic d by the Eng l be chamfere rained wood p s shall be 50 rout mix per 1 shall be carr concrete sect intained on th thoroughly sa loss of moistu typically 4 to ximately 20oC closure tempe e between 40 the enclosure for accelerate e for proper h or cylinders .
e shall have a purpose shall ure , and in no SPECIFICA TATION an nforced Conc r Reinforcing es , Cut-off s m m with the allow cation of form ineer before ed with triangu placed on the 0 mm and the 41.4.5. ried out in ac tions shall be he casting be aturated air ure and heat .
o 5 hours af C. erature shall 0 and 60oC .
e shall not ex ed curing sha hydration of th an excess of have a temp o case shall ex ATIONS nd INFRAS J crete Pipes Steel Slope of Beve 50 mm ± 10 m 50 mm ± 10 m able tolerance coating .
placing of co ular fillets , 19 side exposed e voids shall b ccordance wit e in accorda ed in an appro and/or steam fter casting ) be raised at xceed 5°C .
all not be app he cement ; a f moisture du perature that v xceed 60oC .
TRUCTUR ITEM : 14 January , 201 eled Ends mm mm es .
ncrete shall b mm by 19 mm d to concrete .
be filled to the th CSA A23 .
ance with CS oved enclosur m around th the enclosur t a rate not t plied before th nd shall not b uring the entir varies no mor RE 41 5 be m , eir 1 , SA re he re to he be re re DEPA CONC Janua 141.4 .
141.4 141.4 ARTMENT CRETE PIPE - ary , 2015 4 .6 The the dev .7 Wh be .8 Cu hou the .5 Finishin .1 All acc .1 .2 .3 .2 Imm cle def .1 .3 All .6 Pipe Le .1 Bef ma pre .2 For .1 STAN of TRANS - LARGE e Contractor/ e entire curing vice per lengt hen a concret lowered , at a lvert sections urs in warm t e outside air te ng of Concret surfaces of t cordance with All surface v removal of t grout mix of incorporate All objection be totally rem If the concre Finish , the designated p mediately afte arly marked a fect .
The Contrac .1 Cement .2 All defe adjacen ridges occurr ess Than 3000 fore delivery anufacturer sh esence to dete r pipes up to C The Enginee produced for D-load spec 0.3 mm crac occurs first .
NDARD SP PORTATIO /Manufacturer g period by m th of the curin te section has a rate of 15oC s shall not be emperatures emperature .
te Surfaces the precast c h the following voids larger t the formwork f cement and a latex bondi nable fins , pr moved to the ete surface do Contractor s portions , or a er the remova and the Contr ctor shall subm t washes of a cts shall be t surface .
ring at junctio 0 mm in Diam of pipe sec hall perform ermine the loa Class 140-D th er shall select r the Contract cified for the s ck develops or ECIFICATI ON and INF GRADING r shall provid means of app ng enclosure t s reached its per hour , to t e exposed to following cur concrete secti g : han 12 mm i k , shall be fille d fine sand fro ng agent .
ojections , off Engineer 's s oes not adeq shall , as dire ll of the concr al of forms , an ractor shall no mit a repair p ny kind shall finished smo ns of form pa eter – Fabrica ctions , and o D-load testin d to produce a he following a at random on t or supplied f size and class r a load 5 % g IONS FRASTRUC e a continuo proved accura to record the required stre the ambient a o freezing tem ring , and coo ions shall rec n diameter a ed to their en om the same fsets , streaks satisfaction .
uately fulfill th ected by the rete , and repl ny part of the otify the Engi procedure for not be used .
ooth , uniforml anels shall be ation & Testing on at least 5 ng ( Three-Ed a 0.3 mm crac pplies : ne pipe section from stock .
If n s of pipe teste reater than th CTURE ous record of ate automatic temperature .
ength the enc air temperatur mperatures u oled at not mo ceive an `` Ord nd cavities , o ntire depth w e source as u s or other sur he requireme e Engineer , lace with new Work which d ineer of the lo approval .
y colour mat ground smoo g 5 Days notic dge Bearing ck .
n per size and no 0.3 mm cra ed , further loa he specified lo curing tempe c recording de losure tempe re .
until they hav ore than 5oC dinary Surfac or holes visib with an approv used in the co rface imperfe ents for Ordin entirely remo w concrete .
displays defe ocation and e tched and flu oth .
ce to the En Test ) in the d class from a ack has deve ad shall be ap oad is reached ITEM : 141 Page 141-5 eratures for evices ; one erature shall ve dried 48 per hour to e Finish '' in le upon the ved cement oncrete and ctions shall ary Surface ove certain ects shall be extent of the sh with the ngineer , the Engineer ’ s mong those loped at the pplied until a d , whichever CO Pag 141 141 ONCRETE PIP ge 141-6 1.4.6.2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 1.4 .7 Pipe .1 .2 PE - LARGE .2 The man sections , strength , .3 In the ev verificatio tested to For pipes of a .1 The Thre mm crack .2 Three re supplier ’ s loads , the specimen .3 The three load plus required .4 If a plant of the sa providing to : review have bee After the des used to deter All specimens During produ marked `` TES During produ every 15 m3 o .1 For conc tests sha e 3000 mm in All Work shal Sampling , te accordance w .1 A streng additiona .2 For dry-c strength t DEPARTM ufacturer sha the word `` T the word `` RE vent of disag on of the 0.3 its ultimate st a class higher ee-Edge Bear k , and the ultim epresentative s D-loading te e manufacture ns from full-len e test specime s 5 % , and to limits to verify has previous ame pipe from g a submittal s wed shop dra en taken to the ign has been rmine accepta s tested to ulti ction , one furt STED '' .
ction , quality of concrete pla rete placeme ll be carried o Diameter and l be carried o st cylinders a with CSA A23 th test is defi al cylinders bro cast precast c test shall be ta STA MENT of TR GRADIN ll clearly mark TESTED '' ; and EJECT '' .
greement betw mm crack on trength at the than 140-D th ring Test shall mate load ( to pipe specim est equipmen er shall cast t ngth sections .
ens shall be te ultimate stre y the design of sly verified a d m that design showing verifi awings , mix de e ultimate load verified , tests ance of the pip mate strength ther test spec control testin aced .
nts under 15 out per half Da d Larger- Man ut in the prese and air conte .2. ned as a min oken at earlier oncrete sectio aken on every ANDARD S RANSPORT NG k on the inside d on section ween the ma n a culvert se Contractor ’ s e he following a l be performe verify the des mens shall be t can not test three shorter ested to D-loa ength .
All of t f the pipe .
design for a sp without unde cation .
The s esign , and th d. s in accordan pe .
h shall be mar cimen shall be g and test sa m3 , a minimu ays production ufacture & Te ence of the En ent tests sha nimum of 2 cy r dates for pro ons , air conte y second secti SPECIFICA TATION an e of test secti s that failed anufacturer/su ection being t expense .
applies : ed to determin sign ) .
e tested prio full-length pip specimens fo ad ( developme the specimen pecific pipe , th ergoing the ve ubmission sh ree Three-Ed nce with claus rked `` REJECT e tested to D-l ampling per 3 um of one set n. esting ngineer .
ll be perform ylinders broke oduction purpo ent shall be te ion .
ATIONS nd INFRAS J ions the follow or were test upplier and th tested , that s ne the load to or to full pro pe sections to or testing rath ent of a 0.3 m s shall meet hat plant may erification pro all include , bu dge Bearing te se 9 of CSA A T '' .
load , to D-load 02.4 shall be t of cylinders a med by the m en at the spec oses .
sted on every TRUCTUR ITEM : 14 January , 201 wing : on all te ted to ultimat he Engineer section may b o produce a 0 duction .
If th o the specifie her than cuttin mm crack ) , to D or exceed th y produce mor ocess again , b ut is not limite est results th A257.2 shall b d plus 5 % , an carried out fo and air conte manufacturer cified age , wit y section and RE 41 5 est te in be .3 he ed ng D- he re by ed at be nd or nt in th a DEPA CONC Janua 141.4.7 141.4 141.4 141.4 ARTMENT CRETE PIPE - ary , 2015 7.2 .3 .4 .8 Weirs a .1 Eac tran .2 Eac by .3 Co and .4 Wh dril adh .9 Bevelle .1 Bev .2 The con hou .3 Saw .4 A s pla .10 Placem .1 The sele .2 The the .3 Exc Sta .1 .4 Pip .5 Pip gra as STAN of TRANS - LARGE For wet-cast every section If superplas of the super and Baffles ch weir/baffle nsverse direct ch weir/baffle a method app ncrete for wei d shall be moi hen drilled hol led to a minim hesive such a ed End Section velled ends sh e bevel shall ncrete .
Cappin urs .
w-cut bevels s slurry coat of E ced .
ment e Engineer s ected location e Contractor s Work as show cavation shall andard Drawin If Overexcav Overexcavat and compac pes shall be pl pe sections sh ade with bell e recommended NDARD SP PORTATIO t precast conc n. ticizers are a rplasticizer .
e shall be pos tion when the shall have tw proved by the irs and baffles ist cured for a es and dowel mum of 100 s Epcon A7 o ns hall be constru be capped w ng concrete s shall be rough Engineer-app hall provide c ns or as otherw shall be respo wn on the Pla l be carried o ngs 161-1 to 1 vation occurs , tion with an a cted to 95 % of aced as show hall be joined i end up grade .
d by the lifting ECIFICATI ON and INF GRADING crete sections dded , the air sitioned unde pipe is install wo rows of rei Engineer .
s shall match a minimum of 7 s are used to mm , and the or approved eq ucted as show with concrete shall be finish hened before b roved bonding control points wise required .
onsible for the ans .
out in accorda 61-5 , or as sp , the Contract approved bac f the maximum wn on the Plan in a straight lin Each pipe se g device manu IONS FRASTRUC , air content a r content test er the lifting d led .
inforcement a the concrete 72 hours .
attach weirs/ dowels shall quivalent .
wn on the Plan matching the hed smooth a being capped g agent shall s in the field .
e layout and m ance with 16 pecified in the tor shall , at h ckfill material , m dry density .
ns and/or shop ne using stan ection shall be ufacturer .
CTURE and one streng shall be perf device so the and shall be s of the pipe in /baffles to the l be secured ns or shop dra e colour and c and moist cur .
be applied be for vertical a maintenance o 61.4 and to th Contract Doc is/her own ex placed in ac p drawings .
ndard industry e set into place gth test shall formed after t e top is horizo secured to the n colour and c invert , the ho with an epox awings .
consistency o red for a min efore capping and horizonta of all lines and he limits as in cuments .
xpense , repair ccordance wit y methods , pro e and position ITEM : 141 Page 141-7 be taken on the addition ontal in the e pipe invert consistency , oles shall be xy or acrylic of the pipe ’ s imum of 72 concrete is al control at d grades for ndicated on r and fill the h Item 936 , oceeding up ned together CO Pag 141 ONCRETE PIP ge 141-8 1.4.10 .6 .7 .8 .9 .10 .11 .12 .13 .14 PE - LARGE The maximum diameter , and .1 Where th meet the Precast cut-o the elevations from the Plan .1 An inlet c placed p satisfactio Contracto .2 Following the wall section im .3 With the prefabrica .4 The 25 M adhesive Sections of c the inlet or ou Gaskets shal Pipe sections transverse dir length of the w All other appu Lifting anchor Backfill shall 161-1 to 161- .1 If the pipe placed an No backfill sh Engineer , inc foundation m .1 Material o .2 Backfill s rammer-t .3 Backfill s maximum DEPARTM m joint gap b d 20 mm for p he joint gap ex specified tole off walls under s and offsets ns , as directed cut-off wall or h per 141.4.8.5 on of the En or shall make g placement a shall be “ butt mmediately se end section ated holes as M dowels sh e such as Epco concrete pipe utlet end of the l be installed p s with weirs or rection , with a weir .
urtenances sh r recesses sha be placed an -5. e shall have a nd shaped as hall be placed cluding but n aterials .
over 75 mm in hall be placed type compacto shall be comp m dry density .
STA MENT of TR GRADIN between pipe ipes of 1800 m xceeds the ab erance , at the r this Item , or shown on the d by the Engin headwall shal to ensure th ngineer .
If the necessary co and backfilling tered ” with a et into place o in place , the guides to a n all be inserte on A7 or an a marked as ha e installed culv per the pipe m r baffles shall a maximum in hall be installed all be entirely nd shaped to an induced tre noted in the C d in the excav not limited to n size shall no d in lifts of no ors and not m pacted in acc ANDARD S RANSPORT NG sections sha mm diameter bove tolerance Contractor 's e cast-in-place e Plans and/or eer .
l not be place hat the inlet e e pipe fails to orrections at h of a precast 25 mm layer n it .
Contractor sh ominal depth ed and secure pproved equiv aving been tes vert .
manufacturer's be installed w stalled toleran d as shown o grouted in wit lines and gra nch construct Contract Docu vation until th the dimensio ot be placed w ot more than 2 more than 300 cordance with SPECIFICA TATION an all be 13 mm and larger .
es , sections sh expense .
headwalls un r shop drawin ed until enough end section l o line up with is/her expens cut-off wall , th r of non-shrin hall drill 30 m of 150 mm in red into place valent .
sted for D-loa s instructions .
with the weir o nce of 2 % ver n the Plans .
th non-shrink ades as indic ted over it und uments .
he excavation ons of excav within 300 mm 200 mm in thi mm in thickne Item 936 , to ATIONS nd INFRAS J m for pipes u hall be remov nder Item 301 , ngs , or if site c h culvert secti ine up with t h the wall as se .
he top pre-for k grout and t mm diameter h to the top of th e using an ep ading shall be or baffle top h rtically over th grout .
cated on Stan der Item 169 , n has been ap vation and th of any concre ickness for vib ess for vibrato o a minimum TRUCTUR ITEM : 14 January , 201 p to 1500 m ed and reset t , shall be set conditions diffe ions have bee the wall to th s specified , th rmed surface the culvert en holes using th he wall .
poxy or acryl e placed only horizontal in th e full horizont ndard Drawing backfill shall b pproved by th e character o ete pipe .
bratory plate o ory rollers .
of 95 % of th RE 41 5 m to at er en he he of nd he lic at he tal gs be he of or he DEPA CONC Janua 141.4 .
141.5 141.6 ARTMENT CRETE PIPE - ary , 2015 10 .15 Bac Stru .16 No bac Doc .17 Sho Wo .18 The the MEASURE .1 The Qu concret .1 The BASIS OF .1 Paymen concret .2 The Ow STAN of TRANS - LARGE ckfilling of co ucture and sh traffic or cons ckfill cover in cuments has oring , bracing ork shall be em e Contractor s pipe and app MENT FOR P uantity to be te pipe supplie e measureme PAYMENT nt for Work u te pipe , as ide wner shall mak NDARD SP PORTATIO oncrete pipe all never exce struction equi ndicated on been placed .
g , sheeting , pu mployed , main shall construc purtenances a PAYMENT measured fo ed and placed ent shall be tak under this Item entified under t ke partial paym ECIFICATI ON and INF GRADING shall proceed eed 600 mm in pment shall b Standard Dr umps , tempor ntained and re ct , maintain a as required in a or payment sh d in accordanc ken along the m shall include the Contract .
ment for reinfo IONS FRASTRUC d simultaneou n differential e be permitted to rawings 161- rary roads and emoved by the and remove te accordance w hall be the n ce with this Ite invert of the p e a separate orced concret CTURE us and even elevation .
o pass over th -1 to 161-5 d/or bridges th e Contractor .
emporary con with Item 918. number of line em .
pipe .
Unit Price fo te pipe in acco nly on both s he concrete p and/or in th hat are neces nstruction deto ear metres o or each size o ordance with 9 ITEM : 141 Page 141-9 sides of the pipe until the he Contract ssary for the ours around of reinforced of reinforced 908.7 .
DEPA PRECA Janua 142.1 142.2 ARTMENT AST CONCR ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite MATERIAL .1 All mate .2 Concre .1 Exp .2 Air .3 Interior recomm .4 Exterio with pri .5 The ca .1 The .2 The nitr .3 The pro .1 .2 .6 Dowels bars .
.7 Reinfor conform .1 We on .8 Weirs/b Enginee .1 Wh dril acr .2 Re .3 The STAN of TRANS RETE BOX CU TION em consists o S erials shall be ete shall meet posure Class content shall r water tight mendations , o r joint wrap s mers recomm lcium nitrite c e dosage rate e corrosion in rite by weight o e calcium nitr ovided to the E Acceptable computerize Verification s s for attachme rcing steel sh ming to ASTM elding of reinf the Contract baffles shall b er and moist c hen drilled hol led to a minim rylic adhesive inforcement s e concrete for NDARD SP PORTATIO ULVERT f the supply a e supplied by t the requirem shall be C-X be 5 to 8 % .
joint seal sh or approved e shall be 300 mended by the corrosion inhib shall be 15 L nhibiting calciu of solution .
rite shall be a Engineer for th verification s d batch plants shall be provid ent of cut-off w hall be rebar M A82 , A185 , forcing steel , Documents .
be reinforced cured for a mi es and dowel mum depth o such as Epco shall be placed r precast weir PECIFICAT ON and INF GRADING and placemen the Contracto ments of CSA L. hall be Rub ’ r equivalent .
mm wide Co e manufactur bitor shall con /m3 .
um nitrite adm added at the he quantity of shall include , s or printouts f ded on the del walls to beve conforming to A496 and A4 including tack d and secure inimum of 72 s are used to of 100 mm , a on A7 or appr d in both face rs , baffles and TIONS FRASTRUC nt of precast c or .
A23.1 and C r-Nek , size p onwrap , ConS rer .
nform to the fo mixture shall c concrete rea the calcium n but is not n from compute livery slip .
lled ends sha o 304.2 and/o 497. k welding , is ed to the Cu hours .
attach weirs/ and the dowe roved equivale s of weirs , ba d cut-off walls CTURE concrete box SA A23.2 .
per joint sea Seal CS-212 ollowing : contain betwe ady mix plant nitrite added to necessarily li erized admixtu all be 25 M de or welded de prohibited un ulvert by a m /baffles to the els shall be se ent .
affles and cut-o s shall have a Culvert sectio l manufactur or approved een 30 % to 3 and verificati o each batch o mited to , prin ure dispensing eformed reinf eformed steel nless otherwis method appro invert , the ho ecured with a off walls .
an air content ITEM : 142 Page 142-1 on ( s ) .
rer ’ s written equivalent , 6 % calcium ion shall be of concrete .
ntouts from g units .
forcing steel l wire fabric se indicated oved by the oles shall be an epoxy or of 5 to 8 % .
PR Pag 142 142 ECAST CON ge 142-2 2.2.8 .4 .9 Non .10 Leve man .1 .11 Liftin capa .12 Rigi suffi .1 .13 Rein mini .14 Side .15 Bac .1 .2 2.3 SUBMIT .1 The conc .1 .2 .3 NCRETE BOX Weirs , baffle Culvert .
n-shrink grout elling sand sh nufactured cru Sand ( includ tested in acc ng anchorage acity for hand d sheets ( bo icient durabili The supplied Culvert .
nforcing supp imum of 25 m e form spacer kfill material s Backfill mate If sufficient q determined b accordance w TTALS Contractor s crete box Culv Station of cul General layo Length and w DEPARTM X CULVERT s and cut-off shall conform hall be clean , usher Dust ob ing crusher D ordance with Grad A Sie 9 .
4.7 2.3 1.1 6 3 7 e devices sha dling and plac oards , plywoo ty so as to all d rigid sheets ports shall b mm of cover .
rs shall be ma shall be Class rial shall be o quantities of s by the Engin with Item 167 shall submit , vert , containin lvert , name of ut showing al weight ( mass ) ST MENT of TR GRADIN walls shall b m to ASTM C non-plastic , btained from c Dust ) shall me ASTM C136 T ding Require ASTM ve Size .5 mm 75 mm 36 mm 18 mm 600 µm 300 µm 75 µm all be Dayton cing the Culve od , sheet me low adjacent s shall be of be made of ade entirely o s “ A ” per 167. obtained from suitable backf neer , addition from a sourc in accordan ng but not limi f watercourse ll box culvert ) of individual TANDARD RANSPORT NG be made with 1107. free of delete crushing bedr eet the gradin .
Table 142-1 ements for L Superior Swif ert sections .
etal or simila Culvert sectio f a length to plastic , stain f plastic or en .2. within the W fill material ar nal backfill s ce approved b nce with Item ted to , the fol e , and DTI Co sections and sections ; SPECIFICA TATION an the same co erious materia rock .
ng limits as s Levelling San Percent Pas 100 95 to 10 80 to 10 50 to 90 25 to 65 10 to 35 2 to 10 ft Lift System ar ) for placin ons to slide in o extend bey nless steel , o ntirely of stain Work Site as ap re not availab shall be impo by the Engine m 956 , shop lowing inform ontract numbe appurtenanc ATIONS nd INFRAS oncrete requir als and shall hown in Tabl nd ssing 0 0 0 5 5 s or equivale ng under join nto place .
yond each si or galvanized nless steel .
pproved by th ble within the orted by the eer .
drawings for mation : er and descrip ces ; TRUCTUR ITEM : 14 January , 20 rements as th be a natural o e 142-1 , whe nt , of sufficie nts shall be o de of the bo d steel with he Engineer .
e Work Site , a Contractor r each preca ption ; RE 42 15 he or en nt of ox a as in st DEPA PRECA Janua 142.3 .
142.4 142.4 ARTMENT AST CONCR ary , 2015 1 .4 Joi .5 Pro .6 Loc be .7 Loc .8 Bar .9 Item .10 Det .11 Co .12 Tw .13 Loc .14 BO on .1 .2 The pro Days b .1 The .2 The em .3 The Co certifica .4 The Co materia .5 If the so shall su advanc .6 Submitt CONSTRU .1 Genera .1 The spe .2 The res Cu .1 .2 .3 STAN of TRANS RETE BOX CU nt details ( inc oposed constr cation and typ cut for lifting cation of reinf r schedules fo mized supply tail showing y ncrete design wo sets of des cation of man OXCAR design the Contract BOXCAR de Contract Do oposed mix p efore concret e Contractor s e Contractor mployed for the ontractor shal ation that the m ontractor sha al from within t ource of the s ubmit the prop ce of obtaining tals are requir CTION al e Contractor ecifically direct e Contractor spect to fabri lvert sections Reinforcing 10 mm .
At joints , the end of the b For circumfe mm and the NDARD SP PORTATIO ULVERT cluding gap , g ruction joints pe of inserts a anchors ) ; forcing steel ; or all reinforci list ; year of fabrica n strength , ag ign calculatio nufacturing pla n input and o Documents .
esign input s ocuments .
roportions ( de te production shall submit a shall submit e curing and p l submit , in a materials to b ll submit , upo the Work Site supply of the posed source g backfill mate red in accorda shall carry ou ted by the Eng shall comply ication , trans s. steel bars or e minimum co ell and spigot erential steel , maximum co PECIFICAT ON and INF GRADING gasket , conne ( if sections n and lift device ing steel ; ation embedd ge of test , form ns ; and ant .
utput , includi hall be in acc esign ) , shall b is due to star a production s t to the Engi protection of t dvance of the e supplied for on request , t . backfill mater , in writing , fo erial from the p ance with any ut the Work a gineer .
y with the req sportation , sto r wire mesh s oncrete cover t. in the bell an oncrete cover TIONS FRASTRUC ection plates a ot cast mono es ( including l ded in the hea m removal str ng printouts o cordance with be submitted rt .
schedule to th neer the pro the precast c e commencem r the fabricatio the proposed rial is located or the approva proposed sou cross-referen as indicated i quirements of orage and d shall have a m r shall be 13 nd spigot , the r shall be 50 m CTURE and waterproo lithically ) ; location wher adwalls ; rength and sh of outputs for h the Supple to the Engine he Engineer .
oposed metho concrete secti ment of the W on meet the s source of th outside the W al of the Engi urce .
nced Item form in the Contra f CSA A23.4 elivery of the minimum con mm for all lo e minimum co mm .
ofing ) ; re rebar and/o hipping streng r load cases a ement to Item eer for review od and sequ ons .
Work , the ma pecified requi he supply of Work Site , the neer , at least ming part of th act Documents and ASTM e precast co ncrete cover o ongitudinal ste oncrete cover ITEM : 142 Page 142-3 or mesh will gth ; as indicated m 142 of the w at least 14 ence to be nufacturer ’ s irements .
the backfill e Contractor t 14 Days in is Item .
s and/or as C1433 with oncrete box of 55 mm ± eel from the shall be 13 PR Pag 142 142 ECAST CON ge 142-4 2.4.1 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9 2.4 .2 Culv .1 .2 .3 NCRETE BOX All aspects o be to the sati Manufacture been reviewe .1 The Eng manufac and deta The Contract advance of t inspector can .1 The Eng and the Drawings .2 The man The manufac plant to acco .1 The offic adequate approxim .2 Convenie services Shop drawin the Plans , bu those indicat The cured Cu mm or less , unit , to ensur Waterproofin vert Design Box culvert d worst-case lo .1 Earth fill factor of The live load Box culvert d the latest ed Association .
DEPARTM X CULVERT of precast con isfaction of th of the box C ed by the Eng ineer 's written turer of the r ails of fabricat tor shall ensu he commenc n be schedule ineer shall h authority to o s or Specifica nufacturer sha cturer shall pr mmodate the ce space sha e lighting , an mately 20°C .
ent telephon shall also be gs may show ut the inside ed on the Pla ulvert section and the joints re proper fit a ng , if required design shall b oading of eith material shal 1.15. ing shall conf design shall b dition of the ST MENT of TR GRADIN ncrete work sh e Engineer .
Culvert section gineer .
n notice of rev responsibility ion in accorda ure that the m cement of any ed .
ave the right order the Wo ations .
all ensure that rovide regular e Engineer .
all be clean a nd ventilation e , internet , f provided .
w a design w dimensions ans .
ns shall be fitt s so fitted sh t the Work Si , shall be carr be in accorda er 0.7 m of ea l have a desig form to CL-62 be carried ou BOXCAR so TANDARD RANSPORT NG hall comply w ns shall not co view of the S for correctne ance with 142 manufacturer y phase of the to inspect th ork to stop if t safe working r and practica and furnished n and heatin facsimile , ph ith wall and s ( ID ) of the sp ed horizontal hall be sequen te .
ried out in acc ance with the arth fill or finis gn density of 25 live loading ut using the “ C oftware spon SPECIFICA TATION an with CSA A23 .
ommence un hop Drawings ess of dimen 2.3.1. notifies the E e manufactur he manufactu it does not c g conditions e ally located of d with a suita ng to provid hotocopy , ma slab thickness pan and the lly at the plan ntially numbe cordance with e latest editio shed grade p 2.15 t/m3 and g. CHBDC ” des sored by the ATIONS nd INFRAS .1 and CSA A ntil the Shop D s shall in no w nsions , size o Engineer at le re so that the ure of the pre conform to th exist for the E ffice space at able office de e a room te ail and mess ses different rise shall no nt to a gasket- ered on the o h Item 351. ons of CAN/C lus 1.0 m of e d a soil struct sign option co e American C TRUCTUR ITEM : 14 January , 20 A23.4 and sha Drawings hav way relieve th of componen east 5 Days e DTI-assigne ecast section e Plans , Sho Engineer .
the fabricatio esk and cha emperature o sage handlin from those o ot be less tha -free gap of 1 outside of eac CSA-S6 for th earth fill .
ture interactio ontained with Concrete Pip RE 42 15 all ve he ts in ed s , op on ir , of ng on an 10 ch he on in pe DEPA PRECA Janua 142.4 142.4 142.4 ARTMENT AST CONCR ary , 2015 .3 Forms .1 For .2 For .3 For per .4 Per mm con .5 The ent .4 Materia .1 Sam acc .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 Curing .1 Mo unt .2 Art A23 .1 .2 .3 .4 STAN of TRANS RETE BOX CU rms shall be o rms shall be c rms shall be c rmitted .
rmanently ex m , made of st ncrete .
e minimum co tire depth with al Testing mpling , test c cordance with A strength te additional cy For dry-cast strength test For wet-cast every section If superplas of the super and Protectio oist curing of til the design s ificially accel 3.4 and the fo The concret that ensure concrete sec During the temperature For the next exceed 15°C .1 The tem Steam , radia the initial se shall not be NDARD SP PORTATIO ULVERT of a configura clean and free complete and posed sharp teel , plastic , over over form h an approved cylinders and h CSA A23.2 .
st is defined a ylinders broken precast concr t shall be take t precast conc n. ticizers are a rplasticizer .
on of Concrete the concrete strength is re erated curing ollowing : te sections sh es full circula ctions with a initial curing e shall be kep t stage of cur C per hour , to mperature diffe ant heat or fo et ; shall prov applied direc PECIFICAT ON and INF GRADING ation to ensure e of mortar pr d inspected by edges shall or clear strai m snap-ties s d cement gro d air content as a minimum n at earlier da rete sections , n on every se crete sections dded , the air e sections sha ached .
g of the conc hall be mainta ation of thor minimum loss period ( typi t at approxim ring , the encl o a temperatu erential within orced air used vide excess m ctly to the con TIONS FRASTRUC e compliance rior to applica y the Enginee be chamfered ight-grained w shall be 50 mm ut mix per 14 tests shall b m of 2 cylinders ates for produc air content sh econd section .
, air content a r content test all be carried crete section ained on the c roughly satur s of moisture ically 4 to 5 mately 20°C .
osure temper ure between 4 n the enclosu d for accelera moisture for p ncrete , forms o CTURE e with the allow ation of form c er before plac d with triangu wood placed m and the vo 42.4.6. be performed s broken at the ction purposes hall be tested .
and one streng shall be perf d out in accor ns shall be in casting bed in rated air and and heat .
hours after rature shall b 40 and 60°C .
re shall not ex ated curing sh proper hydra or cylinders .
wable toleran coating .
cing of concre ular fillets , 19 on the side oids shall be f by the man e specified ag s. on every sect gth test shall formed after t rdance with C n accordance n an approved d/or steam a casting ) the be raised at a xceed 5°C .
hall not be app tion of the ce ITEM : 142 Page 142-5 nces .
ete shall be 9 mm by 19 exposed to illed to their ufacturer in ge , with tion and a be taken on the addition CSA A23.1 , e with CSA d enclosure around the e enclosure a rate not to plied before ement ; and PR Pag 142 142 142 ECAST CON ge 142-6 2.4.5.2 2.4 .6 Finis .1 .2 .3 .4 2.4 .7 Culv .1 NCRETE BOX .5 The exp entire cu no more .6 The Con for the devices ; .7 When a shall be l .8 Culvert s 48 hours hour to th shing of Conc All surfaces accordance w .1 All surfac removal grout mix incorpora .2 All object totally rem .3 If the con Finish , t designate Immediately clearly marke defect .
.1 The Cont .1 Cem .2 All d adjac All ridges occ Exposed end coating to pre vert Placemen Excavation s Documents .
.1 If Overex the Over 936 , and DEPARTM X CULVERT osed surface ring period .
W than 10°C fro ntractor/Manuf entire curing one device p concrete sec lowered , at a section ( s ) sha s in warm tem he outside air crete Surfaces of the precas with the follow ce voids large of the formw x of cement a ate a latex bon tionable fins , moved to the ncrete surface he Contracto ed portions , o after the remo ed and the Co tractor shall s ent washes o efects shall b cent surface .
curring at junc ds of lifting d event rusting .
nt shall be carrie xcavation occ rexcavation w compacted t ST MENT of TR GRADIN es of the con Water applied om the concre facturer shall g period by per length of th ction has reac rate of 15°C all not be exp mperatures fo r temperature s st concrete se wing : er than 12 m work , shall be and fine sand nding agent .
projections , o Engineer 's sa e does not ad or shall , as or all of the con oval of forms ontractor sha ubmit a repair of any kind sha be finished s ctions of form evices that h . ed out in acc curs , the Con with an appro to 95 % of the TANDARD RANSPORT NG ncrete shall h d for this purp ete temperatu provide a co means of a he curing enc ched its requ per hour , to t posed to free ollowing curing e. ections shall m in diamete filled to their d from the sa offsets , streak atisfaction .
dequately fulf directed by ncrete , and re , any part of t ll notify the E r procedure fo all not be used smooth , unifor m panels shall have been cu cordance with ntractor shall , oved backfill m maximum dr SPECIFICA TATION an have an exce ose shall hav ure , and in no ontinuous rec approved acc closure to rec ired strength the ambient a ezing tempera g , and cooled receive an `` er and cavities r entire depth ame source a ks or other su fill the require the Enginee eplace with ne the Work whi Engineer of th or approval .
d. rmly colour m be ground sm ut off shall be h 161.4 and a , at his/her o material , plac ry density .
ATIONS nd INFRAS ess of moistu ve a temperat o case shall ex cord of curing curate autom cord the tempe the enclosur air temperatur atures until th d at not more Ordinary Sur s , or holes vi h with an app as used in the urface imperfe ements for Or er , entirely re ew concrete .
ch displays d e location an matched and mooth .
e painted with as specified i own expense , ce in accorda TRUCTUR ITEM : 14 January , 20 ure during th ture that varie xceed 60°C .
g temperature matic recordin erature .
re temperatur re .
hey have drie e than 5°C pe rface Finish '' isible upon th proved ceme e concrete an ections shall b rdinary Surfac emove certa defects shall b d extent of th flush with th h an approve n the Contra , repair and f ance with Ite RE 42 15 he es es ng re ed er in he nt nd be ce in be he he ed ct fill m DEPA PRECA Janua 142.4 .
ARTMENT AST CONCR ary , 2015 7 .2 Fol off sec .3 Wit pre .4 The adh .5 The and are .6 A r und ma .7 Pre ma .1 .8 Cu up rec .9 The acr .1 .2 .10 Afte with .11 Joi with .1 .12 Bac Do .13 No Eng fou .1 .2 STAN of TRANS RETE BOX CU lowing placem wall shall be ction shall be th the end se efabricated ho e 25 M dow hesive such a e Contractor s d raked or sc ea of the Culv rigid sheet sh der each joint aterials are pre ecast concret anufacturer ’ s s Deviation fr written autho lvert sections grade .
Eac commended b e maximum j ross the joint w Sections se specified ga Sections wh er satisfactor h non-shrink g nt seal and e h the manufa Joint seal sh ckfill shall be cuments .
backfill shall gineer , includ ndation mate Material ove Backfill shal or rammer-t rollers .
NDARD SP PORTATIO ULVERT ment and bac e “ buttered ” w immediately ection in plac oles as guides wels shall be as Epcon A7 o shall place a creeded to p vert .
hall be instal t of the Culve evented from te box Culver shop drawing rom the man orization of th s shall be join h Culvert se by the manufa oint gap betw with the secti et to a joint g ap .
hich can not be ry placement grout .
exterior wrap cturer 's spec hall be placed e carried out be placed in ding but not erials .
er 75 mm in s ll be placed in type compac PECIFICAT ON and INF GRADING ckfilling of the with a 25 mm set into place ce , the Contr s to a nomina inserted and or an approve minimum thic provide a unif led flush with rt sections , s entering and rt sections sh gs .
ufacturer 's sh he Engineer .
ned in a straig ection shall acturer of the ween any two ons in straigh gap greater t e reset as 142 of the Culve material and ifications .
d around the e in accordan the excavati limited to the ize shall not b n lifts of not m ctors and no TIONS FRASTRUC e cut-off wall , m layer of no e on the cut-o ractor shall d al depth of 150 d secured in ed equivalent ckness of 50 form bedding h the bed lev uch that whe d contaminatin hall be erecte hop drawings ght line using be set into lifting device o box Culver ht alignment .
than 20 mm 2.4.7.8 shall b ert sections th d appurtenan entire joint .
nce with 166 on until the e e dimensions be placed wit more than 20 t more than CTURE the top horiz on-shrink grou off wall .
drill 30 mm d 0 mm into the nto place usi t. mm of bed le g surface , ov velling mater n sections are ng the joint .
ed in the seq s shall not b g industry me place and .
rt sections sh shall be rem be rejected .
he lifting hoo nces shall be .4 and as sp excavation ha s of excavatio hin 300 mm o 00 mm in thic 300 mm in zontal surface ut and the be iameter holes e top of the w ng an epoxy evelling sand , er the entire rial surface a e joined , sand quence indica e permitted w ethods , with t positioned to hall be 20 mm moved and re k pockets sh installed in a pecified in th as been appro on and the c of the Culvert kness for vib thickness fo ITEM : 142 Page 142-7 e of the cut- evelled end s using the all .
y or acrylic compacted foundation and centred d and other ated on the without the he bell end ogether as m uniformly eset to the all be filled accordance he Contract oved by the character of t. ratory plate or vibratory PR Pag 142 142 142 ECAST CON ge 142-8 2.4.7.13 .14 .15 .16 2.5 MEASU .1 The box .1 2.6 BASIS O .1 Pay conc .2 The NCRETE BOX .3 Backfill s maximum Backfilling of Culvert and s No traffic or minimum of of crossing .
Shoring , brac the Work sha REMENT FO Quantity to b Culvert suppl The measure end section to OF PAYMENT ment for Wor crete box Culv Owner shall DEPARTM X CULVERT shall be comp m dry density .
f box Culverts shall never ex Equipment s 1000 mm of b cing , sheeting all be employe OR PAYMENT be measured f ied and place ement shall b o end section T rk under this vert , as identif make partial ST MENT of TR GRADIN pacted in acc .
s shall procee xceed 600 mm shall be allow backfill mater g , pumps , tem ed , maintaine T for payment s ed in accordan e taken along .
Item shall in fied under the payment for p TANDARD RANSPORT NG cordance with ed simultaneo m in differenti wed to cross rial has been mporary road ed and remov hall be the nu nce with this It g the inside b nclude a sepa Contract .
precast concre SPECIFICA TATION an h Item 936 , to ous and even al elevation .
s over the in placed over ds and/or brid ved by the Co umber of linea tem .
bottom centre arate Unit Pri ete box Culve ATIONS nd INFRAS o a minimum nly on both sid nstalled box C the box Culv dges that are ntractor .
ar metres of pr eline of the bo ce for each s ert in accordan TRUCTUR ITEM : 14 January , 20 of 95 % of th des of the bo Culvert until vert in the are necessary fo recast concret ox Culvert fro size of preca nce with 908 .
RE 42 15 he ox a ea or te m ast 7 .
DEPA FOUN Janua 161.1 161.2 161.3 161.4 ARTMENT DATION EXC ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite and pla .2 Founda 161-1 .
A B C MATERIAL .1 None id SUBMITTA .1 Submitt CONSTRU .1 The Co specific .2 Excava 7 , unles .3 For ind excavat .4 The Co comple .5 The Co .6 Shoring Work s .7 Excava .8 Excava Enginee .1 For and .2 Ma sha STAN of TRANS CAVATION TION em consists o acement of ma ation Excavat Foundation e Foundation e Foundation e S dentified .
ALS tals are requir CTION ontractor sha cally directed b ation shall be c ss otherwise in uced trench lo tion to the dim ontractor shall te for the Wor ontractor shall g , bracing , sh hall be emplo ated materials ated materials er and as follo r embankmen d/or 108.4. aterial identifie all be disposed NDARD SP PORTATIO of excavation aterials within tion is classifi Definition excavation of excavation of excavation of red in accorda all carry out t by the Engine carried out to ndicated in the ocations ( to b mensions indic not commenc rk Area involve immediately n heeting , pump yed , maintain that meet the s not required ows : t construction ed by the Eng d of in accorda ECIFICATI ON and INF GRADING n necessary f n the Work Si ed by the typ Table of Foundatio common mat unclassified m solid rock as ance with any the Work as er .
the dimension e Contract Do be completed cated in the Co ce any excava ed .
notify the Eng ps , temporary ned and remov e requirements d or unsuitab n within the Wo ineer as wast ance with Item IONS FRASTRUC for the constr te , or disposa pe ( s ) of mater 161-1 on Excavatio terial as defin material as de defined by It cross-referen indicated in ns as indicate ocuments .
under Item 1 ontract Docum ation until the ineer when be y roads and/o ved by the Co s of 167.2 sha ble for backfil ork Site and p te shall becom m 947 .
CTURE ruction and/o al outside the rial encounter on by Type ned by Item 1 efined by Item tem 108 nced Item form the Contrac ed on Standard 69 ) , the Cont ments .
e Owner ’ s initia edrock or bou or Bridges tha ontractor .
all be used as l shall be uti placed in acco me the prope or removal of Work Site .
red as indicat 06 m 107 ming part of th ct Documents d Drawings 16 tractor shall c al cross-sectio ulders are enco at are necess backfill .
lized as direc ordance with 1 erty of the Con ITEM : 161 Page 161-1 Structures , ted in Table is Item .
s and/or as 61-1 to 161- carry out the on survey is ountered .
sary for the cted by the 106.4 , 107.4 ntractor and FO Pag 161 161 UNDATION E ge 161-2 1.4.8 .3 .9 Whe to en .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .10 Whe cut i from .1 .2 .11 The .12 No b exca exca .13 The loos 1.5 MEASU .1 The acco .2 The Con .3 If Fo shal befo .1 EXCAVATIO All overhaul s ere foundation nsure that any The Contracto Any pipe det Owner .
Salvageable nearest DTI M Unsalvageab disposed of o The Contrac damage is the ere the Finish in a straight li m the underlyin The Contract use in emban Any existing Subgrade ma Contractor sh backfill materi avation has b avation and th bottom of the se rock and so REMENT FO Quantity to ordance with t volume shall ntract Docume oundation Exc ll be removed ore any blastin Boulders sha before dispos DEPARTM N shall be subjec n excavation i y existing pipe or shall notify termined by pipe shall be Maintenance D le pipe and outside the Wo tor shall be e result of the ed Grade is t ne to a straig ng material .
or shall break nkment constr Aggregate B aterials for re-u hall notify the al , formwork , een approved he nature of th e foundation e oil .
OR PAYMENT be measured this Item .
be calculated ents .
cavation types d sufficiently to ng or excavatio all be excavat sal .
STA MENT of TR GRADIN ct to the appro involves remo e is not damag the Engineer the Engineer re-used in th Depot .
waste shall b ork Site .
responsible t Contractor ’ s the same as t ht edge on ea k down the Pa ruction .
Base/Subbase use under 166 Engineer afte pipe or other d by the Engin he foundation excavation for T d for paymen d from the dim s “ A ” and “ C ” o allow the E on of the bedr ted when enc ANDARD S RANSPORT NG oval of the Eng oval of existing ged during exc prior to expos r to be salvag he Work Site become the p to replace th actions , as de the existing P ach side of th vement piece e shall be ex 6.2 at the Wor r the excavati r Structure ( s ) s neer , including materials .
r footings foun nt shall be the mensions sho have been te ngineer to tak rock takes pla countered and SPECIFICA TATION an gineer .
g Culverts , th cavation and sing any exist geable shall or transporte property of th e pipe which etermined by t Pavement surf he trench or h es to a size sm xcavated and rk Area .
on is complet shall be place g but not limit nded on solid e number of own on the St endered , any ke measurem ace .
d separated fo ATIONS nd INFRAS he Contractor is salvaged fo ting pipe .
remain the p ed , by the Co he Contracto h is damaged the Engineer .
face , the Pav hole and remo mall enough to stockpiled s ted .
ed in the exca ted to the dim d rock shall be cubic metres tandard Draw y overlying co ments of the b or the Engine TRUCTUR ITEM : 16 January , 20 shall take car or re-use .
property of th ontractor , to th r and shall b d , where suc vement shall b oved separate o be suitable fo separately fro avation until th mensions of th e cleaned of a s excavated ings and/or th mmon materi bedrock surfac eer to measur RE 61 15 re he he be ch be ely or m he he all in he al ce re DEPA FOUN Janua 161.6 ARTMENT DATION EXC ary , 2015 BASIS OF .1 Paymen as iden .2 The ove 806 , 80 STAN of TRANS CAVATION PAYMENT nt for Work un tified under th erhaul of mate 07 and/or 808 , NDARD SP PORTATIO nder this Item he Contract .
erial , as appro , as applicable ECIFICATI ON and INF GRADING m shall include oved by the E e. IONS FRASTRUC e a separate U ngineer , shall CTURE Unit Price for be paid for in each type of n accordance ITEM : 161 Page 161-3 excavation , with Item ( s ) DEPA BACK Janua 166.1 166.2 166.3 166.4 ARTMENT KFILLING AR ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite MATERIAL .1 Suitable of 167.2 .1 Cla mm .2 Cla mm .2 Addition with Ite SUBMITTA .1 Submitt CONSTRU .1 The Co specific .2 Backfilli 161-7 , u .3 If the S specific .4 No bac Enginee materia .1 Ma .2 Bac ram .3 Bac ma .5 Only co .6 Backfilli shall ne STAN of TRANS OUND STRU TION em consists of S e material obt 2 shall be use ass `` A '' backfil m in diameter a ass `` B '' backfi m or smaller in nal backfill , m 167 .
ALS tals are requir CTION ontractor sha cally directed b ing to be carr unless otherw Structure bein c backfilling re kfill material s er , including b als .
aterial over 75 ckfill shall be mmer-type com ckfill shall be aximum dry de ompactors rec ing of Structur ever exceed 6 NDARD SP PORTATIO UCTURES f the placeme tained from th ed for backfillin ll shall be use and concrete ll shall be use n diameter .
if authorize red in accorda all carry out t by the Engine ried out to the wise indicated ng backfilled quirements , a shall be placed but not limited mm in size sh placed in lift mpactors and e compacted ensity .
commended b res shall proce 00 mm in diffe ECIFICATI ON and INF GRADING nt of backfill m he excavation ng around Str ed for backfilli box Culverts .
ed for backfill ed by the ance with any the Work as er .
e lines and gr in the Contrac is to be cons as noted in the d in the excav d to the dime hall not be pla ts of not mor not more than in accordanc y the pipe ma eed simultane erential elevat IONS FRASTRUC material aroun within the Wo ructures .
ing metal Culv ing catch bas Engineer , cross-referen indicated in rades as indic ct Documents structed with e Contract Doc vation until the ensions of exc aced within 30 re than 200 m n 300 mm in t ce with Item anufacturer sh eously and eve tion .
CTURE nd a Structure ork Site and m verts ( pipes ) , sins , footings , shall be su nced Item form the Contrac cated on Stan s. an induced t cuments , sha e excavation h cavation and 00 mm of any S mm in thickne thickness for v 936 , to a m hall be used w enly on both s e. meeting the re concrete pipe and concrete upplied in ming part of th ct Documents ndard Drawin trench design ll apply .
has been appr the nature of Structure .
ess for vibrato vibratory roller minimum of 9 within 1 m of m sides of the St ITEM : 166 Page 166-1 equirements es over 900 e pipes 900 accordance is Item .
s and/or as gs 161-1 to n , additional roved by the f foundation ory plate or rs .
95 % of the metal pipes .
tructure and BA Pag 166 166 166 ACKFILLING A ge 166-2 6.4 .7 No t cove been .8 Sho Wor 6.5 MEASU .1 The arou .2 The Con 6.6 BASIS O .1 Pay .2 Ove the E AROUND ST traffic or cons er indicated o n placed .
oring , bracing , rk shall be em REMENT FO Quantity to und a Structur volume shall ntract Docume OF PAYMENT ment for Work erhaul of suita Engineer , sha DEPARTM TRUCTURES struction Equip on the Standa , sheeting , pu mployed , maint OR PAYMENT be measured re carried out be calculated ents .
T k under this Ite able material o all be paid in a STA MENT of TR GRADIN pment shall be rd Drawings umps , tempor tained and rem T d for paymen in accordance d from the dim em shall be at obtained from accordance wi ANDARD S RANSPORT NG e permitted to 161-1 to 161- rary roads an moved by the nt shall be th e with this Item mensions sho t the Unit Pric m the excavati th Item ( s ) 806 SPECIFICA TATION an o pass over th -5 and/or in th nd/or Bridges e Contractor .
he volume in m. own on the St ce .
ion within the 6 , 807 , and/or ATIONS nd INFRAS he Structure u he Contract D s that are nec cubic metres tandard Draw e Work Site , a r 808 , as appli TRUCTUR ITEM : 16 January , 20 until the backf Documents ha cessary for th s of backfillin ings and/or th as approved b cable .
RE 66 15 fill as he ng he by DEPA BACK Janua 167.1 167.2 167.3 167.4 ARTMENT KFILL FOR ST ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite MATERIAL .1 All mate .2 It shall unless t .3 Backfill indicate Class A B SUBMITTA .1 The Co Enginee .2 Submitt CONSTRU .1 The Co specific .2 The Co .3 The Co at any t .1 Ra effe .2 No an STAN of TRANS TRUCTURES TION em consists of S erials shall be be the respo the source of for Structure ed in Table 16 Class `` A '' uncoated more than Class “ B ” retained o ALS ontractor sha er , at least 14 tals are requir CTION ontractor sha cally directed b ontractor shall ontractor shal time during th ndom sample ects of the ch Work shall b approval is re NDARD SP PORTATIO S f supplying ba supplied by t onsibility of th the materials es shall satisf 67-1. backfill shal particles free n 10 % retained backfill shall b on the 100 mm all submit the Days in adva red in accorda all carry out t by the Engine supply the sp ll advise the he course of t es shall be t ange .
be undertaken eceived from ECIFICATI ON and INF GRADING ackfill obtained he Contractor e Contractor is specified in fy the require Table Backfill for D ll be a well of lumps of c d on the 100 m be a well grad m sieve , and n e proposed b ance of obtain ance with any the Work as er .
pecified mater Engineer imm he Work .
taken and tes n by the Con the Engineer IONS FRASTRUC d from outside r. to provide th n the Contract ements for the 167-1 r Structures Description graded granu clay or other d mm sieve , and ded granular m ot more than backfill source ing material fr cross-referen indicated in rial ( s ) to the W mediately of a sts conducte tractor in the r. CTURE e the Work Sit he pit and/or t Documents .
e material typ ular material eleterious ma d not more tha material havin 35 % Dust .
e , in writing , rom the propo nced Item form the Contrac Work Area .
any changes ed by the En e area of the c te .
quarry source pe and the g composed o aterial , and ha an 10 % Dust .
ng not more th for the appr osed source .
ming part of th ct Documents in the source gineer to det changed con ITEM : 167 Page 167-1 e for supply gradation as of clean , aving not han 10 % roval of the is Item .
s and/or as e materials , termine the ditions until BA Pag 167 167 ACKFILL FOR ge 167-2 7.5 MEASU .1 The acco 7.6 BASIS O .1 Pay iden R STRUCTUR REMENT FO Quantity to b ordance with t OF PAYMENT ment for Wor ntified under th DEPARTM RES OR PAYMENT be measured this Item .
T k under this It he Contract .
STA MENT of TR GRADIN T for payment tem shall incl ANDARD S RANSPORT NG shall be the ude a separa SPECIFICA TATION an number of to ate Unit Price ATIONS nd INFRAS J onnes of bac for each clas TRUCTUR ITEM : 16 January , 201 kfill supplied s of backfill , a RE 67 5 in as DEPA INDUC Janua 169.1 169.2 169.3 169.4 ARTMENT CED TRENCH ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite MATERIAL .1 All mate .2 Backfill uncons .1 The .2 Bal SUBMITTA .1 None id CONSTRU .1 The Co specific .2 The Co embank indicate .3 The Co to the s .1 The em .2 The  1 .4 The Co .1 If th sup STAN of TRANS H TION em consists o S erial shall be s material shal olidated fashi e Engineer ha led hay or str ALS dentified .
CTION ontractor sha cally directed b ontractor shal kment constru ed in the Cont ontractor shall specified dime e material e bankment .
e excavation 0 % in width o ontractor shall he trench wall pply and insta NDARD SP PORTATIO f the construc supplied by th ll be a lightwe on .
as approved t aw shall be b all carry out t by the Engine l construct th uction have b ract Documen excavate a tr nsions and de excavated fro shall have on each side .
excavate the ls show signs ll shoring to m ECIFICATI ON and INF GRADING ction of an ind e Contractor .
eight product o the backfill m Tab Approved B Prod Saw Wood Rubber t Expanded Loose ha broken up to a the Work as er .
e induced tre been complet nts .
rench in the e epth as indica om the trenc a tolerance trench such t of sloughing , maintain the tre IONS FRASTRUC duced trench .
of a consisten aterials listed ble 169-1 Backfill Mater duct wdust d chips tire chips Polystyrene ay or straw a loose condit indicated in ench only afte ted to the sp mbankment s ated in the Con ch shall be e of ± 20 hat the sides , it shall be th ench walls in a CTURE .
nt nature , and d in Table 169 rials tion before pla the Contrac er the installa pecified eleva surface along ntract Docume incorporated mm in dept of the trench s e Contractor ’ s a vertical state d supplied in a 9-1 for use in acement in th ct Documents ation of the p ation and dim the centreline ents .
d into the th and a to stand verticall s responsibilit e. ITEM : 169 Page 169-1 a loose , dry , the Work .
he trench .
s and/or as ipe and the mensions as e of the pipe surrounding olerance of ly .
ty to design , IND Pag 169 169 169 DUCED TREN ge 169-2 9.4 .5 The .1 .2 .6 The Item 9.5 MEASU .1 The cons .1 9.6 BASIS O .1 Pay NCH trench shall b The Contracto If shored , the Contractor s m ) over the ind REMENT FO Quantity to b structed in acc The volume s OF PAYMENT ment for Work DEPARTM be completely or shall not lea Contractor sh hall place a m duced trench p OR PAYMENT be measured cordance with shall be calcu T k under this Ite STA MENT of TR GRADIN backfilled wit ave any of the hall remove th minimum of 6 prior to permitt T for payment s h this Item .
ulated from th em shall be at ANDARD S RANSPORT NG h the approve e trench open he shoring from 00 mm of em ting constructi shall be the v e dimensions t the Unit Pric SPECIFICA TATION an ed material wh at the end of m the trench a mbankment m ion traffic to u volume in cub s shown in the ce .
ATIONS nd INFRAS hich shall not b any Day ’ s op after backfilling aterial ( under se the Work A bic metres of e Contract Do TRUCTUR ITEM : 16 January , 20 be compacted peration .
g. r the applicab Area .
induced trenc ocuments .
RE 69 15 d. ble ch DEPA CHAIN Janua 182.1 182.2 182.3 ARTMENT N LINK FENC ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite MATERIAL .1 All mate .2 Chain li .1 Cha .3 The fen Type 1 , .1 The .4 Posts a indicate .1 Lin .2 Ter and fab .3 Top with .5 All nuts .6 Concre .7 Concre waterpr Standa .8 The Co indicate SUBMITTA .1 The Co certifica recomm .2 Submitt STAN of TRANS CE TION m consists of S erials shall be ink fence and ain link fence nce fabric sha , Class A , Styl e top selvedge and rails sha ed on Standar e posts shall b rminal ( gate , e d a minimum ric to the post p rails shall be h sleeves that s , bolts , parts a te shall meet te form tubes roof glue , and rd Drawing 18 ontractor shall ed in the Stan ALS ontractor shall ation that the mended proce tals are requir NDARD SP PORTATIO f supply and in supplied by t appurtenance gates and fitti all be chain lin le 2 , Grade 2. e of the fabric all be Schedu rd Drawing 18 be 60 mm OD end , corner a 11.28 kg/m m ts , and bands e 43 mm OD , t allow for con and fittings sh the requireme s shall be coa d supplied with 82-1. supply all oth dard Drawing l submit , in a materials sup edures for ins red in accorda ECIFICATI ON and INF GRADING nstallation of c he Contractor es shall meet ings shall mee nk , 50 mm m shall be twist ule 40 , scale- 2-1 , and as fo D , 4.0 mm wal and straining ) mass , supplie for attaching 3.6 mm wall t traction and e all be hot-dipp ents of Item 30 ated , spiral wo h a minimum her appurtena gs 182-1 and 1 dvance of the pplied meet th stallation and ance with any IONS FRASTRUC chain link fenc r. the requireme et the requirem mesh , construc ted and the bo -free , hot-dipp ollows ; l thickness an posts shall b ed with stretch the braces .
thickness and expansion at t ped galvanize 01.2 , and CSA ound , wood fi length of 1.22 ances and mis 182-2. e commencem he specified r instructions f cross-referen CTURE ce and gates .
ents of CAN/C ments of CAN cted of 3.5 mm ottom selvedg ped galvanize nd a minimum be 89 mm OD hing bands an d a minimum 3 the top rail join ed steel , or alu A A23.1 , expo ibre paper bo 2 m and of a scellaneous m ment of the W requirements , for handling .
nced Item form CGSB 138.1 a N/CGSB 138.4 m steel wire , e shall be knu ed tubular ste 5.45 kg/m ma D , 5.5 mm wa nd bars for a 3.38 kg/m ma nts .
uminum alloy .
osure class F- oard manufact diameter as i metals as requ Work , the ma and the man ming part of th ITEM : 182 Page 182-1 and 138.2 .
4. galvanized , uckled .
eel pipe as ass .
all thickness ttaching the ss , supplied -1. tured with a ndicated on uired and as anufacturer ’ s nufacturer ’ s is Item .
CH Pag 182 AIN LINK FE ge 182-2 2.4 CONST .1 The spec .2 All W .3 Prio mino the p .4 All fe .5 All p conc .1 .2 .6 All c .7 If po Draw .8 Line .1 .9 A co strai .10 Top reco .11 Term betw .12 The term is di .13 Leng syst .1 ENCE RUCTION Contractor s cifically directe Work shall be r to the const or ground und proper constru ence grades s posts installed crete form tub Any void spac than 20 % of backfill prior t If the void is g shall be remo post shall be concrete shall osts are place wing 182-1. e posts shall b If an obstruct adjacent post more than 3 m orner post sha ining post at c rails , braces ommended pro minal posts s ween the gate fence fabric s minal posts and storted .
gths of fabric tem such that Splicing by ov DEPARTM shall carry o ed by the Eng carried out in ruction of the dulations ( gre uction of the fe shall be subjec d in soil shal be forming the ce that results the OD of th to placing the greater than 2 oved and the repositioned t be placed in a ed in solid roc e placed verti tion or major t , the post ma m. all be installed changes in ele s and appurte ocedures .
shall be brace , corner or en shall be instal d stretched tig shall only be a continuous verlap shall no STA MENT of TR GRADIN ut the Work gineer .
accordance w chain link fen ater than 0.3 ence in its req ct to the appro l be centred boundary of t s between the e concrete fo concrete .
20 % of the OD hole shall be to meet 182.4 accordance w ck , then the fo cally , and in li ground elevat ay be placed d wherever the evation of mo enances shal ed by a centr d post and the led on the ou ghtly and unifo joined by sp diamond mes ot be permitted ANDARD S RANSPORT NG as indicated with the Stand nce , the Contra m vertical in quired location oval of the En and vertically the excavated e concrete form orm tube shal D of the concre backfilled wit 4.5 or 182.4.5. with 301.4. ootings shall ine at a unifor tion difference not less than e fence line ch re than 30° .
l be installed re rail of the e adjacent pos tside of the lin ormly but not t licing , using t sh pattern resu d. SPECIFICA TATION an d in the Cont dard Drawings ractor shall rem a 3 m length n. ngineer .
y embedded d hole formed m tube and th l be backfilled ete form tube , th compacted 1. be constructe rm spacing no e prevents pla 2.4 m from th hanges direct d in accordan same materi st. ne posts and to such a deg the manufactu ults .
ATIONS nd INFRAS tract Docume s 182-1 and 18 move any deb h ) which woul in the concre by augering .
e excavated h d with well co , then the con excavated m ed as indicate ot exceeding 3 acing a post a he next post tion by more t nce with the ial and size a top rail , contin ree that the d urer ’ s approve TRUCTUR ITEM : 18 January , 20 ents and/or a 82-2. bris and corre d interfere wit ete placed in hole that is les ompacted san crete form tub material and th ed on Standar 3 m. at 3 m from a and in no cas than 10° , and manufacturer as the top ra nuous betwee iamond patter ed splicing wir RE 82 15 as ect th a ss nd be he rd an se a r ’ s ail , en rn re DEPA CHAIN Janua 182.4 182.5 182.6 ARTMENT N LINK FENC ary , 2015 .14 At all e stretchi procedu .15 The bo pattern , MEASURE .1 The Qu includin .2 The len section BASIS OF .1 Paymen STAN of TRANS CE end , corner an ng bar and ures .
ottom tension , fastened to t MENT FOR P uantity to be m ng gates , if any ngth shall be of fence .
PAYMENT nt for Work un NDARD SP PORTATIO nd gate posts stretching b wire shall be the fabric by a PAYMENT measured for y , supplied an taken along t nder this Item ECIFICATI ON and INF GRADING s the fabric sh bar bands as e strung tight a twisted wire o payment shal nd installed in the top of the shall be at the IONS FRASTRUC hall be broken s indicated i t on the outs or enclosed in ll be the numb accordance w e fence from t e Unit Price .
CTURE n and secured n the manuf side of the lin n a fabric knuc ber of linear m with this Item .
terminal post d to the posts facturer ’ s rec ne posts at th ckle .
metres of chai to terminal p ITEM : 182 Page 182-3 s by a steel commended he diamond in link fence post of each DEPA REMO Janua 186.1 186.2 186.3 186.4 186.5 186.6 ARTMENT OVAL OF FEN ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite MATERIAL .1 None id SUBMITTA .1 None id CONSTRU .1 The Co specific .2 All post .3 The dis adjacen .1 The res .4 All mat outside MEASURE .1 The Qu disman BASIS OF .1 Payme STAN of TRANS NCE TION em shall cons LS dentified .
ALS dentified .
CTION ontractor sha cally directed b t holes shall b smantling and nt and surrou e Contractor s sulting from th terials and wa e the Work Sit MENT FOR P uantity to be ntled and hand PAYMENT nt for Work u NDARD SP PORTATIO ist of the rem all carry out t by the Engine be backfilled a d removal sh nding area .
shall be respo his Work .
aste shall be te .
PAYMENT measured f dled in accord nder this Item ECIFICATI ON and INF GRADING oval of all typ the Work as er .
and tamped a hall be carried onsible , at his come the pro for payment s dance with th m shall be at t IONS FRASTRUC pes of fencing indicated in and graded to d out in a ma s/her own exp operty of the shall be the is Item .
the Unit Price CTURE g. the Contrac o match the su anner so as pense , for an Contractor a number of l e. ct Documents urrounding gr to avoid dam y repair of su and shall be d inear metres ITEM : 186 Page 186-1 s and/or as rade .
mage to the uch damage disposed of s of fencing DEPA APPLI Janua 191.1 191.2 191.3 191.4 191.5 191.6 ARTMENT ICATION OF ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite MATERIAL .1 All mate .2 Water agencie .3 When a permit c SUBMITTA .1 The Co the wat CONSTRU .1 The Co specific .2 Water s amount .1 For dire .2 For .3 To .3 The Co MEASURE .1 The Qu and app .2 The ca Work , e the load .1 For BASIS OF .1 Paymen applicat STAN of TRANS WATER TION em consists of LS erials shall be shall be obt es , and shall b applying for a covers extract ALS ontractor shall ter and the ce CTION ontractor sha cally directed b shall be appli ts and at such r dust control , ected through r compaction cool a newly ontractor shall MENT FOR P uantity to be m plied in accord pacity ( load s either by weig ds applied , the r the purposes PAYMENT nt for Work un tion , as identif NDARD SP PORTATIO f the supply an e supplied by t tained from a be free of any a permit for w tion of water f submit , upon rtification of th all carry out t by the Engine ed by Equipm h times as req any time tha the Work Site of soils or agg placed aspha be prepared PAYMENT measured for dance with th size ) of each w ghing each loa ereafter .
s of this Item , nder this Item fied under the ECIFICATI ON and INF GRADING nd application the Contracto a source app y deleterious m ater extractio for use under n request , the he approval o the Work as er .
ment capable quired , for the t the Contract e over dust-pr gregates .
alt concrete m to apply wate payment sha is Item .
water tank wil ad or by weig a tonne ( mas shall include a e Contract .
IONS FRASTRUC n of water .
or .
proved by th materials .
n per 191.2.2 the Items of t method of w of the source .
indicated in of a uniform following purp tor is hauling rone surfaces at .
er on a seven- all be the num ll be determin ghing and/or c ss ) shall be eq a separate Un CTURE he appropriat 2 , the Contrac the Contract .
ithdrawal , the the Contrac m and even ra poses : within the Wo s. -day-per-week mber of cubic ned prior to th calculating a t quivalent to a nit Price for ea te regulatory ctor shall ens e method of ap ct Documents ate of distribut ork Site or pu k basis .
metres of wat he commence typical load a cubic metre .
ach type of wa ITEM : 191 Page 191-1 agency or ure that the pplication of s and/or as tion in such blic traffic is ter supplied ement of the nd counting ater STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS DEPARTMENT of TRANSPORTATION and INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARD DRAWINGS ITEM : 199 Shaping of Overburden at Top of Solid Rock Backslope January , 2015 GRADING Standard Drawing 106-1 STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS DEPARTMENT of TRANSPORTATION and INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARD DRAWINGS ITEM : 199 Solid Rock Transitions ( longitudinal ) January , 2015 GRADING Standard Drawing 108-1 GROUND SURFACE BEDROCK STANDARD UNDERCUT IN BEDROCK GROUND SURFACE BEDROCK TRANSITION IN CUT CONDITION TRANSITION IN FILL CONDITION COMMON EXCAVATION FILL IN BEDROCK STANDARD UNDERCUT 6000 SUBGRADE QUALITY MATERIAL 6000 SUBGRADE 10000 –2500 10000 –2500 BORROW A/A1 ( AS INDICATED IN THE CONTRACT DOCUMENTS ) QUALITY MATERIAL BORROW A/A1 ( AS INDICATED IN THE CONTRACT DOCUMENTS ) STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS DEPARTMENT of TRANSPORTATION and INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARD DRAWINGS ITEM : 199 Subdrain January , 2015 GRADING Standard Drawing 136-1 STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS DEPARTMENT of TRANSPORTATION and INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARD DRAWINGS ITEM : 199 Subdrain Outlet January , 2015 GRADING Standard Drawing 137-1 STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS DEPARTMENT of TRANSPORTATION and INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARD DRAWINGS ITEM : 199 Tension Rod/Bar Assembly January , 2015 GRADING Standard Drawing 140-1 STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS DEPARTMENT of TRANSPORTATION and INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARD DRAWINGS ITEM : 199 Case 1.1 Cross Culvert : Subgrade Above Original Ground Trench ≤ 1.2 m deep January , 2015 GRADING Standard Drawing 161-1 1000 D 1000 D 1000 1000 200 ORIGINAL GROUND SUBGRADE C OR SHOULDER L D 500 500 1.5 1.5 1 1 ID ORIGINAL GROUND SUBGRADE C OR SHOULDER L NOTE : BACKFILL MATERIAL WITHIN 1000mm OF SUBGRADE SHALL BE THE SAME AS OR SIMILAR TO THAT WHICH COMPRISES THE ROADBED FILL .
D = NOMINAL PIPE DIAMETER : OUTSIDE DIAMETER OF CONCRETE PIPE , LIMITS OF FOUNDATION EXCAVATION SEE NOTE H 1000 1200 1200 File : 161-1 LIMITS OF BACKFILLING AROUND STRUCTURES ( TO HEIGHT `` H '' ) OR DIAMETER OF METAL PIPE , OR SPAN OF METAL PIPE-ARCH ( ID = OD ) BACKFILL AS PER ( 85 % ASTM D698 ) 166.4 AND 167.2 1/3 D LIGHTLY COMPACTED BACKFILL ID 1000 ID/2 600 H 2000 1200 1200 TO 2000 INCREASED TO A 1:1 SLOPE EXTENDING OUTWARD AND UPWARD FROM THE BOTTOM OF EXCAVATION .
FOR CULVERTS HAVING A NOMINAL ID 2100mm , THE LIMITS OF FOUNDATION EXCAVATION ARE STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS DEPARTMENT of TRANSPORTATION and INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARD DRAWINGS ITEM : 199 Case 1.2 Cross Culvert : Subgrade Above Original Ground Trench > 1.2 m deep January , 2015 GRADING Standard Drawing 161-2 1000 D 1000 1200 D 1000 1000 200 ORIGINAL GROUND SUBGRADE C OR SHOULDER L H ID ID 1000 ID/2 600 H LIMITS OF FOUNDATION EXCAVATION 1 4 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 EXCAVATED MATERIAL OR SIMILAR BORROW D = NOMINAL PIPE DIAMETER : OUTSIDE DIAMETER OF CONCRETE PIPE MAXIMUM 1200 MAXIMUM 1000 1 4 SUBGRADE C OR SHOULDER ORIGINAL GROUND L 2000 1200 1000 File : 161-2 1000 LIMITS OF BACKFILLING AROUND STRUCTURES ( TO HEIGHT `` H '' ) OR DIAMETER OF METAL PIPE , OR SPAN OF METAL PIPE-ARCH ( ID = OD ) NOTE : 1000 1200 TO 2000 ( 85 % ASTM D698 ) BACKFILL AS PER 166.4 AND 167.2 1/3 D LIGHTLY COMPACTED BACKFILL INCREASED TO A 1:1 SLOPE EXTENDING OUTWARD AND UPWARD FROM THE BOTTOM OF EXCAVATION .
FOR CULVERTS HAVING A NOMINAL ID 2100mm , THE LIMITS OF FOUNDATION EXCAVATION ARE STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS DEPARTMENT of TRANSPORTATION and INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARD DRAWINGS ITEM : 199 Case 2.1 Cross Culvert : Original Ground Above Subgrade Trench ≤ 2.2 m deep January , 2015 GRADING Standard Drawing 161-3 LIMITS OF FOUNDATION EXCAVATION D = NOMINAL PIPE DIAMETER : OUTSIDE DIAMETER OF CONCRETE PIPE , BE THE SAME AS OR SIMILAR TO THAT WHICH COMPRISES BACKFILL MATERIAL WITHIN 1000mm OF SUBGRADE SHALL ID THE ADJACENT SUBGRADE MATERIAL .
OR SIMILAR BORROW EXCAVATED MATERIAL NOTE : 1200 1 4 H MAXIMUM 1 4 1000 L 1200 ID 200 1 4 600 H ORIGINAL GROUND 200 SUBGRADE C OR SHOULDER SUBGRADE C OR SHOULDER ORIGINAL GROUND L 4 1 MAXIMUM 1200 1000 SEE NOTE 2200 2200 1000 D 1000 1000 D 1000 File : 161-3 LIMITS OF BACKFILLING AROUND STRUCTURES ( TO HEIGHT `` H '' ) OR DIAMETER OF METAL PIPE , OR SPAN OF METAL PIPE-ARCH ( ID = OD ) BACKFILL AS PER ( 85 % ASTM D698 ) 1/3 D LIGHTLY COMPACTED BACKFILL INCREASED TO A 1:1 SLOPE EXTENDING OUTWARD AND UPWARD FROM THE BOTTOM OF EXCAVATION .
FOR CULVERTS HAVING A NOMINAL ID 2100mm , THE LIMITS OF FOUNDATION EXCAVATION ARE 166.4 AND 167.2 STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS DEPARTMENT of TRANSPORTATION and INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARD DRAWINGS ITEM : 199 Case 2.2 Cross Culvert : Original Ground Above Subgrade Trench > 2.2 m deep January , 2015 GRADING Standard Drawing 161-4 D = NOMINAL PIPE DIAMETER : OUTSIDE DIAMETER OF CONCRETE PIPE , AS OR SIMILAR TO THAT WHICH COMPRISES THE SUBGRADE MATERIAL .
BACKFILL MATERIAL WITHIN 1000mm OF SUBGRADE SHALL BE THE SAME ID OR SIMILAR BORROW EXCAVATED MATERIAL NOTE : SUBGRADE C OR SHOULDER 200 L ORIGINAL GROUND 1200 MAXIMUM SUBGRADE C OR SHOULDER ORIGINAL GROUND 200 1200 4 1 MAXIMUM 1 1 1 1 4 L 1 LIMITS OF FOUNDATION EXCAVATION 1 1 1 4 4 1 1 1 1000 1000 D 1000 H SEE NOTE 1000 D 1000 2200 2200 1000 File : 161-4 LIMITS OF BACKFILLING AROUND STRUCTURES ( TO HEIGHT `` H '' ) OR DIAMETER OF METAL PIPE , OR SPAN OF METAL PIPE-ARCH ( ID = OD ) BACKFILL AS PER ( 85 % ASTM D698 ) 166.4 AND 167.2 1/3 D LIGHTLY COMPACTED BACKFILL INCREASED TO A 1:1 SLOPE EXTENDING OUTWARD AND UPWARD FROM THE BOTTOM OF EXCAVATION .
FOR CULVERTS HAVING A NOMINAL ID 2100mm , THE LIMITS OF FOUNDATION EXCAVATION ARE ID ID/2 1000 H 2000 1200 600 1200 TO 2000 STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS DEPARTMENT of TRANSPORTATION and INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARD DRAWINGS ITEM : 199 Case 3.1 Storm Drainage Culvert Longitudinal to the Centreline of Roadway January , 2015 GRADING Standard Drawing 161-5 D 1200 500 500 200 300 ID LIMITS OF BACKFILLING AROUND STRUCTURES 1 1 1 1 MAXIMUM LIMITS OF FOUNDATION EXCAVATION MAXIMUM 1 1 ORIGINAL GROUND IN FILL 200 1 1 SUBGRADE IN CUT OR ORIGINAL GROUND IN FILL SUBGRADE IN CUT OR EXCAVATED MATERIAL OR SIMILAR BORROW 1200 500 D 500 File : 161-5 BACKFILL AS PER ( 85 % ASTM D698 ) 166.4 AND 167.2 1/3 D LIGHTLY COMPACTED BACKFILL INCREASED TO A 1:1 SLOPE EXTENDING OUTWARD AND UPWARD FROM THE BOTTOM OF EXCAVATION .
FOR CULVERTS HAVING A NOMINAL ID 2100mm , THE LIMITS OF FOUNDATION EXCAVATION ARE NOTE : STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS DEPARTMENT of TRANSPORTATION and INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARD DRAWINGS ITEM : 199 Foundation Excavation for Footings Solid Rock and Common Cases January , 2015 GRADING Standard Drawing 161-6 STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS DEPARTMENT of TRANSPORTATION and INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARD DRAWINGS ITEM : 199 Foundation Excavation for Footings Common over Solid Rock Case January , 2015 GRADING Standard Drawing 161-7 STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS DEPARTMENT of TRANSPORTATION and INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARD DRAWINGS ITEM : 199 Chain Link Fence January , 2015 GRADING Standard Drawing 182-1 STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS DEPARTMENT of TRANSPORTATION and INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARD DRAWINGS ITEM : 199 Chain Link Gate January , 2015 GRADING Standard Drawing 182-2 HINGE BOLT AND FRAME FOR FOOTING DETAILS SEE STD .
DWG .
182-1 DROP BOLT 43mm FRAME MEMBERS CROSS BRACE DROP LATCH AND CATCH 89mm OD POSTS CAPS 1830 6100 250 DOUBLE SWING GATE 300 File : 182-2 DEPA TABLE Janua IT 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 ARTMENT E OF CONTE ary , 2015 TEM D 201 P 203 A 204 S 205 F 208 C 210 S 231 S 259 B 260 A 261 A 262 P 263 F 264 M 265 C 267 P 284 S 299 S 210 231 260 260 STAN of TRANS ENTS DESCRIPTIO Production of Aggregate Ba Shoulder Mate Fine Grading Cold Milling - A Shoulder Rum Shoulder Subd Bituminous Ta Asphalt Concr Asphalt Concr Partial Depth R Full Depth Re Microsurfacing Chip Seal …… Pulverizing ....
Shoulder Proc Standard Draw 0 - 1 1 - 1 Shou Shou 0 - 1 Const 0 - 2 Const NDARD SP PORTATIO PAV N Highway Agg se/Subbase .
erial .............. ..................... Asphalt Conc mble Strips ..... drain ............ ack Coat ....... rete - Method rete-End Res Recycling ..... cycling .......... g ................... ………………… ..................... cessing ......... wings lder Rumble S lder Subdrain truction Detai truction Detai PECIFICAT ON and INF VEMENT STRUC gregates ....... .................... ..................... ..................... crete ............. .................... ..................... ..................... Specification ult Specificati ..................... .................... ..................... …… .............. ..................... .....................
Strip Installat n and Outlet D il of a Transve ils at a Struct TIONS FRASTRUC CTURE .................... .................... .................... .................... .................... .................... .................... .................... n ................. ion ( ERS ) ..... .................... .................... ................... ..................... ..................... .................... ion Details erse Key Join ure CTURE NUMBER PAGE 10 3 2 1 2 2 3 2 30 42 9 8 8 8 1 2 nt DI OF ES VISION 200 Page 200-1 DEPA PROD Janua Artic 201 .
201 .
201 .
201 .
201 .
201 .
201.1 201.2 201.2 ARTMENT DUCTION OF ary , 2015 cle .1 DESCRIP .2 MATERIA .1 Gener .2 Rock .3 Blend .4 Aggre .1 Cr .2 Cr .3 Pi .4 Cr .5 Crush .6 Cover .3 SUBMITTA .4 CONSTRU .1 Gener .2 Plant .3 Pits a .4 Pits a .5 Stock .6 Samp .7 Aggre .5 MEASURE .6 BASIS OF DESCRIPT .1 This Ite .2 For the separat MATERIAL .1 Genera .1 All STAN of TRANS HIGHWAY A TION ........... LS ............... ral ................ and Gravel A ing of Aggreg egate Base/Su rushed Rock rushed Grave t Run Gravel rushed Sands hed Shoulder r Material ..... ALS ............. UCTION ....... ral ................ ..................... nd Quarries C nd Quarries C piles ............ pling and Test egates Produc EMENT FOR F PAYMENT .
TION em consists o e purposes of te material .
LS al materials sha NDARD SP PORTATIO AGGREGATE PAV ..................... ..................... .....................
Aggregates - P gates ............ ubbase ........ Base/Subbas el Base/Subba Subbase ..... stone Subbas Material ....... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... .....................
Controlled By Controlled By ..................... ting of Aggreg ced Outside t PAYMENT .
..................... f the process this Item the all be supplied ECIFICATI ON and INF ES VEMENT STRUC CONTEN ..................... ..................... .....................
Physical Requ ..................... ..................... se ................. ase .............. ..................... se ................. ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... y Owner ........ y Others ........ ..................... gates ............ he Specified ..................... ..................... ing and stock term `` rock '' d d by the Cont IONS FRASTRUC CTURE NTS ..................... ..................... ..................... uirements .... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... .................... ..................... ..................... .................... ..................... ..................... ..................... Limits .......... .................... .................... kpiling of High does not inclu tractor .
CTURE ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... hway aggrega ude sandston Page 201-1 .
201-1 201-1 .
201-2 .
201-2 201-3 .
201-3 201-4 201-4 201-5 201-6 .
201-6 201-6 201-7 201-7 .
201-7 201-7 .
201-8 .
201-8 .
201-8 .
201-9 201-10 201-10 ates .
e , which is ha ITEM : 201 Page 201-1 andled as a PR Pag 201 201 201 ODUCTION O ge 201-2 1.2.1 .2 .3 .4 1.2 .2 Roc .1 .2 1.2 .3 Blen .1 .2 OF HIGHWAY The Contract materials is s The Owner r past field per Engineer wit grading limits The Owner aggregate so viewing , in ac Building , 975 ck And Gravel Aggregate sh contain friabl would make environmenta exposed to th Aggregate sh Te Micro-Deva ( MTO LS - 6 Micro-Deva ( MTO LS - 6 Freeze Tha ( MTO LS - 6 Flat & Elong ( MTO LS - 6 Plasticity Ind ( AASHTO T nding of Aggr Blending of a percentage o Blending sha tests ( Micro-D DEPARTM Y AGGREGA tor shall provi specified in th reserves the rformance , do h a specific s. maintains rec ources locate ccordance wit College Hill R l Aggregates hall be compo le , soluble or e the aggreg al hazard , fro he natural ele hall meet the est and Meth l 618 ) l 619 ) w 614 ) gated Particle 608 ) dex T89 and T90 ) egates aggregates s of crushed pa all not be per Deval , Freeze STA MENT of TR ATES PAVEMENT ST ide the pit and he Contract D right to reject ocumented by material , rega cords of field ed throughout th Item 926 , a Road , Frederic - Physical Re osed of clean reactive mine gate prone to om the prese ements after p requirements Properties hod es @ 4:1 hall be perm rticles , or dec rmitted if requ e-Thaw and P ANDARD S RANSPORT RUCTURE d/or quarry so ocuments .
t any source y the records ardless of co d and Labora t the provinc at the Owner ’ cton , NB , duri equirements , hard , sound erals or other o decompos ence of the p placement in t s of Table 201 Table 201-1 s of Rock and Aggr Cov Aggr Aggreg and Sh Blend ( Aggr Blend ( Aggrega Shou All Highw Crushed R Aggr and Ble Aggreg and Ble itted to meet crease the pe uired solely to Plasticity Inde SPECIFICA TATION an ource for sup of supply of and experien ompliance wit atory testing ce and these s offices loca ng normal bus d , durable , un r deleterious ition or disin parent materia the Work .
1-1 .
1 d Gravel Agg regate Type ver Material regate Base gate Subbase oulder Materi ding Material regate Base ) ding Material ate Subbase a lder Material ) way Aggrega Rock Aggreg regate Base ending Materi gate Subbase ending Materi t the grading ercentage of fl o improve the ex ) .
ATIONS nd INFRAS J ply unless the aggregates o nce of the Ow th physical re results for kn e records are ated in the So siness hours .
ncoated partic materials or ntegration , o al or its by-p gregate V e ial and ) tes ates ial e ial requirements lat and elonga e results of m TRUCTUR ITEM : 20 January , 201 e source of th on the basis o wner and/or th equirements o nown Highwa e available fo oils and Miner cles that do no conditions tha r present an products , whe Value ( Max . )
22 % 25 % 30 % 25 % 30 % 20 % 35 % 3 5 s , increase th ated particles material quali RE 01 5 he of he or ay or ral ot at ny en he s. ty DEPA PROD Janua 201.2 .
201.2 201.2 .
ARTMENT DUCTION OF ary , 2015 3 .3 Ble the for .4 The me .5 Ble wh .1 .6 Nat agg .7 Ble .4 Aggreg 4 .1 Cru .1 STAN of TRANS HIGHWAY A ending shall b e blending ma approval , prio e blending m easurable .
ending materi en tested in a The blendin requirement tural sand or gregates shal ending of aggr gate Base/Sub ushed Rock B Crushed roc to conform t with ASTM C .1 Rock sh AST Sieve 90.0 m 75.0 m 63.0 m 50.0 m 37.5 m 31.5 m 25.0 m 19.0 m 12.5 m 9.5 m 4.75 m 2.36 m 1.18 m 300  75  NDARD SP PORTATIO AGGREGATE PAV be permitted o aterial into the or to producti material shall als shall be accordance w ng materials ts of Table 20 r gravel used ll not exceed regates shall p bbase Base/Subbase ck base/subb to the gradin C136 and C1 hall be quarrie Grading L TM Size 25 % p mm mm mm mm mm mm mm 95 mm 71 mm 56 mm 47 mm 31 mm 21 mm 13 m 5 m 0 ECIFICATI ON and INF ES VEMENT STRUC only at the cru e crushing pro on of any ble be added s granular mat with ASTM C1 shall individu 01-1. d as blending 20 % by mass produce a con e ase shall be g limits as se 17. ed from a sou Tab Limits - Crus Aggregate B 5 mm passing 3 % 100 5 - 100 - 100 6 - 82 7 - 74 1 - 59 1 - 46 3 - 34 5 - 18 0 - 8 IONS FRASTRUC CTURE usher , and th ocess shall be ended product such that the terials having 17. ually meet th g material in s of the blend nsistently grad produced by et out in Tab urce that is so ble 201-2 shed Rock B Base 31.5 mm % passing 100 95 - 100 81 - 100 66 - 90 50 - 77 41- 70 27 - 54 17 - 43 11 - 32 4 - 19 0 - 8 CTURE he method an e submitted in t. e rate of ble g a Dust cont he Micro-Dev the producti ded aggregate ded product .
y the crushing le 201-2 , whe olid in situ .
Base/Subbase Aggrega 50 mm % passing 100 95 - 100 76 - 100 60 - 84 50 - 76 32 - 61 21 - 49 15 - 40 10 - 32 4 - 18 0 - 9 nd location of n writing to th ending is con tent not exce val and Plas ion of the cr e produced .
g and process en tested in a e ate Subbase 75 mm % passin 100 95 - 100 85 - 100 73 - 95 58 - 87 35 - 69 25 - 54 17 - 43 12 - 35 8 - 28 4 - 16 0 - 9 ITEM : 201 Page 201-3 introducing he Engineer ntrolled and eeding 20 % sticity Index rushed rock sing of rock accordance m ng 0 0 5 7 9 4 3 5 PR Pag 201 201 201 ODUCTION O ge 201-4 1.2.4 .2 1.2.4.2 1.2.4 .3 OF HIGHWAY Crushed Gra .1 Crushed gravel to ASTM C ASTM Sieve Size 100.0 mm 90.0 mm 75.0 mm 63.0 mm 50.0 mm 37.5 mm 31.5 mm 25.0 mm 19.0 mm 12.5 mm 9.5 mm 4.75 mm 2.36 mm 1.18 mm 300 m 75 m .2 Gravel B fractured Pit Run Grav .1 Pit run g Table 20 .1 Over DEPARTM Y AGGREGA avel Base/Sub gravel base o conform to t 136 and C117 Grad Aggre 25 mm % passing 100 95 - 100 75 - 100 60 - 82 52 - 75 36 - 61 25 - 48 16 - 36 5 - 16 0 - 6 ase shall hav d face , when t vel Subbase gravel subbas 01-4 , when tes rsize rocks in STA MENT of TR ATES PAVEMENT ST bbase e/subbase sha the grading li 7. ing Limits - C egate Base g 31.5 m % pass 100 95 - 10 83 - 10 70 - 9 55 - 7 45 - 7 30 - 5 20 - 4 14 - 3 5 - 19 0 - 6 ve a minimum tested in acco se shall be g sted in accord the pit run m ANDARD S RANSPORT RUCTURE all be produc imits of Table Table 201-3 Crushed Gra mm sing 50 m % pas 10 95 - 79 - 00 00 63 - 90 53 - 78 72 35 - 57 24 - 46 17 - 35 12 - 9 5 - 6 0 - m of 40 % of th ordance with A gravel that co dance with AS aterial shall b SPECIFICA TATION an ced by the c e 201-3 when 3 avel Base/Su Aggreg mm ssing 7 % p 95 00 86 100 7 100 6 - 85 - 78 3 - 62 2 - 51 1 - 42 1 - 33 9 18 4 - 6 he particles , b ASTM D5821 onforms to th STM C136 an be removed fr ATIONS nd INFRAS J crushing and n tested in ac ubbase gate Subbase 5 mm passing % 100 5 - 100 6 - 100 75 - 95 61 - 87 38 - 70 8 - 56 9 - 46 3 - 37 9 - 30 4 - 16 0 - 7 by mass , havin 1. he grading lim nd C117 .
rom the Work TRUCTUR ITEM : 20 January , 201 processing o ccordance wit e 100 mm % passing 100 95 - 100 80 - 100 60 - 87 50 - 81 34 - 68 25 - 58 17 - 48 13 - 39 9 - 30 4 - 17 0 - 7 ng at least on mits set out k. RE 01 5 of th ne in DEPA PROD Janua 201.2 .
201.2 .
ARTMENT DUCTION OF ary , 2015 4 .4 Cru .1 4.4.1 STAN of TRANS HIGHWAY A ushed Sandst Crushed sa sandstone t accordance .1 Sandsto other de .1 San .2 Crushed ASTM 1 7 5 .3 Crushed greater LS-618 ,  Para .
 Para .
Perce NDARD SP PORTATIO AGGREGATE PAV Grading ASTM Sieve Size 125 mm 100 mm 75 mm 50 mm 37.5 mm 19 mm 9.5 mm 4.75 mm 2.36 mm 1.18 mm 300 m 75 m tone Subbase andstone sub to conform to with ASTM C one shall be c eleterious mat ndstone rubble d sandstone s Grading M Sieve Size 100 mm 75 mm 50 mm 75 m d Sandstone p than 60 % A Grading , m 5.6- The Micr 5.7 and 5.8- nt Loss calcul ECIFICATI ON and INF ES VEMENT STRUC Table Limits - Pit R e e bbase shall b o the grading C136 and C11 composed of terials , and sh e and highly w shall have a m Ta g Limits - Cr 5 % P 95 0 proposed for when test modified as foll ro-Deval abras - A 75 μm si lation .
IONS FRASTRUC CTURE 201-4 Run Gravel S % - 9 8 6 5 be produced limits as set 17. clean uncoat hall be from a weathered sa maximum Pla able 201-5 rushed Sands 50 mm Passing 5 - 100 0 - 10 use as subba ted in acco lows : sion machine ieve shall be CTURE Subbase -Passing 100 95 - 100 82 - 100 62 - 100 52 - 100 30 - 90 22 - 79 16 - 66 12 - 55 9 - 44 4 - 25 0 - 7 by the crus t out in Table ed particles f a source that andstone shal asticity Index ( stone Subba 75 mm % Passing 95 - 100 0 - 10 ase shall hav ordance with shall run 30 m added to de hing and pro e 201-5 , whe free from clay is solid in situ ll not be acce ( PI ) of 5. ase g 100 m % Pas 95-1 0 - 1 ve a Micro-De h Test Me minutes .
etermine Mas ITEM : 201 Page 201-5 ocessing of en tested in y , organic or u. eptable .
mm ssing 00 10 eval loss not thod MTO ss ' B ' in the PR Pag 201 201 201 ODUCTION O ge 201-6 1.2 .5 Crus .1 1.2 .6 Cov .1 1.3 SUBMIT .1 The .1 .2 OF HIGHWAY shed Shoulde Shoulder ma conform to th C136 and C1 ver Material Cover mater conform to t ASTM C136 A Sie 19.0 16.0 12.5 9.5 4.75 2.36 7 TTALS Contractor s The Contrac representativ The Enginee notification of DEPARTM Y AGGREGA er Material aterial shall b he grading lim 117 .
Gradin rial shall be the grading and C117 .
ASTM eve Size % 0 mm 0 mm 5 mm 5 mm 5 mm 6 mm 75 m hall notify the ctor shall mak ve samples of er shall requ f the evaluatio STA MENT of TR ATES PAVEMENT ST be produced b mits set out in Tab g Limits - Cr ASTM Sieve Size 37.5 mm 31.5 mm 25.0 mm 19.0 mm 12.5 mm 9.5 mm 4.75 mm 2.36 mm 1.18 mm 300 m 75 m produced by limits set ou T Grading Li 9.5 mm % passing 100 0 - 5 0 - 2 e Engineer , in ke available f the material uire up to 21 on of the mat ANDARD S RANSPORT RUCTURE by the crushi n Table 201-6 ble 201-6 rushed Shou 31.5 m % pass 100 95 - 1 84 - 1 70 - 9 55 - 7 45- 7 30 - 5 20 - 4 14 - 3 7 - 2 3 - 9 y the crushin t in Table 2 Table 201-7 mits - Cover 12.5 mm % passing 100 40 - 90 0 - 20 0 - 8 0 - 3 writing , ident all Equipmen proposed for 1 Days from terial .
SPECIFICA TATION an ing and proc 6 , when tested ulder Materia mm sing 0 100 100 90 78 72 57 46 35 21 9 ng and proce 201-7 , when r Material 16 mm % passin 100 0 - 90 0 - 60 0 - 20 0 - 8 0 - 3 tifying the sou nt necessary r supply .
m the date o ATIONS nd INFRAS J cessing of roc d in accordan al essing of roc tested in ac m ng 19 m % pas 10 40 - 20 - 0 - 0 - 0 - urce of mater for the Engi f sampling t TRUCTUR ITEM : 20 January , 201 ck or gravel t nce with AST k or gravel t ccordance wit mm ssing 00 - 80 - 62 20 10 - 3 rial .
neer to obta to the date o RE 01 5 to M to th in of DEPA PROD Janua 201.3 201.4 201.4 201.4 201.4 ARTMENT DUCTION OF ary , 2015 .2 The Co approva CONSTRU .1 Genera .1 The spe .2 The ma .1 .2 .3 For pro nec .2 Plant .1 The nec cle sub .1 .2 The flow .3 The and .4 Agg .1 .2 .3 Pits and .1 Pro pro .2 The at a as STAN of TRANS HIGHWAY A ontractor sha al of the sour CTION al e Contractor ecifically direc e Contractor aterials , at any Random sam effects of the No Work sh until an appr r rock and gra operty require cessary chang e Contractor cessary provis an and free o bstances , for The Contrac conform to t e Contractor wing off the b e Contractor d capable of y gregates sha The water amounts of Disposal of d Quarries Co ocessed mate operty of the O e Contractor a location wit directed by th NDARD SP PORTATIO AGGREGATE PAV all not comm rce is received shall carry ou cted by the En shall advise y time during mples shall b e change .
hall be undert roval is receiv avel aggrega ements of Ta ges in locatio shall provid sions for pow of injurious a the duration o ctor shall reta the requireme shall provide elt ( s ) , or to th shall crush a yielding a con ll only be was to be used oil , alkali , acid any washing ontrolled By O erials not mee Owner .
shall be resp hin the devel he Engineer .
ECIFICATI ON and INF ES VEMENT STRUC mence any p d from the En ut the Work a ngineer .
e the Engine the course of be taken and taken by the ved from the tes , if sample able 201-1 th on or source to de an area wer and an ad amounts of oi of the Work .
ain a qualifie ents of the Ca the Enginee he stockpile .
and screen a nsistent and a shed by a me for washing d , organic ma residue shall Owner eting the spec ponsible for th oped pit/quar IONS FRASTRUC CTURE processing W ngineer .
as indicated i eer immediat f the Work .
tests conduc Contractor in Engineer .
es taken duri he Contracto o produce ma for the Own dequate suppl il , alkali , acid ed electrician anadian Elect r safe access aggregates w acceptable pro ethod that prod aggregate s atter or other be the respo cified aggreg he loading , ha rry as specifie CTURE Work until wr in the Contra tely of any cted by the En n the area of ng the Work or shall cease aterial meetin ner ’ s lab trai ly of water ( m d , organic ma to perform t rical Code .
s to the strea with Equipme oduct .
duces a cons shall be clea deleterious s onsibility of the gate type and auling and sto ed in the Con ritten notifica ct Document changes in ngineer to de f the changed fail to meet t e production ng the require iler and sha minimum 10 L/ atter or other the electrical am of crushed nt of adequa sistent produc an and free ubstances .
e Contractor .
/or size shall ockpiling of th ntract Docum ITEM : 201 Page 201-7 ation of the ts and/or as the source etermine the d conditions the physical and make ments .
ll make all /min ) that is deleterious hook-up to d aggregate ate capacity ct. of injurious remain the his material ents and/or PR Pag 201 201 201 ODUCTION O ge 201-8 1.4 .4 Pits .1 1.4 .5 Stoc .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 1.4 .6 Sam .1 .2 OF HIGHWAY and Quarries Processed m responsibility ckpiles Crushed agg and/or as app Stockpiling o the entire we maximum rec .1 Stockpile aggregat all aggre at all time .2 If a poten stockpile fine-grain stockpile Stockpiles sh completed be Forming of c dumping ove It is the expre the specified .1 Aggregat shall be i mpling and Te The crushed shall be acce Sampling and DEPARTM Y AGGREGA s Controlled b materials not y of the Contra gregate shall b proved by the of aggregate s eight and dim covery of the es shall not b tes , nor near gate is not po es .
ntial for conta e site , the Co ned material , es .
hall be built in efore the next cone-shaped er the edge of ess responsib quality and g tes that beco immediately r esting of Aggr product shall epted or rejec d testing shal STA MENT of TR ATES PAVEMENT ST by Others meeting the actor .
be stockpiled e Engineer .
shall be done mension of th stockpiled m be placed ne property line ossible or pra amination of t ontractor sha , a minimum n layers not e t layer is begu piles with c f stockpiles sh bility of the Co gradation and ome contamin removed from regates l be monitore cted on the ba ll be carried o ANDARD S RANSPORT RUCTURE e specified ag at a location e on well-drain he stockpile ( s aterial ( s ) .
ear the quarry s , tree lines o actical and acc the aggregate all evenly dis m of 150 mm exceeding one un .
conveyer belt hall not be pe ontractor to e are of uniform nated or mixe m the stockpile d for gradatio asis of the tes out as indicate SPECIFICA TATION an ggregate type as indicated ned , level ba s ) and in suc ry face , Stripp or drainage d cess to the st e exists due stribute and m thick , to f e metre in de ts , pushing u rmitted .
ensure that st m distribution ed with other e ( s ) .
on throughout sts performed ed in Table 20 ATIONS nd INFRAS J e and/or size in the Contra se ( s ) capable ch a manner ping piles or ditches such t tockpile shall to ground co compact a l form a foun epth and each up piles with tockpiles cont n. r aggregates t the period of by the Engin 01-8 .
TRUCTUR ITEM : 20 January , 201 e shall be th act Documen e of supportin r as to ensur piles of othe that retrieval o be maintaine onditions at th ayer of clea dation for th h layer shall b a tractor an tain material o or segregate f the Work an neer .
RE 01 5 he ts ng re er of ed he n , he be nd of ed nd DEPA PROD Janua 201.4 .
201.4 .
201.4 ARTMENT DUCTION OF ary , 2015 Sam Re Sie NO 6 .3 Sam con 6 .4 The sha out .7 Aggreg .1 The und .2 The sto onc and sho STAN of TRANS HIGHWAY A Procedu mpling Aggre duction of Sa eve Analysis OTES : 1 ) Sh 2 ) W te 3 ) Fr de mple sizes sm ntrol purposes Base/S NOTE : e Contractor s all be notified tside of the sp gates Produce e Contractor der 201.4.6.4 e Contractor ckpile all ma ce a test res d shall contin ow that mater NDARD SP PORTATIO AGGREGATE PAV Minimum ure egates ample hift is defined Where product esting shall be requency of te etermined by maller than th s , as indicated M Type Base Shoulder Mat Subbase Subbase Subbase Subbase Field sample larger than th shall be provi d immediately pecified limits ed Outside the shall not pla that the mate shall “ hold ” t aterial being p ult indicates nue to do so rial being prod ECIFICATI ON and INF ES VEMENT STRUC Tab m Sampling Standa ASTM ASTM ASTM C1 d as one produ tion is greate e increased as esting may al the Engineer hose specified d in Table 20 T Minimum Sie Aggregate S ( m terial 3 1 Pit es obtained u he above siev ided a copy o y if any test r . e Specified L ace any mate erial being pro he placemen produced in that the mate until such ti duced is withi IONS FRASTRUC CTURE ble 201-8 And Testing ard ( s ) M D75 C702 17 , C136 uction crew ’ s er than 4000 s determined lso be reduce r. d in ASTM D7 01-9 Table 201-9 eve Analysis Size mm ) M 25 31.5 50 1 75 1 100 2 t Run 2 under ASTM ve analysis siz of all test resu result indicate Limits erial into the p oduced is out nt of material separate and erial being pr ime that 2 ad in the specifie CTURE g Frequency Minimum  50 mm 3 3 3 s daily work pe t per shift the by the Engin ed during low 75 and C136 s Sample Size Mass ( g ) ( 5000 7000 0000 5000 20000 20000 D75 shall b zes .
ults as soon a es that mater production st tside the spec into the prod d clearly defi roduced does dditional cons ed limits .
m Frequency m  eriod .
e minimum fr neer .
production , a may be used es Cover Mate Size ( mm ) 9.5 12.5 16 19 be at least fo as they are av rials are bein tockpile after cified limits .
duction stockp ined “ reject ” s not meet s secutive siev ITEM : 201 Page 201-9 Per Shift 75 mm 2 2 2 requency of as d for quality erial Mass ( g ) 1000 1200 1500 2000 our times vailable and g produced notification pile or shall stockpile ( s ) specification ve analyses PR Pag 201 201 201 ODUCTION O ge 201-10 1.4.7.2 .3 two Sp one Sp one Sp 1.5 MEASU .1 The proc 1.6 BASIS O .1 Pay aggr OF HIGHWAY .1 Should o the com placed in shall be r The sequenc Table 201-10 o consecutive pecifications e test outside pecifications e test outside pecifications REMENT FO Quantity to cessed and st OF PAYMENT ment for Wor regate , as ide DEPARTM Y AGGREGA only one test pletion of 2 n the producti rejected from ce of materia 0 .
Schema e tests within e e OR PAYMENT o be measur tockpiled , in a T rk under this ntified under t STA MENT of TR ATES PAVEMENT ST indicate mate acceptable c on stockpile ; the Work unt al acceptance Ta atic Represen hold in se stockpile ( next two specificat hold in se stockpile ( following Specifica T red for paym accordance w Item shall inc the Contract .
ANDARD S RANSPORT RUCTURE erial to be ou consecutive t otherwise the til 2 acceptab e/rejection in able 201-10 ntation of Ha eparate ( s ) tests within tion eparate ( s ) test outside ation ment shall be with this Item .
clude a separ SPECIFICA TATION an utside the spe test results , e held materi ble consecutiv nto production andling Proc place in place in reject ma reject un tests wit e the numbe rate Unit Pric ATIONS nd INFRAS J ecified limits , the material al and any ot ve test results n stockpiles cedure production st production st aterial ntil two conse hin specificat er of tonnes ce for each si TRUCTUR ITEM : 20 January , 201 then followin held may b ther productio s are obtained is indicated tockpile tockpile cutive tion of aggregat ze and type RE 01 5 ng be on d. in te of DEPA AGGR Janua 203.1 203.2 203.2 203.3 203.4 203.4 203.4 ARTMENT REGATE BAS ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite MATERIAL .1 Genera .1 All .2 Agg sha SUBMITTA .1 Submitt CONSTRU .1 Genera .1 The spe .2 Agg req up .1 .2 .3 The tim be .1 .2 Placem .1 The and Wo .1 STAN of TRANS SE/SUBBASE TION em consists o LS al materials sha gregate Base all be of the ty ALS tals are requir CTION al e Contractor ecifically direc gregate Base quirements for to the comple If the materi and/or grada immediately Any materia the Work .
e Contractor e during the c taken and tes No Work sh until an appr ment e Contractor s d grades as ork .
Any deficie commencem NDARD SP PORTATIO E PAV f supply and p all be supplied e/Subbase sh ype and size , red in accorda shall carry ou cted by the En e/Subbase ma r the class of m etion of the Co ial incorporate ation , the Con rectify the pro l found to be shall advise course of the sts conducted hall be undert roval is receiv shall satisfy h indicated in encies in gra ment of the W PECIFICAT ON and INF VEMENT STRUC placement of d by the Cont all conform to as indicated ance with any ut the Work a ngineer .
aterials shall material spec ontract .
ed into the W ntractor shall oblem to the s non-conformi the Enginee Work and su d by the Owne taken by the ved from the himself that th the Contract ade shall be Work .
TIONS FRASTRUC CTURE f Aggregate B tractor .
o the requirem in the Contra cross-referen as indicated i conform to th cified , at the tim Work does not cease hauling satisfaction of ing to the spe r of any chan ufficiently in a er to determin Contractor in Engineer .
he existing gra t Documents e noted and CTURE Base/Subbase ments of 201. act Document nced Item form in the Contra he properties me of incorpo conform with g from the so the Engineer .
ecified materia nges in the s advance so th ne the effects n the area of ade has been s prior to the d submitted e. .2 , 201.3 and ts .
ming part of th ct Document and specifie oration into the h the specified ource of supp .
al shall be rem source mater hat random sa s of the chang f the changed n constructed commencem in writing p ITEM : 203 Page 203-1 201.4 , and is Item .
ts and/or as ed gradation e Work , and d properties ply and shall moved from rials , at any amples may ge .
d conditions to the lines ment of the prior to the AG Pag 203 203 GGREGATE B ge 203-2 3.4.2 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9 .10 .11 .12 .13 .14 3.4 .3 Seg .1 .2 BASE/SUBBA Aggregate Ba rutted or froze by the Engine .1 Any ruts eliminate unsuitabl Prior to the Area shall ha may be requi The Aggrega potential for s .1 The max Each lift of A required Prof The final grad Spreading , sh operations an placed is sha Crawler tract Base/Subbas The Foreslop ridges and/or Aggregate Ba Any deteriora directly or ind Engineer befo The Contract have been bla The Contrac specified den The Engineer length of Roa regation If the Cont ASTM C125 immediately .
If segregation remedy the W DEPARTM ASE ase/Subbase en surfaces an eer .
or potholes d by scarifyin e material and placement of ave been sha ired .
ate Base/Subb segregation .
imum Aggreg Aggregate Bas ile and cross s de after shapin haping and co nd the Contra ped and comp tors and scra se .
pe in the Aggr r undulations , ase/Subbase ation of the pla directly attribu ore any Work tor shall remo aded to the si ctor shall mai sity until the c r may accept t adbed depend ractor ’ s meth and tested i n of materials Work in place , STA MENT of TR PAVEMENT ST materials sha nd Work shall which appea ng , shaping d placing and f Aggregate aped to the s base shall be ate Subbase se/Subbase sh section .
ng and compa ompacting ope actor shall , at pacted to the apers shall n regate Base/S to form a stra materials sha acement grad utable to the may continue ove , from the W des of the lay intain the fin completion of t the Work on c ing on conditi hods result n accordance occurs , then or shall remo ANDARD S RANSPORT RUCTURE all not be pla l progress only ar in advance and compact compacting n Base/Subbas atisfaction of e spread even lift thickness s hall be bladed action shall be erations shall t the complet specified den ot be permitt Subbase laye ight line Slope ll not be blade de which appe Contractor sh e over this are Work Site , ex er .
ished grade the Contract .
contiguous 1 k ons at the tim in segregat e with ASTM the Contracto ve the segreg SPECIFICA TATION an ced on inund y once the Wo e of the Agg ting , or if ne new material o se , the slope f the Enginee nly and comp shall be 300 m d , shaped and e to the specif proceed simu tion of any D sity .
ted for haulin rs shall be co e in cross sect ed onto the Su ears during th hall be repaire ea .
xcess materia to the speci km long sectio me of the Work ion of the C136 , the C or shall subm gated material ATIONS nd INFRAS dated , soft , m ork Area has gregate place cessary , by of the same qu es and ditche er , including a pacted in lifts mm .
d compacted fied tolerances ultaneously wi Day , ensure th ng or placing onstructed to ction .
ubgrade Fores he course of th ed to the sat al and oversize ified tolerance ons of Roadbe k. materials , a Contractor sha it a Work plan ls from the Wo TRUCTUR ITEM : 20 January , 20 uddy , pothole been approve ement shall b excavating th uality .
es in the Wo any topsoil tha minimizing th to produce th s. th the dumpin hat all materi g of Aggregat be free of rut slope .
he Work and isfaction of th e stones whic es and to th ed or the who as defined b all cease Wo n to scarify an ork .
RE 03 15 ed ed be he rk at he he ng al te ts , is he ch he ole by rk nd DEPA AGGR Janua 203.4 203.5 203.6 ARTMENT REGATE BAS ary , 2015 .4 Compa .1 The ma MEASURE .1 The Q Base/S BASIS OF .1 Paymen Aggreg STAN of TRANS SE/SUBBASE ction e material sha aximum dry de MENT FOR P uantity to be Subbase supp PAYMENT nt for Work u ate Base/Sub NDARD SP PORTATIO E PAV all be compa ensity .
PAYMENT e measured plied and plac under this Item bbase , as iden PECIFICAT ON and INF VEMENT STRUC cted in accor for payment ed , in accord m shall includ ntified under th TIONS FRASTRUC CTURE rdance with It t shall be th ance with this de a separate he Contract .
CTURE tem 936 to a he number o s Item .
e Unit Price fo minimum of of tonnes of or each size ITEM : 203 Page 203-3 95 % of the Aggregate and type of DEPA SHOU Janua 204.1 204.2 204.3 204.4 ARTMENT ULDER MATE ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite MATERIAL .1 All mate .2 Should the type .3 If speci .1 RA in t .2 The .3 The det SUBMITTA .1 Submit CONSTRU .1 The Co specific .2 The pla the adja .1 The adj .3 Should .1 Any pla .2 Sho .4 The Co uncomp .1 Wh und the STAN of TRANS ERIAL TION em consists o LS erials shall be er material sh e and size , as fied for use in AP may be ma the Contract D e Contractor s e Contractor termined by A ALS tals are requi CTION ontractor sha cally directed b acement of S acent and sur e Contractor acent and/or er material sh y Shoulder s ce any Shoul oulder materi ontractor sha pacted thickn here surplus A der Item 205 , e Shoulder at NDARD SP PORTATIO PAV f supply and p e supplied by hall conform s indicated in n the Contrac ade available Documents .
shall be respo shall process ASTM C136 , a red in accord all carry out t by the Engine houlder mate rrounding Roa shall be resp abutting finis hall be placed spreader cons lder material o al shall not be all spread th ess and shal Aggregate Ba the Contract his/her own e ECIFICATI ON and INF VEMENT STRUC placement of the Contracto to the require the Contract ct , RAP shall b e under Item onsible to sup s the RAP to and shall be f dance with an the Work as er .
erial shall be c adbed .
ponsible , at h hed surfaces d by Equipme sidered for th on the Pavem e bladed onto he Shoulder l employ meth ase has been tor shall sprea expense , prio IONS FRASTRUC CTURE f Shoulder ma or .
ements of 20 Documents .
be made avai 208 and/or fr pply the mate contain 100 % free of all lum y cross-refere indicated in carried out in his/her own ex s resulting from ent specifically he Work sha ment .
o the Subgrad material eve hods to limit s n windrowed ad , shape and r to placing a CTURE aterials on the 01.2 , 201.3 an ilable by the O rom a stockp erial to the Wo % passing the mps or clods a enced Item fo the Contrac n a manner so xpense , to re m this Work .
y designed fo ll be constru de Foreslope .
enly in lifts n segregation .
along the Sh d compact the ny Shoulder m e Roadbed Sh nd 201.4 and Owner .
ile location , a ork .
e 50.0 mm sie and soil .
orming part of ct Documents o as to avoid epair any dam or that purpos cted so that .
not exceedin houlder durin e windrowed material unde ITEM : 204 Page 204-1 houlder .
shall be of as identified eve size , as f this Item .
s and/or as damage to mage to the e. it shall not g 150 mm g the Work material on er this Item .
SH Pag 204 204 204 OULDER MA ge 204-2 4.4 .5 The the .1 .6 The ope .1 .2 .7 Sho Eng .1 .8 Fina abut and .9 The surf 4.5 MEASU .1 The supp 4.6 BASIS O .1 Pay Sho .2 The Sho 204 ATERIAL Shoulder ma maximum dry RAP shall be Contractor s n to traffic wit Regardless o open to traffic Where the d 70 mm in a commence w oulder materia ineer .
The Contract al shaping of tting Paveme shall be blen Contractor s ace shall be f REMENT FO Quantity to plied and plac OF PAYMENT ment for Wor ulder material Contractor s oulder materia .4.6 .
DEPARTM aterial shall be y density , exc e compacted t shall not perm thout the Sho of the distanc c for a period ifference in e any portion o within 48 hour al shall be p tor shall unde the Shoulde ent surface an nded and shap shall keep cle free of Should OR PAYMENT be measured ced in accord T rk under this l , as identified shall be subje al placement STA MENT of TR PAVEMENT ST e compacted cept as follows to the 97 % of mit more than oulder materia ce paved , eac greater than elevation betw of the Work rs of the place placed in driv ertake all hand r material sh nd shall exten ped to match an the adjace der material p T d for payment ance with this Item shall inc d under the Co ect to a pena operation is n ANDARD S RANSPORT RUCTURE in accordanc s : f maximum de 4 km of each al operation b ch new lift of 7 Days witho ween the asph , the Should ement of the a veways and a dwork that ma all be consist nd at the spe the Foreslop ent Pavemen prior to openin t shall be the s Item .
clude a separ ontract .
alty of $ 500.0 not carried ou SPECIFICA TATION an ce with Item 9 ensity as dete h lift of newly eing in progre newly laid as out Shoulder halt concrete der material asphalt concr around guide ay be necess tent and con ecified Slope pe intersection nt surface and ng the Work A e number of t rate Unit Pric 00 per Day , ut in the pres ATIONS nd INFRAS 936 to a minim ermined by a y laid asphalt ess .
sphalt concre material bein and the Sho placement o rete .
e posts as d sary to comple tinuous to th to the line of n. d in all cases Area to traffic onnes of Sho ce for each si for each occ scribed period TRUCTUR ITEM : 20 January , 20 mum of 95 % o test strip .
concrete to b ete shall not b g placed .
oulder exceed operation sha irected by th ete the Work .
e grade of th f the Foreslop the Paveme .
oulder materi ze and type currence , if th d as defined RE 04 15 of be be ds all he he pe nt al of he in DEPA FINE G Janua 205.1 205.2 205.3 205.4 205.5 205.6 ARTMENT GRADING ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite grades MATERIAL .1 None re SUBMITTA .1 Submitt CONSTRU .1 The Co specific .2 All fine dimens .1 If a ma and this .3 The fine of the graded .4 On pav extent p .1 If s rem the .2 The nea MEASURE .1 The Qu comple .2 The are unless BASIS OF .1 Payme STAN of TRANS TION em consists o . LS equired .
ALS tals are requir CTION ontractor sha cally directed b e grading sha sions and tole at any time du ake all necess d/or displaced s Item .
e grading ma maximum dr to the same ving Contract possible to co surplus mater main the prop e Engineer .
e Contractor s at and uniform MENT FOR P uantity to be m eted in accord ea to be fine otherwise no PAYMENT nt for this Wo NDARD SP PORTATIO PAV of shaping a red in accorda all carry out t by the Engine all be carried erances as dir uring the Work sary repairs to d shall be sc aterial shall be ry density .
If elevation as t ts , materials omplete the s rial still rema perty of the O shall be respo m appearance PAYMENT measured for dance with this graded shall ted in the Co ork shall be at PECIFICAT ON and INF VEMENT STRUC nd compactio ance with any the Work as er .
d out in acco rected by the k , the surface o reinstate the arified , resha e compacted paved Shou the top of the remaining fro houldering to ins after com Owner and sha onsible to ens e. payment sha s Item .
be defined a ntract Docum t the Unit Pric TIONS FRASTRUC CTURE on of Aggreg cross-referen indicated in ordance with Engineer .
e becomes rut e surface gra aped and com in accordanc ulders are sp e adjacent sur om fine grad o the line and mpletion of sh all be remove sure that all S all be the num as 300 mm be ments .
ce .
CTURE gate Base to nced Item form the Contrac Item 941 an tted or displa ade and if nec mpacted to m ce with Item 9 pecified , the rface .
ding operation grade of the houldering the ed from the W Shoulders and mber of squar eyond the ed the specified ming part of th ct Documents nd/or to grad ced , the Cont cessary , the d meet the requ 36 to a minim Shoulders sh ns shall be u finished Pave en these mat Work Site as d Foreslopes re metres of f dge of the Pav ITEM : 205 Page 205-1 d lines and is Item .
s and/or as des , slopes , tractor shall depth rutted irements of mum of 95 % hall be fine used to the ement .
terials shall directed by are left in a fine grading vement line DEPA COLD Janua 208.1 208.2 208.3 208.4 ARTMENT MILLING - A ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite MATERIAL .1 None id SUBMITTA .1 The C comme .2 Submitt CONSTRU .1 The Co specific .2 The Co underly .3 The Co or appr .1 All pic Wo .2 If a the sm .3 The .4 The .4 The Co manho are not .5 The Co by the E .6 The RA site as .1 If th eac Do STAN of TRANS ASPHALT CO TION em consists o LS dentified .
ALS Contractor sh encement of th tals are requir CTION ontractor sha cally directed b ontractor sha ying aggregat ontractor shal roved equivale loose mater ked up from ork Area to tra a transverse v e Contractor ooth 1.5 m lo e Lanes shall ere shall be n ontractor sha le frames and damaged , an ontractor shal Engineer .
AP shall rema indicated in t he Contractor ch layer mus cuments .
NDARD SP PORTATIO ONCRETE PAV f the removal hall notify th he Work .
red in accorda all carry out t by the Engine all take care e material .
l provide , in p ent , with auto rial remaining paved Shou affic .
vertical cut is shall immedi ong taper , as s be complete no transverse all remove all d other Struc nd the area a l provide for ain the proper he Contract D r removes the st be stockp ECIFICATI ON and INF VEMENT STRUC , haulage and he Engineer ance with any the Work as er .
in full depth partial depth omatic control g after cold m ulders , gutters s milled in the ately constru shown in Stan d to the same slope control l asphalt con ctures abutting fter removal m the drainage rty of the Ow Documents or e specified thi piled separate IONS FRASTRUC CTURE d stockpiling o a minimum cross-referen indicated in h removal no removal , Equ ls for the cont milling shall s , or from un e existing Pav uct with hot m ndard Drawin e location at t l used .
ncrete from th g the Work , i matches the g of water from wner and shall r as directed b ickness in mo ely , unless o CTURE of asphalt con m of 3 Day nced Item form the Contrac ot to contam uipment with trol of longitu be swept to nder guide ra vement at the mixed aspha ng 260-1. the end of the he faces of g in such a ma grade of the a m the cold m l be loaded a by the Engine ore than one otherwise ind ncrete from a ys in advan ming part of th ct Documents inate the RA a ski at least dinal grade .
a granular s ail before reo e limit of the lt concrete a e Day 's cold m gutters , catch anner that the adjacent remo illed area as and hauled to eer .
layer , then m dicated in th ITEM : 208 Page 208-1 a Roadbed .
nce of the is Item .
s and/or as AP with the t 7.6 m long shoulder or opening the Work Area a temporary milling .
h basins or e Structures oval area .
determined a stockpile material from he Contract CO Pag 208 208 208 OLD MILLING ge 208-2 8.4 .7 Prop the .1 .2 .8 If th recy .9 The and until .1 8.5 MEASU .1 The conc 8.6 BASIS O .1 Pay dept D G - ASPHALT per stockpilin reclaimed asp If a potential site a layer stockpiles .
The height o stockpiled m permitted to t he Contract D ycled asphalt Contractor s in a conditio l such time as Hot mixed as only as a tem REMENT FO Quantity to crete accepta OF PAYMENT ment for Wor th removal , as DEPARTM CONCRETE g procedures phalt concrete for contamin of clean , fine of RAP stockp material and n travel on the Documents sp mix , the RAP shall continuo on providing f s the new asp sphalt concret mporary repair OR PAYMENT be measured ably removed , T k under this It s identified un STA ENT of TR E PAVEMENT ST s shall be use e stockpile .
nation of the R e-grained ma piles shall be no loaders , c stockpile .
pecify that th P shall be weig ously maintain for the safe a phalt concrete te shall be pla r. T d for paymen , hauled and s tem shall inclu der the Contra ANDARD S RANSPORT RUCTURE ed and care t RAP exists d aterial shall b e a maximum crawler tracto e reclaimed a ghed prior to n the Work S and efficient f e is placed .
aced in the p nt shall be th stockpiled in ude a separat act .
SPECIFICA TATION an taken not to due to ground be evenly dis m of 3 m to lim ors , trucks or asphalt conc placement in Site free of po flow of traffic otholes ; cold he number of accordance w te Unit Price f ATIONS d INFRAST contaminate d conditions a stributed as a mit the conso r other Equip crete is to be n the stockpile otholes and s c , from the tim mix or RAP a f square met with this Item for either full d TRUCTURE ITEM : 20 January , 20 or consolidat at the stockpi a base for th olidation of th pment shall b used in a ho e. standing wate me of remova are acceptab tres of aspha .
depth or parti E 08 15 te le he he be ot er al , le alt al DEPA SHOU Janua 210.1 210.2 210.3 210.4 ARTMENT ULDER RUMB ary , 2015 DESCRPIT .1 This Ite MATERIAL .1 None id SUBMITTA .1 The Co .2 Submit CONSTRU .1 The Co specific .2 Rumble travel , a .3 Rumble  2 mm on Stan .4 To acc paved a .1 The Sho .5 Unless location .1 Wit .2 Wit .3 Wit lan .6 All cold Roadbe STAN of TRANS BLE STRIPS TION em consists o LS dentified .
ALS ontractor shal tals are requi CTION ontractor sha cally directed e strips shall at the location e strips shall b m at 150 mm s ndard Drawin commodate ru at least 140 m e outer edge oulder that is otherwise ap ns : thin 300 m of thin 30 m of a thin 30 m of es , resuming d-milled mate ed within one NDARD SP PORTATIO PAV f the cold mill l notify the En red in accord all carry out t by the Engine be cold mill ns indicated i be a series of spacing , para g 210-1. umble strips mm thick , and of the rumb full depth asp pproved by th residential or a Structure wi the beginnin beyond the g erial resulting hour after m ECIFICATI ON and INF VEMENT STRUC ling of rumble ngineer a min dance with an the Work as eer .
led on the o n the Contrac f 400 mm x 1 allel to and 20 the right Sh d another 1.5 ble strip shall phalt concrete he Engineer , r r commercial th PC concre ng or end of gore area .
g from the W illing , to the s IONS FRASSTRU CTURE e strips on the nimum of 5 Da y cross-refere indicated in outside paved ct Documents 50 mm rectan 00 mm outsid oulder shall m paved or c be a minimu e. rumble strips development ete deck ( pave tapers of au Work under th satisfaction of UCTURE e paved ( asph ays prior to co enced Item fo the Contrac d Shoulder , r s. ngular trough de the solid w have a minim chipsealed .
um of 100 m shall not be t ; ed or bare ) ; o uxiliary ( dece his Item sha f the Engineer halt concrete ) ommencing th orming part of ct Documents right side in hs milled to a hite edge line mum 0.8 m mm inside tha installed in th or leration or ac ll be remove r. ITEM : 210 Page 210-1 ) Shoulders .
he Work .
f this Item .
s and/or as direction of depth of 10 e , as shown of its width at portion of he following cceleration ) ed from the SH Pag 210 210 OULDER RU ge 210-2 0.5 MEASU .1 The alon .1 0.6 BASIS O .1 Pay UMBLE STRIP REMENT FO Quantity to ng which rumb The measure OF PAYMENT ment for Wor DEPARTM PS OR PAYMENT be measured ble strips hav ement shall be T rk under this I STA MENT of TR PAVEMENT ST T d for paymen e been accep e taken paral tem shall be ANDARD S RANSPORT RUCTURE nt shall be th ptably constru lel to the whit at the Unit Pr SPECIFICA TATION an he number of ucted in accor te edge line o rice .
ATIONS nd INFRAS f linear metre rdance with th of the travelled TRUCTUR ITEM : 2 January , 20 es of Shoulde his Item .
d lane .
RE 10 15 er DEPA SHOU Janua 231.1 231.2 231.3 231.4 ARTMENT ULDER SUBD ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite outlet S MATERIAL .1 All mate .2 Subdra followin .1 PV per .2 Co .1 .3 All outl CAN/C .4 All app .5 Geotex .6 Free dr SUBMITTA .1 Submitt CONSTRU .1 The Co specific .2 The Co .3 The su Pavem surroun .1 The adj .4 The su STAN of TRANS DRAIN TION em consists Structures .
LS erials shall be ain pipe shall ng : C pipe and rforated as pe rrugated poly All subdrain et pipe shall SA B182.1 .
urtenances s xtile shall be T raining backfi ALS tals are requir CTION ontractor sha cally directed b ontractor shal bdrain trench ent and shal nding Roadbe e Contractor acent and/or bdrain shall b NDARD SP PORTATIO PAV of the supply e supplied by be 100 mm appurtenanc er CAN/CSA B yethylene pipe pipe shall be be solid corr hall conform t Type N2 in ac ll shall be sup red in accorda all carry out t by the Engine l install the Sh h shall be insta l be carried o ed .
shall be resp abutting finis be installed in PECIFICAT ON and INF VEMENT STRUC y and installa the Contracto diameter co ces shall be B182.1 ( Claus e and appurte e pre-wrapped rugated plast to the require ccordance wit pplied in acco ance with any the Work as er .
houlder subd alled in the S out in a man ponsible , at h hed surfaces accordance TIONS FRASTRUC CTURE ation of Shou or .
orrugated slot e DR 35 co se 4.1.5 ) ; or enances confo d with a geote tic pipe and s ements of CAN th 601.2. ordance to the cross-referen indicated in rain system b Shoulder of the nner , so as to his/her own ex s resulting from with the Stan CTURE ulder subdra tted plastic p nforming to orming to AS extile covering shall conform N/CSA B182 .
e requirement nced Item form the Contrac before paving e Roadbed p o avoid dama xpense , to re m this Work .
ndard Drawing in and assoc pipe , and sha CAN/CSA B TM F667 .
g. m to the requ .1. ts of 366.2. ming part of th ct Documents .
arallel to the age to the ad epair any dam g 231-1 .
ITEM : 231 Page 231-1 ciated drain all meet the B182.2 and irements of is Item .
s and/or as edge of the djacent and mage to the SH Pag 231 231 OULDER SU ge 231-2 1.4 .5 The coup reco .6 The Roa of sh .1 .7 All s and .8 The 1.4 .9 Sub .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 UBDRAIN subdrain sh plings compa ommendation material exc adbed and sh houldering ma If the excava material shal Work Site .
subdrain trenc each layer sh ends of each bdrain Outlets All subdrain o The Contrac maximum of vertical curve The subdrain outfall .
The trench fo the limit of th The outfall e Drawing 231 All corrugate graded to pro All outfall det The material outlet trench .
.1 The tren minimum .2 The trenc DEPARTM hall be instal atible with th s. cavated from all be uniform aterial .
ated materia ll become the ch backfill sha hall be thorou h continuous outlets shall b tor shall insta 300 m interv es and as dire n outlets shal or the subdra e Foreslope .
end of the su -1. ed pipe used ovide for posit tail backfill sh l excavated f . ch backfill sh m of 95 % of th ch shall be ba STA MENT of TR PAVEMENT ST led as a co he pipe sup the subdrain mly graded ac l is deemed , e property of all be free-dra ughly tamped line of subdra be installed in all T-sections vals along th ected by the E l be installed ain outlet sha bdrain outlet for subdrain tive gravity dr all be graded from the outl hall be placed he maximum d ackfilled to ma ANDARD S RANSPORT RUCTURE ntinuous line pplied and in n trench shall cross the widt by the Eng the Contract aining backfil .
ain shall be ca n accordance s and the out he run of the Engineer .
as a continu ll be excavate shall be prot n outlet const rainage from d to match the let trench sh d in accorda dry density .
atch the surro SPECIFICA TATION an e with all join n accordance l be disposed th of the Shou ineer , to be tor and shall l and shall be apped .
with the Stan tlet Structure line and at uous line from ed from the T tected in acc truction shall the subdrain e surrounding all be used nce with Item ounding grade ATIONS nd INFRAS nts being co e with the m d of on the S ulder prior to waste then be disposed e placed in tw ndard Drawing es to the sub the lowest p m the T-sectio T-section at t cordance with be unslotted to the outlet o Foreslope gr for backfill o m 936 and co e. TRUCTUR ITEM : 23 January , 20 onstructed wit manufacturer Shoulder of th the placeme the excavate of outside th wo equal laye g 231-1. bdrain line at oint along sa on union to th the subdrain t h the Standar d and shall b outfall .
rade .
of the subdra ompacted to RE 31 15 th r ’ s he nt ed he rs a ag he to rd be in a DEPA SHOU Janua 231.5 231.6 ARTMENT ULDER SUBD ary , 2015 MEASURE .1 The Qu the line .2 The Sh cap for .3 The ou finished BASIS OF .1 Paymen STAN of TRANS DRAIN MENT FOR P uantity to be ear metres of houlder subdr each continu tlet Structure d Foreslope g PAYMENT nt for Work un NDARD SP PORTATIO PAV PAYMENT measured for subdrain outl rain shall be m uous section o s shall be me grade .
nder this Item PECIFICAT ON and INF VEMENT STRUC r payment sh ets supplied a measured alo of installation .
easured sepa shall be at the TIONS FRASTRUC CTURE hall be the line and installed ong the centre .
arately as a un e Unit Price .
CTURE ear metres of in accordanc eline of the p nit complete f f Shoulder su ce with this Ite pipe from end from the T-se ITEM : 231 Page 231-3 ubdrain and em .
cap to end ection to the DEPA BITUM Janua 259.1 259.2 259.3 259.4 ARTMENT MINOUS TAC ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite Portlan MATERIAL .1 All mate .2 Tack co the pro SUBMITTA .1 The Co bitumin .2 The Co supplie CONSTRU .1 The Co specific .2 Bitumin applica .3 Distribu samplin .4 The Co transve .5 Bitumin .1 Imm sha .6 The Co any bitu .1 The .7 The RS of 0.15 .8 Tempe .9 Bitumin traffic s STAN of TRANS CK COAT TION em consists o d cement con LS erial shall be oat shall be R visions of AS ALS ontractor sha nous tack coa ontractor sha ed meet the sp CTION ontractor sha cally directed b nous pressure ation rates , an utors shall be ng valve .
ontractor may erse joint loca nous tack coa mediately prio all be swept c ontractor shal uminous tack e Contractor s S-1 or CRS-1 to 0.25 L/m2 rature of the b nous tack coa shall be divert NDARD SP PORTATIO PAV of supply and ncrete surface supplied by t RS-1 or CRS- TM D977 and all notify the t. ll submit , up pecified requi all carry out t by the Engine e distributors nd at a continu equipped wi y place the bit ations .
at shall be app or to the app clean .
l protect throu coat overspr shall be respo emulsion sh or as directed bituminous ta at shall be allo ted around fre PECIFICAT ON and INF VEMENT STRUC application of e. he Contracto -1 Grade asp d D2397 , resp Engineer at on request , t rements as d the Work as er .
shall be cap uous and unif th a tank gau tuminous tac plied only whe plication of the ugh traffic and ray .
onsible to rem all be applied d by the Engi ack coat when owed to cure eshly sprayed TIONS FRASTRUC CTURE f a bituminou or .
phalt emulsion pectively .
t least 3 Day the manufact detailed in the indicated in pable of app form rate both uge and meas k coat by bru en the surface e bituminous d adjacent Hi move any bitu d in a uniform neer .
n applied sha for such a tim d surfaces unt CTURE s tack coat o n and shall c ys in advanc turer 's certific e Contract Do the Contrac lying tack wi h longitudinal suring stick g ushing or spra e to be treate s tack coat , th ighway/Struct umen adherin m manner , wit ll be between me as approv til the bitumin n an asphalt onform in all ce of the ap cation that th cuments .
ct Documents thin ±5 % of ly and transv graduated in l aying at longi ed is dry .
he surface to ture appurten g to these su thout streakin n 38°C and 66 ved by the En nous tack coa ITEM : 259 Page 259-1 concrete or respects to pplication of e materials s and/or as established ersely .
itres , and a itudinal and o be treated nances from rfaces .
ng , at a rate 6°C .
ngineer , and t has set .
BIT Pag 259 259 259 TUMINOUS T ge 259-2 9.4 .10 Bitu widt .1 .2 .3 9.5 MEASU .1 The tack 9.6 BASIS O .1 Pay D TACK COAT minous tack c th is left open Bituminous inconvenienc The Work sh to within 200 of the Day 's W The Contract becomes fou REMENT FO Quantity to b k coat supplie OF PAYMENT ment for this DEPARTM coat applicati to traffic with tack coat a ce to the publ hall be planne 0 m of the tac Work .
tor shall be re uled due to we OR PAYMENT be measured d and applied T Work shall be STA ENT of TR PAVEMENT ST on widths sha h no tack coat applications ic and shall b ed so that tac cked length be esponsible to eather and/or T for payment d in accordan e at the Unit P ANDARD S RANSPORT RUCTURE all be such th t applied .
shall be st be kept within cked surfaces efore opening o reinstate an traffic .
shall be the ce with this It Price .
SPECIFICA TATION an hat approxima trictly limited the asphalt c s shall be cov g the Work A ny bituminous number of sq tem .
ATIONS d INFRAST ately one-half d in length , concrete Wor vered with as rea to traffic s tack-coated quare metres TRUCTURE ITEM : 25 January , 20 f the Paveme to minimiz k Area .
sphalt concret and at the en surface whic s of bituminou E 59 15 nt ze te nd ch us DEP ASPHA Janua Artic 260 .
260 .
260 .
260 .
PARTMENT ALT CONCR ary , 2015 cle .1 DESCRIP .2 MATERIA .1 Mater .1 As .2 Co .3 Fi .4 Bl .5 An .6 W .2 Produ .1 G .2 W .3 Bl .3 Comp .1 As .2 M .3 SUBMITTA .4 CONSTRU .1 Gener .2 Equip .1 Ge .2 M .3 As .4 Co .5 Th .6 Du .7 Sa .8 Ad .9 Ad .10 Su .11 Pla .12 Co .13 Ma S T of TRANS RETE – METH TION ........... LS ............... rial Properties sphalt Binder oarse Aggreg ne Aggregate ending Sand nti-stripping A WMA Material uction of Aggr rading Requir Washed Aggre ending Aggre position of Asp sphalt Binder ix Design ..... ALS ............. UCTION ....... ral ................ ment ............ eneral .......... ixing Plant ... sphalt Binder old Bins ....... hermometric E ust Collectors afety and Insp dditional Req dditional Requ urge Bins and acing Equipm ompaction Eq aterial Transfe STANDARD SPORTATI HOD SPECIF PAV CON ..................... ..................... s ................... .................... gate .............. e ................... .................... Admixtures ... ..................... regates ......... rements ....... egates ........... egates .......... phalt Concret Content ...... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... .....................
Storage ...... ..................... Equipment ... s ................... pection Requ uirements for uirements for d Storage Silo ment .............. quipment ....... er Vehicle ( M D SPECIFIC ON and IN ICATION VEMENT STRUC NTENTS ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... .................... ..................... ..................... ..................... te Mix ........... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... irements ...... r Batch Mix P Drum Mix Pla os … .............. ..................... ..................... MTV ) .............. CATIONS NFRASTRU CTURE ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... .................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... lants ............ ants .............. .................... ..................... ..................... ..................... UCTURE ..................... ..................... ..................... .................... ..................... ..................... .................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... .................... .................... ..................... .................... .................... ..................... .................... ..................... .................... .................... ..................... .................... .................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... .................... .................... ....................
Page 260-3 .
260-3 .
260-3 .
260-3 .
260-3 260-5 .
260-5 260-6 260-6 260-7 .
260-7 260-7 .
260-7 260-7 260-7 260-7 260-10 260-10 260-10 .
260-10 260-10 260-11 260-11 260-11 260-11 .
260-11 260-11 .
260-11 260-13 260-14 260-14 260-15 260-15 ITEM : 260 Page 260-1 AS Pag A 2 2 2 PHALT CON ge 260-2 Article 260.4 .3 Pro .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9 .1 .1 .1 .4 Qu .1 .2 .3 .5 Qu .1 .2 .3 .4 260.5 MEASU .1 Ge .2 Pa .3 Pa .4 Pa 260.6 BASIS D NCRETE – ME oduction and Handling an Physical Re Plant Calibr Mixing Time Moisture Co Transportat Timing of Pa Placing Asp Padding .... 0 Joints ...... .1 Genera .2 Transve .3 Transve .4 Longitu 1 Compactio 2 Additional uality Control Sampling an Control of A Compaction uality Assuran Asphalt Con Smoothness .1 Genera .2 Bump/D Surface Def Repairs ..... .1 Genera .2 Remova UREMENT FO eneral ........... ayment Adjust ayment Adjust ayment Adjust OF PAYMEN DEPARTM ETHOD SPEC C Placement o nd Stockpiling equirements fo ration and Tria es and Tempe ontent ........... ion of Asphal aving Operati phalt Concrete ..................... ..................... al ................... erse Construc erse Key Join dinal Constru on of Asphalt Requirement Testing ........ nd Testing of Asphalt Concr n Testing ...... nce Testing a ncrete Density s .................. al ................... Dip Profile Re fects ............. ..................... al ................... al and Replac OR PAYMEN ..................... tment for Den tment for Smo tment for Use NT ................ STA ENT of TR CIFICATION PAVEMENT ST CONTENTS f Asphalt Con g Aggregates or Asphalt Co al Mix ........... eratures ....... ..................... t Concrete ... ions .............. e ................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ction Joint .... nt .................. uction Joint ...
Concrete ..... ts for Bridge D ..................... Asphalt Conc rete Mix Produ ..................... nd Adjustmen y .................. ..................... ..................... equirement ... ..................... ..................... ..................... cement ......... NT ................. ..................... nsity .............. oothness ...... e of Material T ..................... ANDARD S RANSPORT RUCTURE ncrete Mix .... .................... oncrete ......... .................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... Deck Paving ..................... crete Mix ..... uction ........... .................... nts ................ ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... .....................
Transfer Vehic ..................... SPECIFICA TATION an ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... .................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... .................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... cle ( MTV ) .... ..................... ATIONS d INFRAST Page ..... 260-16 ..... 260-16 ..... 260-16 ..... 260-16 ..... 260-17 ..... 260-17 ..... 260-17 ...... 260-17 ...... 260-18 ...... 260-20 ...... 260-20 ..... 260-20 ..... 260-20 ..... 260-20 ...... 260-21 ..... 260-21 ..... 260-22 ..... 260-22 ..... 260-22 ..... 260-23 ..... 260-23 ..... 260-23 ..... 260-23 .... 260-26 .... 260-26 .... 260-26 .... 260-26 ..... 260-27 .... 260-27 ..... 260-27 .... 260-27 ..... 260-27 ...... 260-27 ...... 260-28 ..... 260-29 ..... 260-29 TRUCTURE ITEM : 26 January , 20 6 6 6 6 7 7 7 7 8 0 0 0 0 0 2 2 2 3 3 3 3 6 6 6 6 7 7 7 7 7 7 8 9 9 E 60 15 DEP ASPHA Janua 260.1 260.2 260.2 260.2 .
260.2 .
PARTMENT ALT CONCR ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite concret .2 The asp .1 Hot .2 Hot .3 Hot .4 Wa .5 Wa .6 Wa MATERIAL .1 Materia 1 .1 Asp .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 1 .2 Coa .1 .2 .3 S T of TRANS RETE – METH TION em consists of te .
phalt concrete t mixed aspha t mixed aspha t mixed aspha arm mixed asp arm mixed asp arm mixed asp S al Properties phalt Binder Asphalt bind The asphalt Performance M320 , Table .1 When th binder , a the WM When anti-s specified req The Contra accordance .1 The sam .2 Samplin Enginee arse Aggrega Coarse aggr The coarse hard , sound other soft or Coarse aggr ASTM C136 STANDARD SPORTATI HOD SPECIF PAV f the supply a e shall be iden alt concrete ba alt concrete ba alt concrete su phalt concrete phalt concrete phalt concrete der shall be su binder grade e Grade ( PG e 1 - Performa he selected W acceptance o A additive .
stripping adm quirements of ctor shall pr with ASTM D mple container ng shall be on er .
ate regate shall be aggregate sh , durable part disintegrated regate is the p 6 , and shall me D SPECIFIC ON and IN ICATION VEMENT STRUC nd placement ntified by the f ase mix – B. ase/surface m urface mix – D e base mix – W e base/surface e surface mix – upplied by the shall be as sp G ) asphalt b ance Graded WMA technolo of the asphalt mixtures are re 260.2.1.1.3 , a rovide one s D140 from the rs and labels n a random b e supplied by hall be prepar ticles , free fro d pieces , or ot portion retaine eet the physic CATIONS NFRASTRU CTURE t of hot mix as following mix mix – C. D. WMA-B .
e mix – WMA- – WMA-D. e Contractor .
pecified in the binder shall m Asphalt Bind ogy requires binder shall b required , the after the addit ample of as Contractor 's a shall be supp asis , as dete y the Contracto red by crushin om adherent c ther deleteriou ed on the 4.75 cal requireme UCTURE sphalt concre designations : -C. e Contract Do meet the req der Specificat additives to be based on t asphalt binde tion of the req sphalt binder asphalt binde plied by the En rmined by an or .
ng rock or gr coatings , shal us substances 5 mm sieve , t nts of Table 2 ete and warm : cuments .
quirements o ion .
be added to the samples t er grade sha quired admixtu per Contrac er storage tank ngineer .
nd in the pres ravel and sha le , clay , loam s. tested in acco 260-1 .
ITEM : 260 Page 260-3 mix asphalt of AASHTO the asphalt that contain all meet the ures .
ct , taken in ks .
sence of the all consist of , schist and ordance with AS Pag C F P A V V T D P F M P F C ≥ ≥ A N PHALT CON ge 260-4 Coarse Aggre Fine Aggregat Physical Req Air Voids % VMA % ( min ) Voids Filled w TSR ( Average TSR val Dust to Binder Physical Req Freeze/Thaw Micro-Deval % Petrographic N Flat & Elongat Crushed Parti ≥ 3 million Des ≥ 3 million Des Absorption % ( Note : Not ma D NCRETE – ME Sieve S ASTM Desi egate 25.0 19.0 16.0 12.5 9.5 m 6.3 m te 4.75 2.36 1.18 600 300 150 75 µ quirements F with Asphalt % e of Condition ues ) % ( min r Ratio quirements F % ( max ) 0.3 to < ≥ % ( max ) 0.3 to < ≥ No .
( max ) * 0.3 to < ≥ ted Particle 0.3 to < ≥ cles 0.3 to < sign ESALs ( sign ESALs ( ( max ) andatory , the O DEPARTM ETHOD SPEC Superpave A Size ignation mm mm mm mm mm mm mm mm mm µm µm µm µm or Asphalt C % ned & Freeze/ n ) ASTM D or Coarse A DTI Met 3 million Des 3 million Des MTO LS 3 million Des 3 million Des MTO LS 3 million Des 3 million Des % ( max @ DTI Meth 3 million Des 3 million Des DTI Met 3 million Des min % by wt. , min % by wt. , ASTM C Owner reserv STA ENT of TR CIFICATION PAVEMENT ST Table 2 Asphalt Conc Concrete /Thaw D4867 ggregate thod sign ESALs sign ESALs S - 618 sign ESALs sign ESALs S - 609 sign ESALs sign ESALs @ 4:1 ) hod sign ESALs sign ESALs hod sign ESALs , one face ) , two face ) 127 ves the right t ANDARD S RANSPORT RUCTURE 260-1 crete Mix Req Type B/WMA % ( b 100.0 84.0-98.0 72.0-94.0 60.0-87.0 51.0-75.0 41.0-66.0 34.0-60.0 22.0-50.0 12.0-42.0 6.0-32.0 3.0-20.0 2.0-8.0 2.0-6.0 3.0-5.0 13.5 70.0-75.0 80.0 0.6-1.2 16.0 14.0 20.0 18.0 250 230 25.0 20.0 60 95 80 1.50 o obtain a Pe SPECIFICA TATION an quirements A-B Type C by mass ) Pas 0 0 1 0 88.0 0 68.0 0 54.0 0 46.0 0 28.0 0 20.0 13.0 7.0 3.0 2.0 3.0 1 0 70.0 8 0.6 1 1 1 1 2 1 2 1 1 etrographic No ATIONS d INFRAST C/WMA-C Ty ssing Each S - - 00.0 0-98.0 0-90.0 0-77.0 0-69.0 0-58.0 0-50.0 0-40.0 0-27.0 0-10.0 0-6.0 0-5.0 14.5 0-75.0 80.0 6-1.2 14.0 12.0 16.0 15.0 200 180 20.0 15.0 70 95 80 1.50 o. TRUCTURE ITEM : 26 January , 20 ype D/WMA-D Sieve - - - 100.0 76.0-98.0 60.0-84.0 52.0-70.0 36.0-65.0 25.0-55.0 16.0-44.0 8.0-26.0 4.0-12.0 2.0-6.0 3.0-5.0 15.5 70.0-77.0 80.0 0.6-1.2 14.0 12.0 16.0 15.0 200 180 20.0 15.0 70 95 80 1.50 E 60 15 D DEP ASPHA Janua Tabl Phy Micr Unc Note 260.2 .
260.2 .
260.2 .
PARTMENT ALT CONCR ary , 2015 le 260-1 cont ysical Requir ro-Deval % ( m ompacted Vo e : The allowab Coarse Agg 1.2 .4 .5 1 .3 Fin .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 1 .4 Ble .1 .2 .3 .4 S T of TRANS RETE – METH inued ements For F max ) 0.3 to < 3 m ≥ 3 m oid Content % ble Micro-Dev gregate is ≤12 For  3 millio crushing the the retained C117 .
Coarse aggr e Aggregate Fine aggreg Fine aggreg sand and s shale , clay , substances .
Fine aggreg accordance Table 260-1 For  3 mill crushing the retained mat .1 Material fine agg Fine aggreg ending Sand Blending san Blending sa properties a before the m The maximu not exceed 1 Blending san cold feed at STANDARD SPORTATI HOD SPECIF PAV Fine Aggreg MTO LS - 6 million Design million Design % ( min ) ASTM val surface Fin 2.0 , provided t on Design ES e fraction reta d material pas regate may al ate shall be s ate shall be p hall consist o loam , schist gate shall be with ASTM .
ion Design E e fraction retai terial passes t produced as regate .
gate may also nd shall be su and shall be s outlined in material is inco um mass of b 10 % of the tot nd shall have the plant .
D SPECIFIC ON and IN ICATION VEMENT STRUC ate Ty 619 ESALs ESALs C1252 ne Aggregate that the Coars SALs , coarse ined on the 3 sses the 31.5 so be accepte upplied by the prepared by cr of hard , soun t and other s e the portion C117 and C1 ESALs , fine ag ined on the 6 the 6.3 mm si per 260.2.1.2 be accepted upplied by the e used to o Table 260-1 a orporated into blending sand tal mass .
100 % passin CATIONS NFRASTRU CTURE ype B/WMA-B 22.0 20.0 45.0 shall be Max se Aggregate aggregate m 31.5 mm sieve 5 mm sieve , ed or rejected e Contractor .
rushing rock o nd , durable p soft or disint n passing th 136 , and sha ggregate may .3 mm sieve , ieve , as deter 2.4 and passin or rejected o Contractor .
btain accepta and the sourc the asphalt c d to be used i ng the 9.5 mm UCTURE B Type C/W 18.0 17.0 45.0 % Loss=19.0 is from the sa ay be produc e , provided th as determin d on the basis or gravel or sc particles free tegrated piec he 4.75 mm all meet the p y be produce provided that rmined by AST ng the 4.75 m on the basis o able physica ce shall be ap concrete mix .
in the total as m sieve prior to WMA-C Type 0 0 0 0 , if the Micro- ame source .
ced from pit ru hat no more t ed by ASTM of past perfo creening a ma from adheren ces , or other sieve , when physical requ ed from pit ru t no more tha TM C136 and mm sieve may of past perform al asphalt co pproved by th sphalt concre o the introduc ITEM : 260 Page 260-5 e D/WMA-D 18.0 17.0 45.0 -Deval on un gravel by than 10 % of M C136 and rmance .
anufactured nt coatings , deleterious n tested in uirements in n gravel by an 5 % of the d C117 .
y be used as mance .
oncrete mix he Engineer te mix shall ction into the AS Pag 260 260 PHALT CON ge 260-6 0.2.1 .5 0.2.1 .6 D NCRETE – ME Anti-stripping .1 Anti-strip .1 The mix d .2 The O the W .2 The type delivery s WMA Materia .1 The Cont .2 The Con suppliers .3 The Con preparati .4 Other W mixes .
.5 The Engi the Work  E  E  A  G  A  C DEPARTM ETHOD SPEC Admixtures ping admixtur requirement f design stage .
Owner has ap Work .
and dosage slip .
als tractor shall s ntractor shall i s ’ instructions ntractor shall on , handling , WMA materials ineer has app k : Evotherm 3G Evotherm DAT Advera Gencor Ultrafo Astec Double Cecabase RT STA ENT of TR CIFICATION PAVEMENT ST res shall be su for an anti-stri pproved the a Approv of all asphalt upply all mate identify a fac for the use of obtain from storage and u s and the mix proved the fol T oam GX Barrel Green T 2N1 ANDARD S RANSPORT RUCTURE upplied by the ipping admixtu anti-stripping a Table 2 ved Anti-strip Produ Redicote Redicote C Redicote C Rediset LQ AD-here LO AD-here Pave Bond Travcor Innova Evotherm Cecabase binder anti-st erials required ility to produc f their materia the suppliers use of their m x composition lowing Warm Foaming SPECIFICA TATION an e Contractor .
ure is determ admixtures list 260-2 pping Admixt uct e 82-S C 3082 C-2914 Q-1102 OF 65-00 e 7700 d T Lite 4505 alt W m 3G RT 2N1 tripping admix d for productio ce the WMA ls .
s all informat materials .
n shall be as Mix Technolo  Sonne W  Cecabas  ALmix Fo  Meeker F  Rediset L ATIONS d INFRAST mined at the as ted in Table 2 tures xtures shall b on of WMA .
mix in accord ion required s specified fo ogies listed b Warmmix se RT oaming Syste Foaming Syst LQ TRUCTURE ITEM : 26 January , 20 sphalt concret 260-2 for use be noted on th dance with th for the prope or convention below for use ems tems E 60 15 te in he he er al in DEP ASPHA Janua 260.2 260.2 260.2.3 260.2.3 260.2 .
260.2 .
PARTMENT ALT CONCR ary , 2015 .2 Produc .1 Gra .1 .2 Wa .1 .3 Ble .1 .2 .3 Compo 3 .1 Asp .1 3 .2 Mix 3.2 .1 3.2 .2 S T of TRANS RETE – METH tion of Aggreg ading Require Pit run grav aggregates .
ashed Aggreg Washed ma hours to allo uniform mois ending Aggreg Blending of increase the Blending sha graded prod osition of Asph phalt Binder C For the pur assume an a .1 Asphalt .2 Asphalt .3 Asphalt .4 Asphalt .5 Asphalt .6 Asphalt x Design Responsibili .1 Prepara Owner ’ s .1 The test carr Requiremen .1 The Des asphalt Table 26 STANDARD SPORTATI HOD SPECIF PAV gates ements vel or quarrie ates aterials or mat ow free water sture content .
gates aggregates s e percentage o all be perform uct .
halt Concrete Content rpose of esta asphalt binder concrete “ B ” : concrete “ C ” : concrete “ D ” : concrete “ WM concrete “ WM concrete “ WM ity for Design ation and subm s approval is t e Contractor s ing Laborator ry out the des nts for Design sign Mix Form binder and a 60-1 .
D SPECIFIC ON and IN ICATION VEMENT STRUC ed rock shall terials excava to drain from hall be allowe of crushed pa med at the asp Mix ablishing the r content for th 4.8 5.7 6.0 MA-B ” : 4.8 MA-C ” : 5.7 MA-D ” : 6.0 Mix Formula mission of the the responsib shall use Profe ry to assess t sign of the asp n Mix Formula mula is the Lab aggregates to CATIONS NFRASTRU CTURE be crushed ated from und the aggregat ed only to me articles .
phalt plant col Unit Price fo he asphalt co % of the total % of the total % of the tota % of the total % of the total % of the total a e asphalt Des bility of the Co essional Eng the aggregate phalt concrete a boratory dete be blended UCTURE and separat derwater shall te and to allow eet the gradin ld feed units t or asphalt co oncrete mix as specified ton specified ton al specified ton specified ton specified ton specified ton sign Mix Form ontractor .
ineering serv e materials pr e mix .
rmination of t together to m ed into coars be stored for w the materia g requiremen to produce a oncrete the B s follows : nage .
nage .
nnage .
nage .
nage .
nage .
mula ( DMF ) fo ices and a qu roposed for us he precise pro meet the requ ITEM : 260 Page 260-7 se and fine r at least 24 al to attain a nts and/or to consistently Bidder shall or the ualified se and to oportions of uirements in AS Pag 260 260 PHALT CON ge 260-8 0.2.3.2.2.1 0.2.3.2 D NCRETE – ME .1 T S S A H .3 Approval .1 All su .2 The of the and t .1 S a . . .2 S E n .3 The the E .1 A s .2 T .3 T i .4 T b .5 O .6 A m r a .7 S ( 0 .8 A DEPARTM ETHOD SPEC The asphalt co Superpave V Standard Pra AASHTO T31 Hot-Mix Aspha of Design Mi ubmissions sh material samp e source , pit/q the type/size o Sampling of asphalt concre 1 At least 3 Quantity f 2 At least 2 Quantity f Sampling of th Engineer and normal workin Contractor sh Engineer for a A list of all co source ( s ) , asp The average g The percentag n the asphalt The asphalt c blending sand Other charact All Superpave mass , graphs relative densit asphalt absorp Samples of ( 10 ) -18 kg sa 0.5 L of anti-st A sample of th STA ENT of TR CIFICATION PAVEMENT ST oncrete mix d Volumetric De actice for Mi 12 Standard M alt ( HMA ) spe x Formula / A hall include th ples shall be quarry ID num of the materia the aggregat ete mix produ 30 % of each for the mix des 2 000 t of eac for the mix des he aggregate delivered to ng hours .
hall submit the pproval at a lo onstituent ma phalt binder so gradation of e ge by mass o concrete mix oncrete mix d d ) .
eristics of the e mix design c used in arriv ty of each ind ption of the co the aggreg mples of fine tripping admix he asphalt bin ANDARD S RANSPORT RUCTURE design shall fo esign for Hot xture Condit Method for P ecimens by me Aggregate Sou e Contract nu tagged and in mber as indica al .
tes for the D ction for the y h aggregate t signation is le ch aggregate signation exce shall be done the Owner ’ s e DMF includ ocation ( s ) des aterials , includ ource ( s ) and a each aggregat of each aggreg .
design gradat combined ag characteristics ving at the fin ividual materi ombined aggr gate : ( 8 ) -18 e aggregate , ( xture , if neces nder ( 4 L/mix ) .
SPECIFICA TATION an ollow AASHTO t-Mix Asphalt tioning of Ho Preparing and eans of Supe urce Approval umber .
ndicate the Co ated by the En DMF/aggregat year shall not type is in sto ess than 10 00 e type is in st eeds 10 000 t e by the Contr Central Labo ding the follow signated by th ding aggregat anti-stripping te to be used gate ( including tion of the com ggregate spec s , including bu nal asphalt co al and the co regates .
kg sample ( 2 ) -18 kg sam ssary. . ATIONS d INFRAST O R35 Standa t ( HMA ) , AAS ot-Mix Aspha Determining erpave Gyrato l ontract numb ngineer , the sa te source ap be undertake ockpile , when 00 t ; or tockpile , when t. ractor in the p ratory in Fred wing informati he Engineer .
te source ( s ) , admixture sou in the asphalt g blending sa mbined aggre cified in Table ulk relative de oncrete mix d mbined aggre es of coars mples of blend TRUCTURE ITEM : 26 January , 20 ard Practice fo SHTO R30-0 alt ( HMA ) an the density o ry Compactor er , the locatio ample locatio pproval for th en until : n the tendere n the tendere presence of th dericton , durin on/materials t blending san urce ( s ) .
t concrete mix and ) to be use egate ( includin 260-1. nsity specime esign , the bu egates , and th se aggregat ding sand , an E 60 15 or 02 nd of r. on n , he ed ed he ng to nd x. ed ng en ulk he e , nd DEP ASPHA Janua 260.2.3 260.2.3 PARTMENT ALT CONCR ary , 2015 3.2.3.3 3.2 .4 S T of TRANS RETE – METH .9 In o ( 3 ) -1 18 k be d .4 The Eng evaluatio .1 The des of th .1 .5 If the DM .1 The why .2 The Eng .6 The En Contrac .7 Once th combine furnace .1 The Lab .2 The app .8 The Co Contrac Contrac .1 Tes Lab Job Mix Form .1 The Job 4.75 mm shall pro .1 The usin .2 The Des DMF .
STANDARD SPORTATI HOD SPECIF PAV order to cal 18 kg sample kg sample of b delivered to a gineer shall r on by the Ow e evaluation ign , moisture he coarse and In case of dis blending san MF does not m e Engineer sh y the DMF faile e Contractor s gineer for appr gineer shall tor receiving w he DMF has ed aggregates to be used fo e Engineer sh oratory .
e Engineer sh roval of the D ontractor shal tor submits fo t conventiona ting costs inc oratory Rate S mula b Mix Formu m and 75 µm oduce the des e JMF is esta ng the plant pr sign Asphalt B D SPECIFIC ON and IN ICATION VEMENT STRUC librate the ig es of coarse a blending sand lab designate require up to ner ’ s Laborato period shall sensitivity te d fine aggrega screpancy in t d ( s ) , the Engi meet the requ hall provide a ed .
shall then prov roval .
not accept a written approv been appro s and a samp r the quality a hall deliver t all complete DMF .
l be respons or evaluation al mix designa curred by the Schedule ula ( JMF ) es sieve fraction sired asphalt c blished by pr roposed for th Binder Conte CATIONS NFRASTRU CTURE gnition oven aggregate , ( 3 ) d , and 3 L/mix ed by the Eng 8 Days from ory .
include verif sting , and ve ates and blend the bulk relativ ineer 's results irements of T a written expla vide another any asphalt val of the DMF ved , the Eng le of the asph assurance .
the calibration calibration of sible to pay more than o ation .
e Owner sha stablishes the ns of the agg concrete mix p roducing one he Work .
ent is the asph UCTURE n , additional -18 kg sampl x of asphalt bi ineer .
m the time of fication of th erification of th ding sand ( s ) .
ve density va s shall prevail .
Table 260-1 it anation to the complete DM concrete mix F from the En gineer shall halt binder for n samples to f the ignition f the Owner ’ s one asphalt c all be charge e single defi regate and fo properties und or more trial halt binder co samples are es of fine agg nder , shall be f receipt of th e asphalt co he bulk relativ lues of the ag .
shall be rejec e Contractor MF and re-sub x produced p ngineer .
prepare sam calibration of o the quality furnace within associated c concrete mix ed as per DT nite percenta or the asphalt der field cond l asphalt conc ontent establis ITEM : 260 Page 260-9 e required : gregate , ( 1 ) - e required to he DMF , for oncrete mix ve densities ggregates or cted .
that details bmit it to the prior to the ples of the f the ignition y assurance n 3 Days of costs if the design per TI Standard age for the t binder that itions .
crete mixes shed by the AS Pag 260 260 260 260 260 260 PHALT CON ge 260-10 0.2.3.2.4 0.3 SUBMIT .1 The fine .1 .2 The prod .3 The .1 .2 .3 .4 .4 Othe spec .5 Sub 0.4 CONST 0.4 .1 Gen .1 0.4 .2 Equ 0.4.2 .1 D NCRETE – ME .3 The the J .4 The conc TTALS Contractor sh aggregate for The Contract Fredericton , N Contractor duction of the Contractor sh The Contract sample of an The Contract for PG aspha The Contract delivery slip f If the source submit in wri Work .
er submittals cific phase of mittals are req RUCTION neral The Contract specifically di ipment General .1 Equipme paving op .2 The Con pertaining DEPARTM ETHOD SPEC Approved As MF .
Actual Asph crete mix as de hall submit , in r approval by tor shall be r NB Central La shall notify t asphalt concr hall submit in tor shall supp ny proposed a tor shall supp alt binders .
tor shall subm for each tanke of supply of ting , this pro are required f the Work bein quired in acco tor shall carry rected by the nt shall be o perations star ntractor shall g to the Work STA ENT of TR CIFICATION PAVEMENT ST sphalt Binder alt Binder C etermined by n writing , the p the Engineer responsible to aboratory duri he Engineer rete mix .
writing , the pr ply , upon requ admixtures , in ly , upon requ mit at the time er load of asp the asphalt b posed chang for this Item a ng undertaken ordance with a y out the Wo Engineer .
on site and a rt .
provide safe .
ANDARD S RANSPORT RUCTURE Content is th ontent is the ignition furna proposed sou .
o deliver all s ng normal wo 3 Days in a roposed supp uest , a sampl n a volume pro est , the optim e of delivery phalt binder .
binder change e prior to usi and are conta n. any cross-refe rk as indicate available for e access to SPECIFICA TATION an he asphalt bin e asphalt bin ce results .
urce ( s ) of supp samples obta orking hours .
advance of t plier of the asp le of the asp oportional to t mum mixing an to the plant t es during the ng the new a ained within th erenced Item ed in the Con inspection , te the plant an ATIONS d INFRAST nder content nder content ply of coarse ained for test the commenc phalt binder .
phalt binder ( 2 the asphalt b nd compactio the refinery ce e Work , the C asphalt binde he sections ap forming part o ntract Docum esting and a nd Equipment TRUCTURE ITEM : 26 January , 20 determined b in the aspha aggregate an ting to the DT cement of th 2 L/mix ) and inder sample on temperatur ertification an Contractor sha er supply in th pplicable to th of this Item .
ents and/or a pproval befor t for purpose E 60 15 by alt nd TI he a . e , nd all he he as re es DEP ASPHA Janua 260.4.2 260.4.2 260.4.2 260.4.2 260.4.2 260.4.2 260.4.2 PARTMENT ALT CONCR ary , 2015 2 .2 Mix .1 2 .3 Asp .1 .2 2 .4 Co .1 .2 .3 2 .5 The .1 2 .6 Dus .1 .2 2 .7 Saf .1 2 .8 Add .1 .2 .3 S T of TRANS RETE – METH xing Plant The asphalt and the Con phalt Binder S Tanks for s maintaining the temperat Heating sha ld Bins Cold bins sh individual ga aggregate .
Compartmen minimum ga An individua and intermin ermometric Eq An armoured feed line ne tank .
st Collectors Plants shall all environm of Canada , agencies hav Plants equip return all or in Tables 26 fety and Inspe Safe and ad mixer units a ditional Requi A rotary drye The dryer ca Plant scree proportioning STANDARD SPORTATI HOD SPECIF PAV mixing plant ntract Docume Storage storage of as it within the r ture recomme ll be by a mea hall be divide ate control to nt dimension ate opening of al compartme ngling of aggre quipment d thermomete ar the discha be equipped ental regulatio the Province ving jurisdictio pped with a ba a portion of th 0-1 and 260-3 ection Require equate stairw and other plan irements for B er designed fo apacity shall b ens capable g each type o D SPECIFIC ON and IN ICATION VEMENT STRUC and its compo ents .
sphalt binder range of  25° ended by the a ans such that ed into not le enable accura s shall be s f 50 mm .
nt shall be pr egates shall n er reading from arge valve at with a Dust c ons including e of New Bru on .
aghouse dust c he fines as re 3. ements ways , ladders a nt units where Batch Mix Plan or drying and be sufficient to of efficient of asphalt mix CATIONS NFRASTRU CTURE onents shall m r shall be c °C from the o asphalt binde no flame sha ess than three rate and abso such as to p rovided for ea not be permitte m 90°C to 200 the mixer un collecting syst but not limited unswick , and collection sys equired to mee and platforms inspection an nts heating miner o heat aggreg screening of shall be prov UCTURE meet the requ apable of he optimum mixin er supplier .
all contact the e compartme olute proportio promote free ach aggregat ed .
0°C shall be f it and in eac tem and this s d to those init d/or municipa tem shall be a et the ranges s shall be prov nd sampling a ral aggregate ates to the re f aggregates ided .
P uirements of A eating the m ng temperatur asphalt binde nts ; each eq oning of each flow of mate te type ( i.e .
c ixed in the as h asphalt bin system must c tiated by the G l and/or loca able to waste and tolerance vided for acces re required .
s shall be pro quired tempe s to sizes r ITEM : 260 Page 260-11 ASTM D995 material and re based on er .
uipped with size of cold erial with a coarse , fine ) phalt binder der storage comply with Government al regulatory or uniformly es indicated ss to trucks , ovided .
ratures .
required for AS Pag 260 PHALT CON ge 260-12 0.4.2.8.3 . . . D NCRETE – ME .1 Scre .2 Aggr 4.75 4.75 .3 Carry and/o and s .4 Each pla .1 Bins opera .2 Each when .1 W l .3 Each locat .4 Gate .5 Com samp .5 Equipme weighing .6 Gates on .7 Scales fo accurate .8 After plan Engineer Engineer .9 Satisfacto the mix a 10 Asphalt streams o 11 All plants temperat 12 Plant sha mix .
.1 The disch DEPARTM ETHOD SPEC ens shall be k regates shall mm sieve ) mm sieve ) .
y-over for any or the amoun shall not vary nt shall conta shall be div ation of the pl h hot storage n the aggrega When automa evel of the ag h compartmen tion to prevent es on hot stora partments sh ples as the ag nt shall includ box or hoppe n the hopper s or weighing ag to 2.0 % throu nt set up and r , batching pl r. ory means sh at the specified binder shall over full lengt s shall be eq ture of the agg all include a b mixer shall harged .
STA ENT of TR CIFICATION PAVEMENT ST kept clean and be screene ) is stored y mix , defined t of sand whic by more than in a minimum vided into co ant .
bin shall cont ate level falls b atic batching c ggregate , in an nt shall be pro t backing up o age bins shall all be provide ggregate is dis de a means f er of ample siz shall be constr ggregate sha ugh the workin prior to batch lant scales s hall be provide d temperature be delivered h or width of m quipped with gregate at the batch mixer c be construc ANDARD S RANSPORT RUCTURE d in good repa ed such tha separately d as the amo ch enters the n ±5 % from th m of 2 hot stora ompartments tain a sensing below one-thir controls are in ny hot bin in u ovided with an of material into be constructe ed with suitab scharged .
for accurately ze to hold a fu ructed to prev all be accurate ng range .
hing materials shall be teste ed to deliver t e. to the mixer mixer .
a recording t e drier dischar capable of pr cted to preve SPECIFICA TATION an air .
at the stone from the sa ount of stone stone bins , in e established age bins .
of sufficient g device to in rd of the capa n use , batchin use , falls below n overflow chu o other compa ed to prevent ble means of o y weighing ag ull batch withou vent leakage w e to 0.5 % and and wheneve ed for accura the required Q r in a thin u thermometer rge chute .
roducing a co ent leakage ATIONS d INFRAST portion ( ret and portion which enters n no case sha d value .
t size to allo ndicate , at the acity of the bin ng shall not ta w one third fu ute of such si artments .
leakage whe obtaining repr ggregate from ut running ove when closed .
d for asphalt er deemed ne acy in the pr Quantity of as niform sheet or pyrometer onsistent and of contents TRUCTURE ITEM : 26 January , 20 tained on th ( passing th s the sand bin all exceed 20 % ow continuou e control pane n. ake place if th ull .
ze and at suc n closed .
resentative te m each bin in er .
binder shall b ecessary by th resence of th sphalt binder t or in multip r to record th homogeneou until batch E 60 15 he he ns % us el , he ch st a be he he to le he us is DEP ASPHA Janua 260.4.2 260.4.2 PARTMENT ALT CONCR ary , 2015 2.8.12 2 .9 Add .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9 .10 S T of TRANS RETE – METH .2 The mix specified ditional Requi Each cold fe Plant contro proportional .1 Monitors A means of flow of aggr bin should st Screens sha entering the The conveyo up of materia The total flow .1 The Con flow sha content remain c The weighin have provisi the drum .
.1 Scales f be accu .2 The asp tempera The heating and damage .1 The sys tempera .2 The asp requirem Table 1 The mixing homogeneo The method designed , co or loss of the STANDARD SPORTATI HOD SPECIF PAV xer gate shall d mixing time irements for D eed bin shall h ol shall be s control .
s indicating in warning the egate and as top flowing .
all be installe drum .
or belt with a al on the belt .
w of aggregat ntractor shall all be interlock so that the p constant .
ng systems fo on to enable for weighing a rate to 2.0 % t phalt binder s ature and relat of the aspha e to the aspha stem shall be ature at discha phalt binder ments of the - Performanc period and us mix at the d used to tran onstructed an e mix .
D SPECIFIC ON and IN ICATION VEMENT STRUC be equipped w has elapsed .
Drum Mix Plan have a variabl uch that agg dividual cold f plant operato sphalt binder c d on the con load cell sha te shall be me ensure , moni ked with the a proportions of or aggregates easy samplin aggregate sha through the w system shall tive density .
lt mix shall be alt binder .
e equipped w arge .
recovered by Pressure Agi ce Graded Asp temperature required mix t nsfer the mix nd operated s CATIONS NFRASTRU CTURE with a timing nts e speed belt f gregate feed feed bin feede or shall be pr can be stopp nveyor system all be equippe easured by an itor and main asphalt pump f aggregate a s and the met ng and calibra all be accurat working range .
have provisio e controlled to with automati y extraction f ing Vessel ( P phalt Binder S shall be su temperature .
from the drum o that there s UCTURE lock which sh feeder as wel shall have b er speeds sha rovided on ea ped if the mate m to prevent o ed with a belt n electronic we tain the syste and correcte and asphalt b tering system ation without h te to 0.5 % and ons to compe o prevent the ic burner con from the asp PAV ) as spec Specification .
ch as to pro m mixer to th shall be no se P hall lock the g l as an adjust both individua all be required ach aggregate erial from any oversized ma cleaner to pr eighing system em so that the d for aggrega binder entering m for asphalt having the ma d for asphalt ensate for flu fracture of the ntrols indicati phalt mix sha cified in AASH oduce a con he haulage un egregation of , ITEM : 260 Page 260-13 ate until the table gate .
al and total d. e bin so the y aggregate aterials from revent build- m. e aggregate ate moisture g the mixer binder shall aterial enter binder shall ctuations in e aggregate ng the mix all meet the HTO M320 , nsistent and nits shall be damage to AS Pag 260 260 PHALT CON ge 260-14 0.4.2 .10 0.4.2 .11 D NCRETE – ME Surge Bins a .1 Surge bi damage .2 Storage temperat .1 Over .3 Surge bin .4 When the maintaine Placing Equip .1 Mechanic cross-Slo .2 Pavers s of the scr .3 Pavers s without s thickness .1 Scre scree .4 The Cont .5 Pavers s grade an .1 The pave longi .2 The equiv .1 A m .3 A ca pave .6 Longitudi .7 Vibrating used in p .1 Hydr width DEPARTM ETHOD SPEC nd Storage S ns and stora or segregate silos equippe ture without lo rnight storage ns and storag e plant is in c ed above the pment cal self-power ope .
hall be equipp reeds .
hall be equipp segregation a s and in width eds shall be ed and screed tractor shall p shall be equip d transverse S longitudinal g er and be cap tudinal joints .
Contractor s valent for long A joint matchi mats placed a alibrated Slop er .
inal grade con hydraulic sc placing mat wi raulic strike-o hs outside of t STA ENT of TR CIFICATION PAVEMENT ST ilos age silos , and the mix .
ed with a he ocalized overh in the silos sh e silos shall b continuous op one-third cap red pavers sh ped with hopp ped with vibra and with a sm s from 3 to 5 equipped wit d extensions .
provide a 3 m pped with aut Slope .
grade control pable of prov shall use a gitudinal grade ing shoe may adjacent to the e indicator sh ntrol shall be u creed extensio dths greater t off extensions the driving Lan ANDARD S RANSPORT RUCTURE d their comp eating system heating .
hall not be pe be equipped w peration , the m pacity level .
hall be capable pers and distri ating screeds mooth and un m. th heaters wh straight edge tomatic scree shall be equ viding longitud minimum 12 e control .
y be used to e original mat .
hall be instal used on all lift ons and vibra than 3 m. s are only ac nes .
SPECIFICA TATION an ponents shall m shall be c ermitted .
with mix level i minimum leve e of spreading ibuting screws and shall be c niform texture hich are capa with each pav ed controls fo uipped to ope dinal grade c 2 m ski/floati control longit .
led in a read ts .
ating bolt-on cceptable whe ATIONS d INFRAST be designed capable of m indicators .
el of mix in th g mix true to s to place mix capable of sp ed surface , t able of prehea ver .
or the control erate from eith control as we ng beam or tudinal grade dily visible loc screed exten en laying ma TRUCTURE ITEM : 26 January , 20 d so as not t maintaining th he silo must b line , grade an x evenly in fro preading mixe to the require ating the entir of longitudin her side of th ell as matchin r an approve of subseque cation on eac nsions shall b ats of irregula E 60 15 to he be nd nt s , ed re al he ng ed nt ch be ar DEP ASPHA Janua 260.4.2 260.4.2 260.4.2 PARTMENT ALT CONCR ary , 2015 2.11.7 2 .12 Co .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 2 .13 Ma .1 .2 S T of TRANS RETE – METH .2 Screed c mpaction Equ All rollers sh Rollers shall Steel wheele water to the Pneumatic-t tire inflation All rollers wit adhering to t .1 Hydroca Compaction .1 Vibratory .2 Pneuma .1 A co the v .2 Pav tired .3 Steel-dr .1 Use aterial Transfe Material tra asphalt conc characteristi .1 Minimum .2 A conve paver ho .3 An auge asphalt The Contrac asphalt conc STANDARD SPORTATI HOD SPECIF PAV cut off shoes uipment all be of types l be in good co ed rollers sha wheels to pre ired rollers sh pressure .
th rubber tires the rubber tire arbon fuels or Equipment s y roller atic tire roller ombination st vibratory and ving in echelo d rollers .
um tandem fin e of a steel-dru r Vehicle ( MT nsfer vehicle crete from the cs : m storage cap eyor system t opper insert ; a er system in concrete prior ctor has the o crete , with com D SPECIFIC ON and IN ICATION VEMENT STRUC may be used s specifically d ondition and c all be equippe event adhesio hall be self-pr s shall be equ es .
solvents shall hall consist of eel-drum vibr pneumatic ro on on the driv nish roller um finish rolle TV ) es shall be s e hauling equ pacity of 20 t ; to transfer as and the MTV or r to discharge ption of using mpensation pe CATIONS NFRASTRU CTURE when placing designed for a capable of rev ed with a me on of the asph ropelled with uipped with a m l not be used .
f at least one ratory/pneuma ollers .
ving lanes sha er on base cou self-propelled ipment into th sphalt concret paddle mixe e from the hop g a material tr er 260.5.4 he UCTURE g widths less t asphalt comp versing withou eans of suppl alt mix .
a mechanica means to prev of each of the atic tire roller all require the urses shall be d Equipment he paver , and te from the h ers in the ho pper insert .
ransfer vehicle erein .
P than 3 m. action .
ut backlash .
lying a contro al means of a vent the asph e following : may be used e use of two e optional .
capable of d shall have th hauling equipm pper insert to e for the plac ITEM : 260 Page 260-15 olled flow of djusting the halt mix from d in place of pneumatic- transferring he following ment to the o remix the ement of all AS Pag 260 260 260 260 PHALT CON ge 260-16 0.4 .3 Prod 0.4.3 .1 0.4.3 .2 0.4.3 .3 D NCRETE – ME duction and P Handling and .1 The coa separate .2 Stockpile that segr .3 Segregat .4 Productio produced Engineer .5 Aggregat separate .6 Mixing of be permit Physical Req .1 Once the asphalt c A A P P .2 For the p Plant Calibrat .1 The Cont .2 A trial m testing by .3 Continuo Engineer specified .4 Trial mixe unless ot DEPARTM ETHOD SPEC Placement of A d Stockpiling A rse aggregat ly .
es shall be pla egation and c ted or contam on of asphalt d and in stoc r. tes shall be sizes .
f materials or tted .
quirements fo e JMF has be concrete mix to Air Voids Asphalt Binde Percent Pass Percent Pass plant mix , the tion and Trial tractor shall p mix based on y the Enginee ous placemen r is satisfied requirements es are the pro therwise autho STA ENT of TR CIFICATION PAVEMENT ST Asphalt Concr Aggregates te , fine aggre aced on a leve contamination minated stockp concrete sha ckpile , unless loaded into loading of mo r Asphalt Con een designate o the mix con Test Prope er Content sing 4.75 mm sing 75 µm Sie TSR shall me Mix provide to the the Design M er and shall on t of asphalt c that the mix s. operty of the orized by the ANDARD S RANSPORT RUCTURE rete Mix egate and b el , well drained does not occ piles shall not all not comme s specifically cold feed bin ore than one t ncrete ed by the En trol tolerances Table 2 Acceptance erties Sieve eve eet the requir Engineer a co Mix Formula nly be carried concrete in th x properties Contractor an Engineer for t SPECIFICA TATION an blending sand d base and co cur .
be incorporat ence until all designated o ns so as to type of mater ngineer , the C s as shown in 260-3 e Criteria rements of Ta opy of the plan shall be prep out during no he Work shall are in accor nd shall be pl the purpose o ATIONS d INFRAST d shall each onstructed in ted into the W of the aggre otherwise in prevent the rial into a sing Contractor sh n Tables 260- Criteria 2.50 % – 5.00 JMF ± 0.40 JMF ± 6.0 JMF ± 1.0 able 260-1. nt calibration .
pared by the ormal working only be perm rdance with aced outside of padding or TRUCTURE ITEM : 26 January , 20 be stockpile such a manne Work .
gate types ar writing by th intermixing o gle bin shall no all produce a 1 and 260-3 .
0 % 0 0 0 Contractor fo hours .
mitted after th the applicab the Work Sit patching .
E 60 15 ed er re he of ot an or he le e , DEP ASPHA Janua 260.4.3 260.4.3 260.4.3 260.4.3 PARTMENT ALT CONCR ary , 2015 3 .4 Mix .1 .2 .3 .4 3 .5 Mo .1 .2 3 .6 Tra .1 .2 .3 .4 3 .7 Tim .1 S T of TRANS RETE – METH xing Times an For batch p into the pug where all of The mixing t all of the agg Mixing temp concrete mix temperature .1 The max tempera .2 The max additive During pavin Contract .
oisture Conten The maximu from the mix The aggrega not limited to ansportation o Trucks for t foreign mate Loads shall boxes and b or shielded t Truck boxes as required , .1 Hydroca Tarpaulins s prior to dum ming of Paving Paving oper lifted or cont Engineer .
STANDARD SPORTATI HOD SPECIF PAV nd Temperatur lants , the we mill , shall be the aggregate time for drum gregate is tho perature for all x when discha requirement ximum mixing ature recomme ximum mixing supplier .
ng operations nt um moisture c xing unit shall ate shall be d o : the presenc of Asphalt Con transporting a erials .
be covered w be tied down o to prevent air s may be light but must be r arbon fuels or shall be rolled ping the load g Operations rations shall n tinue after the D SPECIFIC ON and IN ICATION VEMENT STRUC res t mixing time 35 seconds , e is thoroughly mix plants sh roughly coate l types of plan arged from th of the DMF , u g temperature ended by the g temperature the Contracto content allow not exceed 0. ried sufficient ce of foaming , ncrete asphalt concr with tarpaulins on three sides infiltration .
tly lubricated raised and dra solvents shal back and the into the mate not commence e dates specif CATIONS NFRASTRU CTURE e , beginning w longer if requ y coated with hall be such to ed with aspha nts shall be su he mixer unit unless otherw for Hot Mix A asphalt binde of the WMA or shall produc wed in the asp .10 % .
tly so that visu slumping or S rete mixes s s of sufficient s s and the fron with an envir ained after ea ll not be used e asphalt con erial transfer v e in the spring fied in Table 2 UCTURE when the asp uired , to produ asphalt binde o produce a h lt binder .
uch that the te shall be contr wise authorized Asphalt Concr er supplier .
mix shall be a ce only aspha phalt concrete ual evidence Stripping of th shall have tig size to overha nt shall be tig ronmentally a ach application .
ncrete shall be vehicle or the p g until the DT 260-4 without P phalt binder is uce a homog er .
homogeneous emperature of rolled within ± d by the Engin rete shall be 1 as specified b alt concrete m e mix as it is of moisture , s e mix , does n ght , metal bo ang the fully lo ht to the box cceptable rele n and before l e uncovered i paver .
TI Weight Res written permi ITEM : 260 Page 260-17 s introduced eneous mix s mix where f the asphalt ± 5°C of the neer .
65°C or the by the WMA mix ( es ) in the discharged such as , but not occur .
xes free of oaded truck of the truck ease agent , loading .
immediately trictions are ission of the AS Pag 260 260 PHALT CON ge 260-18 0.4.3.7 0.4.3 .8 D NCRETE – ME G .2 Paving o altered by .3 The plac commenc entire mil Placing Asph .1 The Cont .1 Asph preci .2 Whe to be .2 When pa water and .3 All prepa asphalt c .1 Milled in ac .4 Existing surfaces Documen .1 The prepa .5 Contact e and Bridg concrete .6 The temp initial com .7 The temp initial com .8 The max temperat DEPARTM ETHOD SPEC Coun Gloucester , M Restigouche All oth operations sh y written appr cement of the cement of the lled surface ha halt Concrete tractor shall p halt concrete ipitation .
n placing asp e overlaid sha aving on an A d at least 300 ared surfaces concrete .
d and aged a ccordance with approaches or other Str nts or as direc removed ma ared as identi edges of exis ge Structures .
perature of th mpaction .
perature of the mpaction .
ximum temper ture recomme STA ENT of TR CIFICATION PAVEMENT ST Cut nty Madawaska , e , Victoria hers hall only be roval by the E new asphalt e cold milling as received a place asphalt c e shall not phalt concrete ll be a minimu Aggregate Ba 0 m of prepare shall be clea asphalt concre h Item 259 pri to railway c uctures , shal cted by the En aterials shall fied in the Co sting mats and shall receive e hot mixed a e warm mixed rature of the h ended by the a ANDARD S RANSPORT RUCTURE Table 260 t-off Dates fo Su O O conducted du ngineer .
t concrete mix operation and lift of asphalt concrete on a be placed e surface mix , um of 5C .
ase , the Aggr ed base shall b ned of loose ete surfaces s or to the plac crossings and l be removed ngineer .
be disposed ontract Docum d contact face e an applicatio asphalt concre d asphalt conc hot mixed asp asphalt binder SPECIFICA TATION an 0-4 or Paving urface mixes October 07 October 22 uring Dayligh x shall comm d shall contin concrete .
a dry surface .
under adver , the surface regate Base m be maintained or foreign ma shall be treate ing of asphalt d bridges , or d to the dept of and the ments or as dir es of curb , gu on of tack coa rete shall be a crete shall be phalt concrete r supplier .
ATIONS d INFRAST Bas Oct Octo ht hours unle mence within 1 nue on a daily rse weather temperature must be free d ahead of pa aterial prior to ed with bitumi t concrete .
r areas adjac ths shown on exposed sur rected by the utters , manho at before plac a minimum of e a minimum o e mix shall be TRUCTURE ITEM : 26 January , 20 e mixes ober 22 ober 31 ess specifical 14 Days of th y basis until th conditions o of the materi from standin avers .
o placing of th inous tack co cent to pave n the Contra rfaces shall b Engineer .
oles , Sidewalk cing the aspha f 115°C prior t of 90°C prior t e 165°C or th E 60 15 lly he he of al ng he at ed ct be ks alt to to he DEP ASPHA Janua 260.4.3 PARTMENT ALT CONCR ary , 2015 3.8 .9 .10 .11 .12 .13 .14 .15 .16 .17 .18 .19 .20 S T of TRANS RETE – METH The maximu 125°C .
.1 The allo screed m .2 The tem probe .
When laying an approved alignment de Irregularities be corrected The cross s measured o Contract Do In narrow ba where it is i asphalt conc practices .
Paving of in and as defin shall be car unless other .1 Drivewa laying op Spreading o out concurre approved by Adjacent asp to approxima For ESAL c newly place been permitt .1 Water re Item 191 Damage to t be immediat All placemen and any load be rejected b The speed o continuous o STANDARD SPORTATI HOD SPECIF PAV um temperatu owable maxim may be increa mperature shal g base and/or d method , su esignated by t s in alignment d by the additi lope of the as over 3 m , perp ocuments or p ase widening , impractical to crete shall be ntersections , e ned in the Con rried out conc rwise approve ay entrances peration of the of asphalt con ently with the y the Engineer phalt concrete ately the same counts equal t d asphalt con ted to cool to equired to low 1. the mat as a r tely repaired b nt , spreading ds arriving at by the Engine of the paver s operation of th D SPECIFIC ON and IN ICATION VEMENT STRUC re of the war mum temperatu ased for Work ll be checked surface cours uch as followi the Engineer .
t and grade a on or remova sphalt concre pendicular to provided by th deep or irreg o spread and e spread by h extra widths a ntract Docume currently with ed by the Engi and aprons s e regular mat ncrete by han machine lay r. e mats , includ e location at t to or greater ncrete until fi 60°C .
wer the mat result of conta by the Contrac , compacting the Work Site eer .
shall be match he paver .
CATIONS NFRASTRU CTURE m mix aspha ure of the wa k after Octobe with a calibra se the alignm ng a stringlin long the outs al of asphalt co ete surface sh the centrelin he Engineer .
gular sections finish aspha hand in accor and other var ents , whether the machine ineer .
shall be pave .
d shall be ke ying operation ding those pla the end of eac than 3 million nish rolling is temperature aminant spills ctor to the sat and rolling s e such that th hed to the pro UCTURE lt concrete be rm mixed asp r 1st , if approv ated stem ther ment of the pav ne , placed by ide edge of th oncrete before hall be within ne ) of the cros s , intersection lt concrete by rdance with s riations from s by hand spre e laying opera ed concurren ept to a minim n of the regula aced on shoul ch Day 's pavin n , no traffic s s complete , a shall be supp from the Con tisfaction of th hall occur on ese requirem oduction of the P ehind the scre phalt concrete ved by the En rmometer or t ver shall be c y the Contrac he asphalt co e the edge is ± 0.5 % ( ±15 ss slope spec s , turn-outs o y machine m tandard hand standard Lane eading or mac ation of the r ntly or after th mum and shal ar mat , unles lders , shall be ng .
shall be perm and the finishe plied in acco ntractor 's Equi he Engineer .
ly during Day ments can not b e asphalt plan ITEM : 260 Page 260-19 eed shall be e behind the gineer .
temperature controlled by ctor from an oncrete shall rolled .
5 mm when cified in the or driveways methods , the d placement e alignment chine laying , regular mat , he machine ll be carried ss otherwise e completed itted on the ed mat has rdance with ipment shall ylight hours , be met shall nt to ensure AS Pag 260 260 260 260 260 PHALT CON ge 260-20 0.4.3 .9 0.4.3 .10 0.4.3.10 0.4.3.10 0.4.3.10 D NCRETE – ME Padding .1 Material the Contr .2 Asphalt c other me .3 The com .1 For p .2 The C the a .4 Padding construct Joints .1 General .1 Joint a sm .2 Dirt o whic .3 The cons week .2 Transver .1 A Tra and asph .1 B .2 B .2 Whe the c .3 Whe back broke .3 Transver .1 Whe Pave betw pavin DEPARTM ETHOD SPEC for padding s ract Documen concrete for p ans approved paction Equip padding , 260.4 Contractor sh asphalt concre is intended t tion of the sub ts shall be co mooth riding su or other fore h joints are to Contractor s struction or ot k. rse Construct ansverse Con at other times halt concrete to Below 115°C f Below 90°C fo re the asphal conditions not n paving res k to full mat en or loose m rse Key Joint n the elevatio ement , a trans ween the existi ng limits and o STA ENT of TR CIFICATION PAVEMENT ST shall be the s nts .
padding shall d by the Engin pment shall be 4.5.1 and 260 all establish a ete used for pa to be a sepa bsequent lift o nstructed to e urface .
ign and loose o be made .
hall remove ther Work ac ion Joint nstruction Join s when pavin o cool .
for hot mix as or warm mixed lt concrete su ted in 260.4.3 sumes , tapers thickness to material and ta on of the new sverse key jo ng and new a other locations ANDARD S RANSPORT RUCTURE ame asphalt be placed b neer .
e in accordanc 0.4.5.2 shall no a rolling patter adding .
arate operatio of asphalt conc ensure thorou e material sh and dispose ctivity , outside nt shall be co g is halted fo phalt concrete d asphalt conc rface and/or 3.10.2.1 ; a sm s from surfac expose fres acked in acco asphalt conc oint shall be c asphalt concre s , as determin SPECIFICA TATION an concrete mix by means of ce with 260.4 ot apply .
rn to achieve t on and shall n crete .
ugh and cont hall be remov of waste ma e the Work S onstructed at t or a period of e. crete .
base course mooth 1.5 m lo ce courses p sh , straight v ordance with 2 crete pavemen constructed p ete Pavement ned by the Eng ATIONS d INFRAST x designation a self-powere .2.12. the maximum not be done inuous bond ved from the aterials , resu Site before th the end of ea f time which s has been term ong taper sha previously lai vertical surfac 259.2 , 259.3 nt is higher th per Standard t , at the begin gineer .
TRUCTURE ITEM : 26 January , 20 as specified ed paver or b m compaction o as part of th and to provid faces again lting from joi e end of eac ach Day ’ s Wo shall permit th minated due t all be paved .
d shall be c ces , free fro and 259.4. han the existin Drawing 260- ning and at th E 60 15 in by of he de st nt ch rk he to ut m ng -1 he DEP ASPHA Janua 260.4 .
260.4.3 260.4.3 PARTMENT ALT CONCR ary , 2015 3.10.3.1 3.10 .4 3 .11 Co .1 .2 .3 .4 S T of TRANS RETE – METH .1 If a sha long .2 Prio shal with .2 When th as the e asphalt beginnin terminat Longitudinal .1 The follo .1 Wid .2 Con may prod Eng .1 .3 All l sha 259 .4 Lon the .5 Lon und .6 On mat mat mpaction of A Quality contr Quality assu If damage t vibratory co Equipment a Along curbs rollers , the m vibrating pla STANDARD SPORTATI HOD SPECIF PAV transverse k ll immediately g taper at the or to the place ll be cleaned h 259.2 , 259.3 he elevation o existing Pavem Pavement sh ng and at the tes against an l Construction owing require dths of succee ntractors using y leave an duction witho gineer .
Before May to tack the lo ongitudinal jo ll receive an .4. gitudinal joint final lift of asp gitudinal join er rolling is a surface cour terial is not s terial shall be Asphalt Concr rol testing sha urance testing to Highway c ompaction Eq and proceed w s , manholes mix shall be c te tampers , o D SPECIFIC ON and IN ICATION VEMENT STRUC key is cut in y construct w joint area , as ement of the of loose fore , and 259.4. of the new as ment , a straigh hall be const end of the pr n existing Pav n Joint ements shall a eding individu g a one pave exposed lon ut an applica 15th and afte ongitudinal joi oints left expo application o ts shall not be phalt concrete ts shall be co chieved .
rses , the me cattered on t carefully rem ete all be the resp shall be carri components a quipment , the with the Work and similar S compacted w r by hand tam CATIONS NFRASTRU CTURE advance of p with hot mixe s shown in Sta asphalt conc ign material a sphalt concret ht vertical sur tructed betwe roject and oth vement .
apply when co ual courses sh er operation b gitudinal join ation of tack c r September nt in accorda osed overnig of tack coat i e permitted b e. onstructed to thod of maki the surface o moved .
ponsibility of th ied out in acco and/or adjace e Contractor using static ro Structures an with either sm mpers .
UCTURE paving the jo ed asphalt co andard Draw crete , all trans and a tack co te Pavement rface equal to een the new er locations w onstructing lo hall be offset between May nt for up to coat unless o 15th the Con nce with 259. ht or which a n accordance between the e o ensure that ing joints sha of the freshly he Contractor ordance with ent property shall immed rolling Equipm nd places no maller compac P oint area , the oncrete a sm ing 260-1. sverse key jo oat applied in is at the sam the thickness lift of Pavem where the new ongitudinal joi by 50-100 mm 15th and Sep one-half of otherwise dire ntractor shall .2 , 259.3 and are exposed e with 259.2 , edges of drivin maximum co all be such t laid mat and r. 260.4.5. is occurring diately cease ment .
ot accessible ctive Equipme ITEM : 260 Page 260-21 Contractor ooth 1.5 m int surfaces accordance me elevation s of the new ment at the w Pavement nts .
m. tember 15th the Day 's ected by the be required 259.4. to moisture , 259.3 and ng Lanes in ompression that excess d all excess while using using this to full size ent , such as AS Pag 260 260 260 PHALT CON ge 260-22 0.4.3 .12 0.4 .4 Qua 0.4.4 .1 D NCRETE – ME Additional Re .1 The Con accordan .2 The Con resulting .1 Shou stopp pavin .3 Expansio passing o .1 The indic .4 The Cont .5 A steel-d pressure roller req .6 The brea .7 After bre not to dis .8 The mat .9 For Bridg ality Control Te Sampling and .1 Asphalt c and shal .2 The asph once per .1 Shift .3 The asp Sampling .4 The Con and sha outside o DEPARTM ETHOD SPEC equirements fo ntractor shall nce with the w ntractor shall from any asp uld the memb ped and repai ng recommen on joints and over them .
placing of th ated on Stand tractor shall s drum tandem on compress uired for Bridg akdown roller s akdown rollin splace the ma shall be finish ge decks , 260 esting d Testing of A concrete mix l be accepted halt concrete r shift .
is defined as phalt concrete g and Testing tractor shall b ll be notified of the specifie STA ENT of TR CIFICATION PAVEMENT ST or Bridge Dec place asph waterproofing m be responsi pect of the pav brane becom irs made , in a ces .
d deck drains he asphalt c dard Drawing ubmit a rolling roller , operat sion roll of at l ge deck pavin shall be requi ng , the mat sh t when stoppi h rolled to rem .4.5.1 and 26 Asphalt Concr production s d or rejected o mix being pr s one product e mix shall g of Asphalt C be provided a d if any test ed limits .
ANDARD S RANSPORT RUCTURE ck Paving alt concrete manufacturer' ble for all da ving operation e damaged , accordance wi s shall be pr concrete at e 260-2. g pattern for th ting in the no least 3.0 kg/m ng .
red to run off hall be rolled ng or turning .
move any mark 0.4.5.2 shall n rete Mix shall be monit on the basis o roduced shall ion crew 's da be sampled Concrete Mix a a copy of all te result indica SPECIFICA TATION an on the dec 's recommend amage to the n. paving opera ith the manufa rotected from expansion join he approval o on-vibratory m mm of drum w the deck to st with a pneum .
ks .
not apply .
tored through of the testing be sampled aily work perio and tested and Pavemen est results as ates that mat ATIONS d INFRAST ck waterproof dation and/or e waterproof ations shall b acturer ’ s instr m damage fro nts shall be of the Enginee mode and exe width shall be top and turn .
matic tired roll hout the perio performed by at a minimum od .
according to nt Cores , Item s soon as the terials are be TRUCTURE ITEM : 26 January , 20 fing system procedures .
ing membran be immediate ructions , befor om Equipme completed a er .
erting a conta the breakdow ler , taking car od of the Wo y the Enginee m frequency o o DTI Manua m 260. y are availab eing produce E 60 15 in ne ely re nt as ct wn re rk er .
of al : le ed DEP ASPHA Janua 260.4 .
260.4 .
260.4 260.4 .
PARTMENT ALT CONCR ary , 2015 4 .2 Co .1 .2 .3 .4 4 .3 Co .1 .5 Quality 5 .1 Asp .1 .2 S T of TRANS RETE – METH ntrol of Aspha Once a tes specified lim .1 The En propertie .2 The Co propertie Regardless plant produc test results d If the test r specified lim .1 Plant pr mix is p The Enginee asphalt conc mpaction Tes The Contrac of the Work Assurance T phalt Concret Compaction A Lot is defin defined as th .1 One Da the quan granular .2 One Day the quan on granu .1 The 260 Lot .
.2 If it qua STANDARD SPORTATI HOD SPECIF PAV alt Concrete M st result indic mits in Tables gineer may es within the ontractor may es within spe of any chang ction and test do not meet s result from th mits , plant pro roduction of a roduced in ac er may reque crete placed i sting ctor shall be to ensure tha Testing and A te Density testing shall ned as the po he following : y 's production ntity used for r Shoulders .
y 's production ntity used for ular Shoulders e quantities .4.5.1.2.1 sh is the last ntity shall be D SPECIFIC ON and IN ICATION VEMENT STRUC Mix Productio cates that th 260-1 and 26 suggest cha specified limi y suggest ch cified limits .
ges being ma ted within one specified limit he second sa duction may b asphalt concr ccordance wit est the aspha is not within th responsible f at the density djustments be based on a ortion of the W n and placem padding and n and placeme padding and s , shall be eva for that Day all be added time the mix included in th CATIONS NFRASTRU CTURE on he material b 60-3 the mate anges to the its .
hanges to a ade , a second e hour of noti ts .
ample indica be suspende rete mix shall th 260.4.3.2 a lt concrete m he specified l for quality con conforms wit a Lot average Work being co ent of 500 t o the quantity o ent of less tha the quantity o aluated as per y and the n together and x is produced he previous D UCTURE being produc erial shall be h constituent asphalt plant d mix sample ification that t tes that the d. l not resume and 260.4.3.3 mix be remove limits .
ntrol testing fo th the require e method .
onsidered for a or more of as of surface mix an 500 t of as of surface mix r 260.4.5.1.2. next Day tha d the total sh d meeting th Day 's Lot .
P ced does no handled as fo materials to settings to e shall be ob the asphalt co mix does no until an acce 3. ed if it is dete for the compa ements of this acceptance an phalt concrete x placed in a s sphalt concrete xed placed in 2.1 and 260.4 at meet the hall be desig hese criteria , ITEM : 260 Page 260-23 ot meet the ollows : return test return test tained from oncrete mix ot meet the eptable trial ermined that action stage Item .
nd is further e , excluding single lift on e , excluding n a single lift 4.5.1.2.2.2. criteria of gnated as a that Day 's AS Pag 260 PHALT CON ge 260-24 0.4.5.1.2.2 .
D NCRETE – ME .3 A c p p .3 Pavemen locations .4 Sample procedur .5 The Lot s .1 In ea the lo the e .2 In no .6 The follow .1 The over maxi .2 Area and r .3 Sma hand .4 Padd .7 Cores sh placemen .1 The appli .2 The place .8 The Cont .1 The c .2 The conju mixe each .9 The Engi 10 The Cont Owner 's DEPARTM ETHOD SPEC A separate Lo construction i placement sh production an nt samples s . locations sha res .
shall be divide ach segment ongitudinal di edge of the se o case shall a wing areas sh Shoulder are granulars , for mum compac s of obvious repaired in ac ll areas suc dwork , and for ding lifts .
hall be obtain nt of the Lot .
maximum ma cable .
Engineer may ement .
tractor shall ca cores shall be Contractor s unction with re d asphalt con h lift with 25 bl neer shall be tractor shall b Laboratory , w STA ENT of TR CIFICATION PAVEMENT ST ot shall be es ndicate that i hall be signif nd/or placeme hall be taken all be determi ed into three s a test site sha stance from t egment .
lateral distanc hall not be cor a where only r which the Co ction of the as surface defe ccordance with h as tapers , r asphalt mix u ned in accord ay be extende y allow cores arry out the co e a nominal 10 shall reinstate emoval of the ncrete in 50 m ows using a s responsible fo be responsible within 2 hours ANDARD S RANSPORT RUCTURE stablished if , it is likely tha ficantly differ ent .
n on the road ned by the E segments of a all be located the end of th ce be less tha red : a single lift o ontractor shal sphalt concrete ects as indica h 260.4.5.4. , aprons , Br used for isolat dance with A ed to include to be obtaine oring in the pre 00 mm diamet e the Pavem e core by dew mm lifts to the standard comp or labelling the e for the stora of coring , for SPECIFICA TATION an in the Engin at a portion of rent from th d by coring a Engineer usin approximately d by using ran e segment a n 0.3 m from of asphalt con ll establish a r e. ated in 260.4. ridge approac ted levelling a ASTM D5361 Saturdays , S ed within 12 h resence of the ter .
ment at each watering the co Pavement su paction device e cores .
age and trans testing .
ATIONS d INFRAST eer ’ s opinion f a Day ’ s pro e remainder at stratified ra ng stratified ra equal length .
ndom number nd the lateral the edge of th ncrete surface rolling pattern 5.3 , which sh ches , gores and repair of f , within 24 h Sundays and hours after as e Engineer .
h core samp ore hole and f urface elevatio e. sportation of th TRUCTURE ITEM : 26 January , 20 n , conditions o oduction and/o of the Day andom samp andom samp .
rs to determin l distance fro he mat .
e mix is place n to achieve th hall be marke and areas failed areas .
hours after th holidays whe sphalt concret ple location filling it with h on , compactin he cores to th E 60 15 of or y ’ s le le ne m ed he ed of he en te in ot ng he DEP ASPHA Janua 260.4.5 PARTMENT ALT CONCR ary , 2015 5.1 .11 .12 .13 .14 .15 S T of TRANS RETE – METH Mat densitie Work and sh The percent core bulk d maximum de The Enginee within one w The procedu .1 When a the test Standar percent .1 An a .2 If the ou test resu The conditio .1 The Con rejected .2 Appeals .3 Any atte the Lot f .4 The Con of receip .5 The Con locations appeal a .6 The Con the Con which h commen .1 Prio testi .2 Any subs cons .7 The test new sam STANDARD SPORTATI HOD SPECIF PAV s shall be test hall conform to t compaction densities , in a ensity of the l er shall provid working Day of ure for dealing an individual c t result in qu d Practice fo significance le appeal is requ utlier test pro ult shall be us ons and proce ntractor may d or penalized s shall be for a empt to impro for acceptanc ntractor shall s pt of the test r ntractor shall s , as determin and these cor ntractor may ntractor ’ s repr he does not nts in order to or to leaving t ing procedure y comments , sequent to the sidered .
t results from mples .
D SPECIFIC ON and IN ICATION VEMENT STRUC ted by the Eng o the density r of a Lot shal accordance w loose mix sam de the Contra f their availabi g with an outl compaction te uestion shall or Dealing wi evel .
uired before th ocedure show sed in the calc dures for an a appeal the re d Lot only onc all tests in the ove density o ce shall void t serve notice o esults .
take addition ned by the En es shall be te have a repre resentative sh consider to resolve them the testing La es are to be gi with respec e Contractor ’ s m the original CATIONS NFRASTRU CTURE gineer by core requirements ll be determin with ASTM D mples , in acco actor with a co lity .
lier test shall est result from be determine ith Outlying O he outlier test ws that the ch culations .
appeal of the esults of acce ce .
e Lot .
on the appeal the appeal an of appeal to th nal cores , in a ngineer , within sted by the E esentative pre hall comment be valid and m. aboratory any iven to the En ct to the te s representativ Lot shall be UCTURE e analysis thro indicated in T ned by comp D2726 , with ordance with opy of the res be as follows m a Lot is que ed in accord Observations applies .
hallenged tes Lot test result eptance testin led Lot after nd the original he Engineer , i accordance w n 48 hours of t ngineer .
esent during t t on anything d the Engine y unresolved ngineer in writ sting proced ve leaving the combined wi P oughout the c Table 260-5. aring the ave the average AASHTO T20 sults of accep s : estionable , th ance with AS using a “ t ” st result is va ts shall be as ng of the den the Engineer l test results s n writing , with with 260.4.5.1 the Contracto the period of g concerning eer shall res comments re ting .
dures , which e Laboratory , th the test re ITEM : 260 Page 260-25 ourse of the erage of the theoretical 09. ptance tests e validity of STM E178 , test at a 5 lid then the follows : nsity for any r has tested shall apply .
hin 48 hours , at random or ’ s notice of the testing ; the testing pond to all egarding the are made shall not be esults of the AS Pag 260 260 260 260 260 PHALT CON ge 260-26 0.4.5.1.15.7 0.4.5 .2 0.4.5.2 0.4.5.2 0.4.5 .3 D NCRETE – ME .1 A v .2 T O Smoothness .1 General .1 The P .2 The chec .3 The E950 .2 Bump/Di .1 Indiv to pa .2 The Surface Defe .1 The finis of visible measure .2 Any obvi Pavemen .1 Multi .1 I .3 Defects s .1 Segr .2 Rave .3 Rolle .4 Crac .5 Impr .6 Tire .7 Sam .8 Impr .9 Cont .10 Flush .11 Pneu DEPARTM ETHOD SPEC A new sample value shall be The new mea Owner .
Profile require smoothness o cked with a Hig profile shall b 0. p Profile Req vidual bumps/ ayment adjust Bump/Dip pro ects hed surface o e signs of po ed with a 3 m ous defects , nt course .
ple defects w f a defect is c shall include b regated areas elling ; er marks ; cking or tearin oper matchin marks ; pling location operly constr taminant on th hed areas ; an umatic-tired ro STA ENT of TR CIFICATION PAVEMENT ST e mean for th used for acce an so obtaine ements shall b of the final lift gh Speed Pro be checked al uirement /dips exceedin tment as desc ofile requirem of any Pavem oor workman straight edge as determine ithin a 10 met continuous bey but not necess s ; ng ; g of longitudi ns not properly ucted patche he mat ; nd oller pickup .
ANDARD S RANSPORT RUCTURE he combined eptance and U ed shall be b be specified in t of newly pla ofiler as soon ong the outsi ng 8.4 mm as cribed in 260. ments shall ap ment course s nship and bu e. ed by the Eng tre section sha yond 10 metre sarily be limite nal and trans y reinstated ; s ; SPECIFICA TATION an test results s Unit Price adju binding on bo n the Contract aced asphalt c as possible a de wheel pat s detected by .5.3. pply to interch shall have a u umps and/or gineer , shall b all be conside es it shall be c ed to the follow sverse joints ; ATIONS d INFRAST shall be determ ustment .
oth the Cont t Documents .
concrete Pave fter final rollin th in accordan y the profiler s ange ramps .
uniform textu dips exceed be cause for r ered as one d considered as wing : TRUCTURE ITEM : 26 January , 20 mined and th tractor and th ement shall b ng .
nce with AST shall be subje re and be fre ding 3 mm a rejection of th efect .
s one defect .
E 60 15 his he be M ct ee as he DEP ASPHA Janua 260.4 .
260.4.5 260.4.5 260.5 260.5 260.5 PARTMENT ALT CONCR ary , 2015 5 .4 Re 5.4 .1 5.4 .2 MEASURE .1 Genera .1 The pla .2 Paymen .1 The .2 The pad .3 If re adj S T of TRANS RETE – METH pairs General .1 Repairs as per determin .2 The asp concrete .1 Any sha .3 Clause 2 Removal an .1 The full removed .2 All joints .3 Repaire shall req .4 Material the mate MENT FOR P al e Quantity to ced , in accord nt Adjustment e Unit Price ad e Unit Price dding , or as a epairs are ca ustment shall STANDARD SPORTATI HOD SPECIF PAV to correct su 260.4.5.4.2 o ned by the En phalt concret e mix designa y asphalt conc ll not be incor 260.6.7 shall d Replaceme l thickness o d by cold milli s shall be tack d areas shall quire further re removed sha erial outside th PAYMENT be measured dance with thi t For Density djustment for adjustments single lift of s rried out by r be based on D SPECIFIC ON and IN ICATION VEMENT STRUC urface defects or routing an ngineer .
e used to co ation as that w crete which d rporated in th also apply .
ent of the approp ng or other m k-coated .
be retested epair .
all become th he Work Site .
d for payment s Item , subjec density shall of Table 260 urface mix on emoval and r quality assura CATIONS NFRASTRU CTURE s shall be car nd crack sea orrect surface which is remo does not conf e Work .
priate lift of means as appr for acceptanc he property of t shall be the ct to payment be as shown 0-5 shall not n granular sho replacement o ance carried o UCTURE rried out by re aling .
The me e defects sha oved .
form to the re rejected Pav roved by the E ce ; those faili f the Contract number of to adjustments .
in Table 260- apply to asp oulders or Brid of the asphalt out on the repa P emoval and re ethod of repa all be the sa equirements vement cours Engineer .
ng shall be re tor , who shal nnes of asph -5. phalt concrete ge decks .
t concrete , the aired Lot .
ITEM : 260 Page 260-27 eplacement air shall be me asphalt of this Item se shall be ejected and l dispose of alt concrete e placed as e Unit Price AS Pag 260 PHALT CON ge 260-28 % of M Relat Lot 0.5 .3 Pay .1 .2 D NCRETE – ME Theoretical aximum tive Density t Average 93.0 92.9 92.8 92.7 92.6 92.5 92.4 92.3 92.2 92.1 92.0 91.9 91.8 91.7 91.6 91.5 91.4 91.3 91.2 91.1 91.0 continued n ment Adjustm Individual bum 260-6 .
For asphalt c 260-6 shall no DEPARTM ETHOD SPEC Unit Pr Adjustm $ per To +0.50 +0.40 +0.30 +0.20 +0.10 0.00 -0.10 -0.20 -0.30 -0.40 -0.50 -0.60 -0.70 -0.80 -0.90 -1.00 -1.20 -1.40 -1.60 -1.80 -2.00 next column ment For Smo mps and dips concrete plac ot apply .
STA ENT of TR CIFICATION PAVEMENT ST T Unit Price A rice ment onne 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 oothness shall be asse ed on Bridge ANDARD S RANSPORT RUCTURE Table 260-5 Adjustment fo % of The Maximum Dens Lot Av 90 90 90 90 90 90 90 90 90 90 89 89 89 89 89 89 89 89 89 89 < 89 essed in acco e decks , the p SPECIFICA TATION an or Density eoretical m Relative sity verage .9 .8 .7 .6 .5 .4 .3 .2 .1 .0 .9 .8 .7 .6 .5 .4 .3 .2 .1 .0 9.0 ordance with th payment adju ATIONS d INFRAST Unit Pric Adjustme $ per Tonn -2.40 -2.80 -3.20 -3.60 -4.00 -4.40 -4.80 -5.20 -5.60 -6.00 -7.00 -8.00 -9.00 -10.00 -11.00 -12.00 -13.00 -14.00 -15.00 -16.00 reject he schedule s ustments as s TRUCTURE ITEM : 26 January , 20 ce ent ne set out in Tab shown in Tab E 60 15 le le DEP ASPHA Janua 260.5 260.6 PARTMENT ALT CONCR ary , 2015 .4 Paymen .1 A u acc BASIS OF P .1 Payme concret .2 Compe content specifie .1 If th sha the .2 If th reim .3 Pay .4 The ave .3 Payme accorda .4 In the c S T of TRANS RETE – METH nt Adjustment unit price ad ceptably place PAYMENT nt for Work u te , as identifie ensation to th t , as determ ed in 260.2.3. he actual asp all reimburse t month of the he actual asph mburse the Co yments and c e asphalt bin erage of all th nt adjustmen ance with Item case that the C STANDARD SPORTATI HOD SPECIF PAV Bump A Bu 8.5 to 9.5 to 10.5 t 11.5 t 12.5 t 13.5 t 14.5 t 15.5 t 16.5 t 17.5 t  1 t for Use of Ma justment of ed using a mat under this Ite ed under the C he Contracto ined by ignit 1 for the tota phalt binder c the Owner usi tender openin halt binder co ontractor the a credits shall b nder content e ignition furn nt for chang m 821 .
Contractor in D SPECIFIC ON and IN ICATION VEMENT STRUC Table 260 And Dip Pena ump/Dip o 9.4 mm o 10.4 mm to 11.4 mm to 12.4 mm to 13.4 mm to 14.4 mm to 15.4 mm to 16.4 mm to 17.4 mm to 18.4 mm 8.5 mm aterial Transfe + $ 3.00/t shal terial transfer m shall includ Contract .
or or the Ow tion furnace l payable tonn ontent is less ing MTO 's PG ng .
ntent is highe actual invoiced e determined for each mix nace results o ge in the P itiates an app CATIONS NFRASTRU CTURE 0-6 alty Schedule Pe $ 1 $ 2 $ 4 $ 6 $ 8 $ 1 $ 1 $ 1 $ 1 $ 1 $ 2 er Vehicle ( MT ll apply to th vehicle in acc de a separat wner for diffe results and nage , will be s than the as G asphalt bind er than the ass d amount sup d upon comple x type will be obtained throu G asphalt b peal under 26 UCTURE e enalty 100.00 200.00 400.00 600.00 800.00 000.00 200.00 400.00 600.00 800.00 000.00 TV ) he total quan cordance with te Unit Price erences betw the assumed as follows : sumed binde der price index sumed binder pplied by the C etion of the W e calculated b ughout the co binder price 60.4.5.1.15 , th P ntity of aspha this Item .
for each type ween the asp d asphalt bind r content , the x for the Mont r content , the Contractor .
Work .
by obtaining ontract .
shall be ca he following s ITEM : 260 Page 260-29 alt concrete e of asphalt phalt binder der content e Contractor th preceding Owner shall a weighted alculated in hall apply : AS Pag 260 PHALT CON ge 260-30 0.6.4 .1 .5 If the .1 .6 For Own each norm .1 .7 For $ 50 D NCRETE – ME If the new tes the testing co borne by the .1 Payment .2 If the ne rejection appeal p e Contractor The Contrac Item 810. each occurre ner a penalty h Day that pav mal Work hou The penalty weather .
each surface 0.00 per defe DEPARTM ETHOD SPEC st results afte osts incurred Owner .
t to the Contra ew test result remains vali rocedure sha carries out re ctor shall be ence that pav of $ 1000 for e ving is not con rs ) , until pavin shall not app e defect as ect .
STA ENT of TR CIFICATION PAVEMENT ST r the appeal p by the Owne actor shall be ts after the a d for that Lot all be charged epairs for surfa e charged f ving is not pe each Day afte ntinuous ( stop ng resumes .
ply on Sunday per 260.4.5.3 ANDARD S RANSPORT RUCTURE process indica er during the made for the s appeal proce t , the testing d , in accordan ace defects , t for the smoo rformed per 2 er the 14th Day pped on any D ys or Statutor 3 , the Contra SPECIFICA TATION an ate that a pen appeal proce sampling cost ess verify tha costs incurre nce with Item the smoothne othness rete 260.4.3.7.3 , t y , until paving Day for more t ry Holidays , o actor shall pa ATIONS d INFRAST nalty no longe edures for tha ts .
at a penalty ed by the Ow 810 , to the C ess shall be re esting in acc the Contracto g commences ; than 40 % of th or for Work ti ay the Owne TRUCTURE ITEM : 26 January , 20 er applies , the at Lot shall b still applies o wner during th Contractor .
etested .
cordance wit r shall pay th ; and $ 1000 fo he Contractor me lost due t er a penalty o E 60 15 en be or he th he or r ’ s to of DEPA ASPHA Janua Ar 261 .
261 .
261 .
261 .
ARTMENT ALT CONCR ary , 2015 rticle 1 DESCRIP .1 Gener .2 Definit .1 E .2 D .3 J .4 A .5 L .6 S .7 S .8 M .9 S 2 MATERIAL .1 Materi .1 As .2 Co .3 Fin .4 Ble .5 RA .6 Ble .7 An .8 W .2 Compo .1 As .2 Mi 3 SUBMITTA 4 CONSTRU .1 Gener .2 Equipm .1 Ge .2 Mi .3 Pla .4 Co .5 Ma STAN of TRANS RETE - END R C PTION ............ ral .................. tions .............. End Result Sp Design Mix Fo ob Mix Formu Asphalt Binder Lot ..................
Stratified Rand Sample Mean .
Mean of the De Specified Thick LS .................. al Properties sphalt Binder .
oarse Aggrega ne Aggregate ending of Agg AP .................. ending Sand .
nti-stripping Ad MA Materials osition of Asph sphalt Binder C ix Design ...... ALS ............... UCTION ......... ral .................. ment .............. eneral ........... ixing Plant .... acing Equipm ompaction Equ aterial Transfe NDARD SP PORTATIO RESULT SPE PAV ONTENTS ...................... ...................... ...................... ecification ( ER ormula ( DMF ) .
ula ( JMF ) ........ r Content ........ ...................... dom Sample ... ...................... eviations ........ kness ............. ...................... ...................... ...................... ate ................. ..................... gregates ......... ...................... ...................... dmixtures ...... ...................... halt Concrete Content ......... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ent ................ uipment ......... er Vehicle ( MT PECIFICAT ON and INF ECIFICATION VEMENT STRUC ...................... ...................... ...................... RS ) ................ ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ......................
Mix .............. ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... TV ) ................. TIONS FRASTRUC N ( ERS ) CTURE ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... CTURE ...................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ...................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ...................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ....................
Page 261-3 261-3 261-3 261-3 261-3 261-4 261-4 261-4 261-5 261-5 261-5 261-5 261-5 261-5 261-5 261-6 261-6 261-8 261-8 261-8 261-9 261-9 261-10 261-10 261-10 261-13 261-13 261-13 261-13 261-13 261-14 261-14 261-14 261-15 ITEM : 261 Page 261-1 AS Pag 2 2 PHALT CON ge 261-2 Article .3 Pro .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9 .1 .1 .4 Qu .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 Qu .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9 .1 .1 261.5 MEASU .1 Ge .2 Un .3 Pay 261.6 BASIS O NCRETE - EN oduction and P Production o Trial Mix ...... Mixing Temp Transportatio Timing of Pa Placing Asph Padding ...... Driveways a Joints ......... 0 Compaction 1 Additional R uality Control T General .....
Inspection Te Sampling an Asphalt Com uality Assuranc General ..... For Work Ca For Work Ca Asphalt Dens Asphalt Cont Smoothness Asphalt Bind Thickness ..
Surface Defe 0 Appeal of L 1 Repairs .... UREMENT FO eneral ............. it Price Adjust yment Adjustm OF PAYMENT DEPARTM D RESULT S CONTENTS Placement of A of Mix ............. ...................... peratures ...... on of Asphalt C aving Operatio halt Concrete ...................... nd Aprons ..... ...................... n of Asphalt C Requirements Testing .......... ...................... esting Plan ( IT d Test Results mpaction Rollin ce Testing and ...................... ategory 1 ....... ategory 2 and W sity ............... tent , Gradatio s .................... der ................. ...................... ects ...............
Lot Test Resul ...................... R PAYMENT ...................... tment ( UPA ) o ment for Smoo T ................... ST MENT of TR SPECIFICATI PAVEMENT ST S Asphalt Concr ....................... ...................... ......................
Concrete ...... ns .................. ...................... ...................... ...................... ......................
Concrete ........ For Bridge De ...................... ...................... TP ) ................ s ................... ng Pattern ..... d Adjustments ...................... ...................... Work Categor ...................... n and Air Void ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ts .................. ...................... ..................... ...................... of the Lot ....... othness ......... ...................... TANDARD RANSPORT ION ( ERS ) RUCTURE rete Mix ........ ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... eck Paving .... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... s ................... ...................... ...................... ry 3 ............... ...................... ds .................. ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... SPECIFICA TATION an ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ATIONS nd INFRAS Page ..... 261-15 ...... 261-15 ..... 261-15 ..... 261-15 ..... 261-16 ..... 261-16 ..... 261-17 ..... 261-19 ..... 261-19 ..... 261-19 ..... 261-21 ..... 261-21 ..... 261-22 ..... 261-22 ..... 261-22 ..... 261-22 ..... 261-22 ..... 261-22 ..... 261-22 ..... 261-25 ..... 261-25 ..... 261-26 ..... 261-26 ..... 261-27 ..... 261-29 ..... 261-29 ..... 261-29 ..... 261-32 ..... 261-34 ..... 261-35 ..... 261-35 ...... 261-35 ...... 261-35 ..... 261-40 TRUCTUR ITEM : 26 January , 20 RE 61 15 DEPA ASPHA Janua 261.1 261.1 261.1 261.1 .
261.1 .
ARTMENT ALT CONCR ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 Genera .1 Thi asp .2 The .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .3 It s .1 .2 .4 Qu eith .2 Definitio 2 .1 End .1 2 .2 Des .1 STAN of TRANS RETE - END R TION al s Item consi phalt concrete e asphalt conc Hot mixed a Hot mixed a Hot mixed a Hot mixed re Hot mixed re Warm mixed Warm mixed Warm mixed hall be the Co The Contrac assurance t for acceptan This respon Contractor o ality assuran her at the job ons d Result Spec ERS - a Spe process that according to for quality c includes a s .1 Work C Assuran The cate determin per the sign Mix Form DMF - the aggregates concrete mix NDARD SP PORTATIO RESULT SPE PAV sts of the su e and warm m crete shall be sphalt concre sphalt concre sphalt concre ecycled aspha ecycled aspha d asphalt conc d asphalt conc d asphalt conc ontractor ’ s re ctor shall imp hat all compo nce , conform nsibility is with or purchased nce tests sha site or at the cification ( ER ecification und t produces th o a specified control ; end tatistically ori ategory – the nce/Quality Co egory defined ned by the De Contract Doc mula ( DMF ) Laboratory d to be blende x. PECIFICAT ON and INF ECIFICATION VEMENT STRUC upply and pla mixed asphalt c identified by ete base mix - ete base/surfa ete surface mix alt concrete ba alt concrete su crete base mix crete base/su crete surface sponsibility to lement and m onents , as we to the Contra hout regard t from supplier ll be perform supplier ’ s pla RS ) der which the he items of co quality assu product acc ented progra e work will be ontrol ( Blende d will apply to epartment ba cuments .
etermination ed together TIONS FRASTRUC N ( ERS ) CTURE acement of h concrete .
the following B. ace mix - C. x - D. ase mix - HRB urface mix - H x - WMA-B .
rface mix - W mix - WMA-D o provide an a maintain a qu ell as end res act requireme to whether th rs or subcontr med , by the E ant .
e Engineer m onstruction an rance plan ; t ceptance is t m of quality a e classified as ed QA/QC ) , W all asphalt co ased on the to of the precis to meet the CTURE hot mixed as mix designati B. HRD .
WMA-C. D. acceptable pr ality control s sult products , nts .
he products a ractors .
Engineer , on onitors the C nd accepts or the Contracto the responsib assurance tes s Work Categ Work Categor oncrete produ otal estimated se proportion specified pro phalt concret ons : roduct as spe system that s submitted to are manufactu random sam ontractor ’ s co r rejects the e or is entirely bility of the O sting .
gory 1 - Blen ry 2 or Work C uced .
The cat d tonnage of t ns of asphalt operties for t ITEM : 261 Page 261-3 te , recycled ecified .
hall provide o the Owner ured by the mples taken ontrol of the end product responsible Owner and ded Quality Category 3. tegories are the Work as binder and the asphalt AS Pag 261 261 261 PHALT CON ge 261-4 1.1.2 .3 1.1.2 .4 1.1.2 .5 NCRETE - EN Job Mix Form .1 JMF - the m sieve desired m .1 Perc Asphalt Bind .1 Design A .2 Approved .3 Actual As by ASTM Manual , Lot .1 Lot - a p the Work .1 Work to the .1 F s .2 F s .3 I a . . .2 Work wher .1 F s .2 F s .3 I a DEPARTM D RESULT S mula ( JMF ) e establishme e fraction of mix properties centage of con er Content Asphalt Binde d Asphalt Bin sphalt Binder M D2172 or D Procedure # portion of the k Category , de k Category 1 e Job Mix For For loose sa segments and For core sam segments and f it is the las apply : 1 If the plan Lot .
.1 For p samp 2 If the pla productio k Category 2 re approved c For loose sa segments and For core sam segments and f it is the las apply : ST MENT of TR SPECIFICATI PAVEMENT ST ent of the sin aggregate an s under field c nstituent mate r Content - th der Content - r Content - th DTI Asphalt C 9 .
Work being escribed in th – a Lot will b rmula have no amples , each d one sample mples , each d one core sa st time the m nt production plant product ple will be obta ant productio n shall be des and Work C changes to th amples , each d one sample mples , each d one core sa st time the m TANDARD RANSPORT ION ( ERS ) RUCTURE ngle definite p nd the aspha conditions .
erials to be lis he asphalt bin - the asphalt b e amount of Concrete Qu considered fo he following se be defined as ot occurred .
h Lot shall b taken from e Lot shall b ample taken fr mix is produce is 800 t or le ion of 800 t ained .
on is more t signated as a Category 3 – e Job Mix Fo h Lot shall b taken from e Lot shall b ample taken fr mix is produce SPECIFICA TATION an percentage pa alt binder con sted on the JM nder content e binder conten asphalt binde ality Assuran for acceptanc ections : s 2400 t ± 50 be divided in each segment be divided in rom each seg ed with this ess the produ t or less , on than 800 t b a Lot .
a Lot will be rmula have n be divided in each segment be divided in rom each seg ed with this ATIONS nd INFRAS assing the 4.7 ntent that sha MF sheet .
established by nt determined er in the mix nce Technicia ce and is furt t where appr nto 3 approx t. nto 5 approx gment .
criterion the uction shall be e additional but less tha e defined as not occurred .
nto 3 approx t. nto 4 approx gment .
criterion the TRUCTUR ITEM : 26 January , 20 75 mm and 7 all produce th y the DMF .
d by the JMF .
as determine an Certificatio her defined b roved change ximately equ ximately equ following sha e added to th random loos n 2400 t , th 1500 t ± 50 ximately equ ximately equ following sha RE 61 15 75 he ed on by es al al all he se he 0 t al al all DEPA ASPHA Janua 261.1 .
261.1 .
261.1 .
261.1 .
261.1 .
261.2 261.2 261.2 .
ARTMENT ALT CONCR ary , 2015 2.5.1.2.3 2 .6 Str .1 2 .7 Sam .1 2 .8 Me .1 2 .9 Spe .1 MATERIAL .1 Materia 1 .1 Asp .1 .2 .3 STAN of TRANS RETE - END R .1 .2 .3 A separ construc different .4 The Con .1 The bind .1 atified Rando Stratified Ra random sam mple Mean Sample Mea sample .
ean of the Dev Mean of the or the air vo ecified Thickn Specified Th obtained fro LS al Properties phalt Binder Asphalt bind The asphalt Performance AASHTO M NDARD SP PORTATIO RESULT SPE PAV If the plant p Lot .
.1 For plan sample w If the plant production sh rate Lot sha ction indicate t from the rem ntractor may e Engineer mu ding .
No appeals w om Sample andom Samp mple is taken f an - the arith viations e Deviations - ids ( 4.00 % ) d ness hickness - the m the core sa der shall be su binder grade e Grade ( 320 , Table 1 PECIFICAT ON and INF ECIFICATION VEMENT STRUC production is 8 nt production will be obtaine production i hall be design ll be establis e that it is lik mainder of tha request to en ust obtain one will be allowed le - the divisi from each are hmetic mean the sum of th divided by the e specified ap amples .
upplied by the shall be as sp PG ) asphal - Performanc TIONS FRASTRUC N ( ERS ) CTURE 800 t or less of 800 t or ed .
is more than nated as a Lo shed if , in th kely that a p at Lot .
nd the Lot befo e QA sample d. on of the Lot ea or segmen of a set of 3 he absolute v e number of te pplication rat e Contractor .
pecified in the lt binder s ce Graded As CTURE the productio r less , one a n 800 t but ot .
he Engineer's ortion of a L fore the Lot is e and results t into 3 or mo nt in an unbia 3 or more tes values of the ests in the Lo te divided by e Contract Do shall meet sphalt Binder on shall be a additional ran less than 1 s opinion , co Lot shall be s completed .
of the QA sa ore areas or s sed way .
t results cons deviations fro t. the bulk rela cuments .
the require Specification ITEM : 261 Page 261-5 dded to the ndom loose 1500 t , the onditions of significantly mple ( s ) are segments ; a stituting the om the JMF tive density ements of .
AS Pag 261 261 261 PHALT CON ge 261-6 1.2.1.1.3 1.2.1 .2 1.2.1 .3 NCRETE - EN .1 Whe binde the W .4 When an specified Coarse Aggr .1 Coarse a .2 The coar hard , sou other soft .3 Coarse a ASTM C1 .4 Coarse a on the 31 the 31.5 .5 Coarse a Fine Aggrega .1 Fine agg .2 Fine agg sand and shale , cl substanc .3 Fine agg accordan Table 26 DEPARTM D RESULT S n the selecte er , acceptanc WMA additive nti-Stripping a requirements egate aggregate sha rse aggregate und , durable p t or disintegra aggregate is th 136 , and shal aggregate ma 1.5 mm sieve mm sieve , as aggregate ma ate regate shall b regate shall b d shall consis ay , loam , sc ces .
gregate shall nce with AST 1-1 .
ST MENT of TR SPECIFICATI PAVEMENT ST d WMA techn ce of the asph e. admixtures ar s of 261.2.1.1 all be supplied e shall be pre particles , free ated pieces , o he portion reta l meet the phy ay be produce e , provided th s determined ay also be acc be supplied b be prepared b st of hard , so chist and othe be the por TM C117 and TANDARD RANSPORT ION ( ERS ) RUCTURE nology require halt binder sha re required , t .3 , after the a d by the Cont epared by cru e from adhere r other delete ained on the 4 ysical require ed from pit run at no more th by ASTM C1 cepted or reje y the Contrac by crushing roc ound , durable er soft or dis rtion passing d C136 , and SPECIFICA TATION an es that additiv all be based o the asphalt b ddition of the tractor .
ushing rock or ent coatings , s rious substan 4.75 mm siev ments of Tab n gravel by cr han 10 % of th 36 and C117 ected on the b ctor .
ck or gravel o e particles fre sintegrated p g the 4.75 m shall meet th ATIONS nd INFRAS ves be added on the sampl binder grade required adm r gravel and s shale , clay , lo nces .
ve , tested in ac le 261-1. rushing the fra he retained m 7. basis of past p or screening a ee from adhe pieces , or oth mm sieve , w he physical re TRUCTUR ITEM : 26 January , 20 d to the aspha es that conta shall meet th mixtures .
shall consist oam , schist an ccordance wit action retaine material passe performance .
a manufacture erent coating her deleteriou when tested equirements o RE 61 15 alt in he of nd th ed es ed s , us in of DEPA ASPHA Janua ARTMENT ALT CONCR ary , 2015 Coarse Aggreg Fine Aggregate Physical Requ Air Voids % VMA % ( min ) Voids Filled wi TSR ( Average TSR valu Dust to Binder Physical Requ Freeze/Thaw % Micro-Deval % Petrographic N Flat & Elongate Crushed Partic ≥ 3 million Des ≥ 3 million Des Absorp Note : Not man STAN of TRANS RETE - END R Sieve Si ASTM Desig gate 25.0 m 19.0 16.0 12.5 9.5 6.3 e 4.75 m 2.36 1.18 600 300 150 75 uirements For th Asphalt % of Conditioned ues ) % ( min ) Ratio uirements For % ( max ) 0.3 to < 3 ≥ 3 % ( max ) 0.3 to < 3 ≥ 3 No .
( max ) * 0.3 to < 3 ≥ 3 ed Particle 0.3 to < 3 ≥ 3 cles 0.3 to < 3 sign ESALs ( m sign ESALs ( m ption % ( max ) ndatory , the Ow NDARD SP PORTATIO RESULT SPE PAV Superpave A ze gnation mm 0 mm 0 mm 5 mm 5 mm 3 mm mm 6 mm 8 mm 0 µm 0 µm 0 µm 5 µm r Asphalt Con d & Freeze/Tha ASTM D48 r Coarse Aggr DTI Method 3 million Design 3 million Design MTO LS - 6 3 million Design 3 million Design MTO LS - 6 3 million Design 3 million Design % ( max @ 4 DTI Method 3 million Design 3 million Design DTI Method 3 million Design min % by wt. , o min % by wt. , tw AST wner reserves PECIFICAT ON and INF ECIFICATION VEMENT STRUC Table Asphalt Con crete aw 67 regate d n ESALs n ESALs 618 n ESALs n ESALs 609 n ESALs n ESALs :1 ) n ESALs n ESALs d n ESALs one face ) wo face ) M C 127 the right to obt TIONS FRASTRUC N ( ERS ) CTURE 261-1 ncrete Mix Re Type B/HRB/WMA-B % ( by 100.0 84.0-98.0 72.0-94.0 60.0-87.0 51.0-75.0 41.0-66.0 34.0-60.0 22.0-50.0 12.0-42.0 6.0-32.0 3.0-20.0 2.0-8.0 2.0-6.0 ( B ) 2.0-6.5 ( HR 3.0-5.0 13.5 70.0-75.0 80.0 0.6-1.2 16.0 14.0 20.0 18.0 250 230 25.0 20.0 60 95 80 1.50 tain a Petrogra CTURE equirements B Ty C/WM mass ) Passin - - 100 88.0- 68.0- 54.0- 46.0- 28.0- 20.0- 13.0- 7.0-2 3.0-1 ) 2.0- RB ) 3.0- 14 70.0- 80 0.6- 14 12 16 15 20 18 20 15 7 9 8 1.5 aphic No .
pe MA-C D/HR ng Each Sieve - - 0.0 -98.0 -90.0 76 -77.0 60 -69.0 52 -58.0 36 -50.0 25 -40.0 16 27.0 8 10.0 4 -6.0 2 -5.0 4.5 -75.0 70 0.0 -1.2 4.0 2.0 6.0 5.0 00 80 0.0 5.0 0 5 0 50 ITEM : 261 Page 261-7 Type RD/WMA-D e - - - 100.0 6.0-98.0 0.0-84.0 2.0-70.0 6.0-65.0 5.0-55.0 6.0-44.0 8.0-26.0 4.0-12.0 2.0-6.0 3.0-5.0 15.5 0.0-77.0 80.0 0.6-1.2 14.0 12.0 16.0 15.0 200 180 20.0 15.0 70 95 80 1.50 AS Pag 261 261 261 261 PHALT CON ge 261-8 Table 261 Physical R Micro-Deva Uncompact NOTE : Th Co 1.2.1.3 1.2.1 .4 1.2.1 .5 1.2.1 .6 NCRETE - EN -1 continued Requirements al % ( max ) 0.3 to ted Void Conte he allowable Mi oarse Aggregat .4 Fine agg on the 6 .
31.5 mm .1 Mate as fin .5 Fine agg .6 Washed from the Blending of A .1 Blending to increa .2 Blending graded p RAP .1 If applica .1 RAP Cont .2 The conc .3 The opera recyc .1 T t h Blending San .1 Blending .2 Blending propertie DEPARTM D RESULT S For Fine Aggr MTO LS o < 3 million De ≥ 3 million De ent % ( min ) AS cro-Deval surfa te is ≤12.0 , prov gregate may b 3 mm sieve , sieve , as det erial produced ne aggregate .
regate may a materials sha aggregate an Aggregates of aggregate se the percen shall be perfo roduct .
able to the Con shall be sup tractor under I Contractor sh crete mix .
Contractor sh ation , spaced cled mix .
The Contracto testing to the hours .
nd sand shall be sand shall es as outlined ST MENT of TR SPECIFICATI PAVEMENT ST regate S - 619 esign ESALs esign ESALs STM C1252 ace Fine Aggre vided that the C be produced provided that termined by A d as per 261.2 also be accep all be stockp nd to allow the es shall be all ntage of crush ormed at the a ntract : pplied by the Item 208. hall be respo hall be respon d equally over or shall be re Owner ’ s Cen e supplied by be used to in Table 261 TANDARD RANSPORT ION ( ERS ) RUCTURE Type B/HRB/WM 22.0 20.0 45.0 gate shall be M Coarse Aggrega from pit run t no more tha ASTM C136 a 2.1.2.4 and p pted or rejecte iled for at lea e material to a owed only to hed particles .
asphalt plant c e Owner in de onsible for the nsible for coll r the portion o esponsible to ntral Laborato y the Contract o obtain acce -1 .
SPECIFICA TATION an MA-B C/ Max % Loss=19 ate is from the gravel by cru n 5 % of the re and C117 .
passing the 4. ed on the bas ast 24 hours attain uniform meet the gra .
cold feed units esignated sto e incorporatio ecting 6 RAP of the milling a o deliver the ory in Frederic tor .
eptable phys ATIONS nd INFRAS Type /WMA-C D 18.0 17.0 45.0 9.0 , if the Micro- same source .
ushing the fra etained mate 75 mm sieve is of past per to allow free m moisture co ading requirem s to produce a ockpiles or o on of RAP in P samples du area needed RAP sample cton , during n sical asphalt TRUCTUR ITEM : 26 January , 20 Type D/HRD/WMA-D 18.0 17.0 45.0 -Deval on action retaine erial passes th e , may be use rformance .
water to dra ontent .
ments and/or a consistently btained by th nto the aspha ring the millin to produce th es obtained fo normal workin concrete m RE 61 15 D ed he ed in he alt ng he or ng mix DEPA ASPHA Janua 261.2 .
261.2 .
261.2 .
ARTMENT ALT CONCR ary , 2015 1.6 .3 .4 1 .7 Ant .1 .2 1 .8 WM .1 .2 .3       STAN of TRANS RETE - END R The maximu not exceed Blending sa the coldfeed ti-stripping Ad Anti-stripping .1 The req mix desi .2 The Ow the Wor The type an delivery slip .
MA Materials The Contrac The Contrac preparation , The Enginee the Work : Evotherm 3G Evotherm DA Advera Gencor Ultra Astec Doubl Cecabase R NDARD SP PORTATIO RESULT SPE PAV um mass of b 10 % of the to and shall have d at the plant .
dmixtures g admixtures uirement for a ign stage .
wner has appro k. d dosage of a . ctor shall supp ctor shall ob handling , sto er has approv G AT aform GX e Barrel Gree RT 2N1 PECIFICAT ON and INF ECIFICATION VEMENT STRUC blending sand otal mass .
e 100 % pass shall be supp an anti-strippi oved the anti- Approved A A C all asphalt bin ply all materia tain from the orage and use ved the follow en Foaming TIONS FRASTRUC N ( ERS ) CTURE d to be used i ing the 9.5 m plied by the Co ng admixture -stripping adm Table 261- Anti-strippin Product Redicote 82 Redicote C 3 Redicote C-2 Rediset LQ-1 AD-here LOF 6 AD-here 7700 Pave Bond T Travcor 450 Innovalt W Evotherm 3 Cecabase RT nder anti-strip ls required for e supplier all e of their mate wing Warm Mix      CTURE in the total as mm sieve prio ontractor .
is determined mixtures listed -2 ng Admixture 2-S 3082 2914 102 65-00 T Lite 05 W 3G T 2N1 ping admixtur r production o l information erials .
x Technologie Sonne Warm Cecabase R ALmix Foam Meeker Foa Rediset LQ sphalt concre or to the introd d at the asph in Table 261- es res shall be n of WMA .
required for es listed below mmix RT ming Systems aming System ITEM : 261 Page 261-9 te mix shall duction into alt concrete -2 for use in noted on the the proper w for use in ms AS Pag 261 261 261 261 261 261 PHALT CON ge 261-10 1.2 .2 Com 1.2.2 .1 1.2.2 .2 1.2.2.2 1.2.2.2 1.2.2.2 NCRETE - EN mposition of A Asphalt Bind .1 For the assume a .1 Asph .2 Asph .3 Asph .4 Asph .5 Asph .6 Asph .7 Asph .8 Asph Mix Design .1 Respons .1 Prep respo .1 T t c .2 Requirem .1 The Supe Stan T312 Asph .1 T r .2 The 30 % .3 The 15 % .3 Approval .1 All su .2 The locat samp DEPARTM D RESULT S Asphalt Concr er Content purpose of e an asphalt bin halt Concrete halt Concrete halt Concrete halt Concrete halt Concrete halt Concrete halt Concrete halt Concrete sibility for Des paration and onsibility of th The Contract testing Labora carry out the d ments for Des asphalt conc erpave Volum dard Practice 2 Standard M halt ( HMA ) sp The asphalt c requirements amount of RA ±5 % of the to amount of RA ±5 % of the to l of Design M ubmissions sh material sam tion of the s ple location , a ST MENT of TR SPECIFICATI PAVEMENT ST rete Mix establishing t nder content “ B ” : “ C ” : “ D ” : “ HRB ” : “ HRD ” : “ WMA-B ” : “ WMA-C ” : “ WMA-D ” : sign Mix Form submission o he Contractor tor shall use atory , to asse design of the sign Mix Form crete mix des metric Desig e for Mixture C Method for P pecimens by m concrete mix d in Table 261- AP in the ho otal weight of AP in the hot otal weight of ix Formula / A hall include th mples shall ource , pit/qu and the type/s TANDARD RANSPORT ION ( ERS ) RUCTURE the Unit Price for the aspha 4.8 % of the 5.7 % of the 6.0 % of the 3.1 % of the 5.0 % of the 4.8 % of the 5.7 % of the 6.0 % of the mula of the asphal r. Professiona ess the aggre asphalt conc mula sign shall follo gn for Hot-M Conditioning Preparing an means of Sup design , at the -1 for the Asp t mixed recyc the combined mixed recycle the combined Aggregate So he Contract n be tagged a arry ID num size of the ma SPECIFICA TATION an e for asphalt alt concrete m e total specifie e total specifie e total specifie e total specifie e total specifie e total specifie e total specifie e total specifie lt DMF for th al Engineering egate materia crete mix .
ow AASHTO Mix Asphalt of Hot-Mix As nd Determinin perpave Gyrat e Design Asph phalt Concrete cled asphalt d materials .
ed asphalt co d materials .
ource Approva umber .
and indicate mber as indic aterial .
ATIONS nd INFRAS t concrete th mix as follows : ed tonnage .
ed tonnage .
ed tonnage .
ed tonnage .
ed tonnage .
ed tonnage .
ed tonnage .
ed tonnage .
he Owner ’ s a g services a als proposed R35 Standa ( HMA ) , AAS sphalt ( HMA ) ng the dens tory Compact halt Content , e Mix Type sp concrete bas oncrete surfac al the Contract cated by the TRUCTUR ITEM : 26 January , 20 e Bidder sha : approval is th and a qualifie for use and t rd Practice fo SHTO R30-0 ) and AASHT ity of Hot-M tor .
shall meet th pecified .
se mix shall b ce mix shall b t number , th Engineer , th RE 61 15 all he ed to or 02 O ix he be be he he DEPA ASPHA Janua 261.2 .
ARTMENT ALT CONCR ary , 2015 2.2.3.2 STAN of TRANS RETE - END R .1 Sa asp .1 .2 .2 Sam the duri .3 The Con the Eng .1 A lis sou .2 The mix .3 The use .4 The ( inc .5 Othe .6 All spe des agg .7 Sam ( 10 ) 0.5 .8 A sa .9 In o ( 3 ) - ( 1 ) - requ .4 The Eng evaluati .1 The des of th .1 NDARD SP PORTATIO RESULT SPE PAV mpling of the phalt concrete At least 30 % Quantity for t At least 2 00 Quantity for t mpling of the Engineer an ng normal wo ntractor shall ineer for appr st of all const rce ( s ) , aspha e average gra .
e percentage d in the asph e asphalt co luding blendin er characteris Superpave cimen mass , ign , the bulk regates , and mples of th ) -18 kg samp L of anti-strip ample of the a order to cal 18 kg sample 18 kg sampl uired to be de gineer shall r on by the Ow e evaluation ign , moisture he coarse and In case of dis or blending s PECIFICAT ON and INF ECIFICATION VEMENT STRUC e aggregates e mix product % of each ag the mix desig 00 t of each a the mix desig aggregate sh d delivered to orking hours .
submit the D roval at a loca tituent materi alt binder sour adation of ea by mass of alt concrete m oncrete mix ng sand ) .
stics of the com mix design , graphs use relative dens the asphalt a e aggregate les of fine ag pping admixtu asphalt binde ibrate the ig es of coarse e of blending elivered to a la require up to wner ’ s Labora period shall sensitivity te d fine aggrega screpancy in sand ( s ) , the E TIONS FRASTRUC N ( ERS ) CTURE s for the DMF tion for the ye ggregate type gnation is less aggregate typ gnation excee hall be done o the Owner MF including ation ( s ) desig als , including rce ( s ) and an ch aggregate each aggreg mix .
design grad mbined aggre characteristi ed in arriving sity of each i absorption of t e : ( 8 ) -18 kg ggregate , ( 2 ) - re , if necessa er ( 4 L/mix ) .
gnition oven aggregate , ( g sand , and ab designated 8 Days from atory .
include verif esting , and ve ates and blen the bulk rela Engineer 's res CTURE F/aggregate ear shall not b e is in stockp s than 10 000 pe is in stock eds 10 000 t. by the Contr r ’ s Central La the following gnated by the g aggregate s ti-stripping ad e to be used gate ( includin dation of the egate specifie ics , including g at the fina ndividual ma the combined g samples 18 kg sample ary .
, additional ( 3 ) -18 kg sam 3 L/mix of a d by the Engi m the time of fication of th erification of th nding sand ( s ) ative density v sults shall pre P source appro be undertaken pile , when th t ; or kpile , when th ractor in the p aboratory in F g information/m Engineer .
source ( s ) , ble dmixture sour in the aspha ng blending s e combined d in Table 26 g bulk relati al asphalt co aterial and the d aggregates .
of coarse es of blending samples are mples of fine asphalt binde neer .
f receipt of th e asphalt co he bulk relativ ) .
values of the evail .
ITEM : 261 Page 261-11 oval for the n until : he tendered he tendered presence of Fredericton , materials to ending sand rce ( s ) .
alt concrete sand ) to be aggregate 1-1. ive density oncrete mix e combined .
aggregate , g sand , and e required : aggregate , er , shall be he DMF , for oncrete mix ve densities aggregates AS Pag 261 261 PHALT CON ge 261-12 1.2.2.2.3 1.2.2.2 NCRETE - EN .5 If the .1 T w .2 T E .6 The Cont .7 Once comb igniti .1 T l .2 T a .8 The Cont Cont .1 T L .4 Approval .1 The The .1 T u .2 T c .3 T .4 T .5 T .2 The J .1 ± .2 ± .3 ± DEPARTM D RESULT S e DMF does n The Engineer why the DMF The Contracto Engineer for a Engineer sh tractor receivi e the DMF h bined aggreg on furnace to The Enginee aboratory .
The Engineer approval of th Contractor s tractor submit tract conventi Testing costs Laboratory Ra l of Job Mix F Contractor sh Contractor ’ s s The percenta used in the as The percenta combined agg The asphalt b The asphalt b The compacti JMF , when co ±3 % for mate ±0.8 % for mat ±0.2 % for asp ST MENT of TR SPECIFICATI PAVEMENT ST not meet the r r shall provide failed .
or shall then p approval .
hall not accep ing written ap has been app gates and a o be used for t r shall delive r shall comple he DMF .
shall be resp ts for evaluat onal mix desi s incurred by ate Schedule Formula hall submit th submission s age by mass sphalt concret age by mass gregates and binder content binder grade a on temperatu ompared to th rial passing th terial passing phalt binder .
TANDARD RANSPORT ION ( ERS ) RUCTURE requirements e a written ex provide anoth pt any aspha pproval of the proved , the E sample of th the quality as er the calibra ete calibration onsible to pa tion more tha ignation .
y the Owner .
he JMF to the hall include th of each agg te mix .
passing the blending san t as a percent and the aspha ure for the lab he DMF , shal he 4.75 mm s g the 75 µm s SPECIFICA TATION an of Table 261 xplanation to her complete alt concrete DMF from th Engineer sha he asphalt b ssurance .
ation samples n of the ignitio ay the Owne an one aspha shall be cha e Engineer pr he following in gregate ( inclu 4.75 mm an nd tage of the m alt binder sup b briquettes .
l be within the sieve .
ieve .
ATIONS nd INFRAS -1 it shall be o the Contrac DMF and re-s mix produce e Engineer .
all prepare s inder for cal s to the qua on furnace w er ’ s associate alt concrete m arged as per ior to beginni nformation : uding blendin nd the 75 m mass of the tot pplier .
e following lim TRUCTUR ITEM : 26 January , 20 rejected .
ctor that detai submit it to th ed prior to th samples of th ibration of th ality assuranc within 3 Days o ed costs if th mix design pe DTI Standar ing productio ng sand ) to b m sieves of th tal mix .
mits : RE 61 15 ils he he he he ce of he er rd n. be he DEPA ASPHA Janua 261.2 .
261.3 261.4 261.4 261.4 261.4 .
ARTMENT ALT CONCR ary , 2015 2.2 .5 SUBMITTA .1 The Co fine agg .2 The Co product .3 The Co .1 The sam sam .2 The for .3 The del .4 If th sub Wo .4 Other s the spe .5 Submit CONSTRU .1 Genera .1 The spe .2 Equipm 2 .1 Ge .1 .2 STAN of TRANS RETE - END R JMF Adjustm .1 Adjustm producti .2 The Con in source ALS ontractor shall gregate for ap ontractor sha tion of asphalt ontractor shall e Contractor mple of any mple .
e Contractor s PG asphalt b e Contractor ivery slip for e he source of bmit in writing ork .
submittals are ecific phase o tals are requi CTION al e Contractor ecifically direc ment neral Equipment s the requirem Equipment u NDARD SP PORTATIO RESULT SPE PAV ments During ments to the J ion .
ntractor shall s e of aggregate submit , in wr pproval by the all notify the t concrete mix submit in writ shall supply , proposed ad shall supply , u inders .
shall submit each tanker lo supply of the g the propose e required for f the Work be red in accord shall carry ou cted by the En shall be desig ments of this S used shall be PECIFICAT ON and INF ECIFICATION VEMENT STRUC Production JMF shall be submit a revis e used in the riting , the prop e Engineer .
Engineer 3 x. ting , the propo upon request dmixture ( s ) , upon request , at the time of oad of aspha e asphalt bind ed change pr r this Item an eing undertak dance with an ut the Work a ngineer .
gned and ope Specification .
of adequate TIONS FRASTRUC N ( ERS ) CTURE submitted to sed DMF in ac asphalt concr posed source Days in adv osed supplier t , a sample o in a volume , the optimum f delivery to t lt binder .
der changes d rior to using t nd are contai ken .
y cross-refere as indicated i erated to pro rated capacit CTURE the Enginee ccordance wit rete mix .
e ( s ) of supply vance of the r of the aspha of the asphalt e proportiona m mixing and c the plant the during the W the new asph ned within th enced Item fo in the Contra oduce an end ty and shall b P r prior to the th 261.2.2.2 fo of coarse agg commencem lt binder .
t binder ( 2 L/ al to the asp compaction te refinery certif Work , the Cont halt binder su he sections a orming part of ct Document d product com be in good wo ITEM : 261 Page 261-13 start of Lot or a change gregate and ment of the /mix ) and a phalt binder emperature , fication and tractor shall upply in the pplicable to f this Item .
ts and/or as mplying with rking order .
AS Pag 261 261 261 PHALT CON ge 261-14 1.4.2 .2 1.4.2 .3 1.4.2 .4 NCRETE - EN Mixing Plant .1 The asph ASTM D Placing Equip .1 Mechanic and cross .2 Pavers s front of th .3 Pavers s mixtures , required .1 Scre scree .4 The Cont .5 Pavers s .1 The pave longi .2 The equiv .1 A m .3 A ca pave .6 Longitudi .7 Vibrating used in p .1 Hydr width .2 Scre Compaction .1 Compact .1 Vibra .1 P b DEPARTM D RESULT S halt mixing pla 995 and the pment cal self-power s-Slope .
hall be equipp he screeds .
shall be equi , without seg thickness and eds shall be ed and screed tractor shall p hall be equipp longitudinal g er and be cap tudinal joints .
Contractor s valent for long A joint matchi mats placed a alibrated Slop er .
inal grade con hydraulic sc placing mat wi raulic strike-o hs outside of t ed cut off sho Equipment tion Equipme atory roller .
Paving in ech breakdown ro ST MENT of TR SPECIFICATI PAVEMENT ST ant and its co Contract Doc red pavers sh ped with hopp ipped with vi regation and d in widths fro equipped wit d extensions .
provide a 3 m ped with autom grade control pable of prov shall use a gitudinal grade ing shoe may adjacent to the e indicator sh ntrol shall be u creed extensio dths greater t off extensions the driving Lan oes may be us nt shall consi helon on the ollers .
TANDARD RANSPORT ION ( ERS ) RUCTURE omponents sh cuments .
hall be capabl pers and distr brating scree with a smoo m 3 m to 5 m th heaters wh straight edge matic screed shall be equ viding longitud minimum 12 e control .
y be used to e original mat .
hall be instal used on all lift ons and vibra than 3 m. s are only ac nes .
sed when plac st of at least driving lanes SPECIFICA TATION an hall meet the r le of spreadin ributing screw eds and shal oth and unifo .
hich are capa with each pav controls .
uipped to ope dinal grade c 2 m ski/floati control longit .
led in a read ts .
ating bolt-on cceptable whe cing widths les one of each o s shall requir ATIONS nd INFRAS requirements ng mixture true ws to place mi ll be capable orm textured s able of prehea ver .
erate from eith control as we ng beam or tudinal grade dily visible loc screed exten en laying ma ss than 3 m. of the followin re the use of TRUCTUR ITEM : 26 January , 20 of e to line , grad ixture evenly e of spreadin surface , to th ating the entir her side of th ell as matchin r an approve of subseque cation on eac nsions shall b ats of irregula ng : f two vibrato RE 61 15 de in ng he re he ng ed nt ch be ar ry DEPA ASPHA Janua 261.4 .
261.4 .
261.4 261.4.3 261.4.3 261.4 .
ARTMENT ALT CONCR ary , 2015 2.4.1 .2 2 .5 Ma .1 .3 Produc 3 .1 Pro .1 .2 3 .2 Tria .1 3 .3 Mix .1 STAN of TRANS RETE - END R .2 Pneuma .1 A co the v .2 Pav tired .3 Steel-dr .1 Use All rollers w from adherin .1 Hydroca aterial Transfe Material tran self-propelle equipment in .1 Minimum .2 A conve paver ho .3 An auge asphalt ction and Plac oduction of Mi Asphalt conc For the plant al Mix Trial mixes a unless other xing and Tem Mixing temp asphalt con 5C of the Engineer .
.1 The max the temp .2 The ma additive NDARD SP PORTATIO RESULT SPE PAV atic-tired rolle ombination st vibratory and ving in echelo d rollers .
rum tandem fi e of a steel-dru with rubber tire ng to the rubb arbon fuels or er Vehicle ( MT nsfer vehicles ed equipmen nto the paver m storage cap eyor system t opper insert ; er system in concrete prio cement of Asp x crete shall me t mix , the TSR are the prope rwise authoriz mperatures perature for a crete mix wh temperature ximum mixing perature reco aximum temp supplier .
PECIFICAT ON and INF ECIFICATION VEMENT STRUC r. eel-drum vibr pneumatic ro on on the driv inish roller .
um finish roller es shall be e ber tires .
r solvents sha TV ) s shall be use t capable of r , and shall ha pacity of 20 t ; to transfer as and the MTV or or to discharge phalt Concrete eet the require R shall meet t erty of the Con zed by the Eng all types of p hen discharge e requirement g temperature ommended by perature of th TIONS FRASTRUC N ( ERS ) CTURE ratory/pneuma ollers .
ving lanes sha r on base cou equipped with all not be used ed for placem f transferring ave the follow ; sphalt concret paddle mixe e from the ho e Mix ements of Tab the requireme ntractor and s gineer for the plants shall b ed from the t of the DMF e for hot mixe y the asphalt he WMA mix CTURE atic tire roller all require the urses shall be a means to d. ment of aspha asphalt con wing character te from the h ers in the hop opper insert .
ble 261-7. ents of Table 2 shall be place purpose of pa be such that mixer unit sh , unless othe ed asphalt co binder supplie x shall be as P may be used e use of two optional .
prevent the a alt concrete , a ncrete from t ristics : hauling equipm pper insert to 261-1. ed outside the adding or patc the tempera hall be contr erwise author ncrete shall b er .
specified by ITEM : 261 Page 261-15 d in place of pneumatic- asphalt mix and shall be the hauling ment to the o remix the e Work Site , ching .
ature of the olled within rized by the be 165°C or y the WMA AS Pag 261 261 261 PHALT CON ge 261-16 1.4.3.3 1.4.3 .4 1.4.3 .5 NCRETE - EN .2 The heat and dam .1 The printe .2 The requi Table .3 Overnigh .4 Reclaime introduct .5 Moisture .1 The disch .2 The as bu not o .6 During p identified .7 When pr summary Transportatio .1 Trucks fo materials .2 Loads sh truck box truck or s .3 Truck bo agent , as loading .
.1 Hydr .4 Tarpaulin immediat Timing of Pav .1 Paving o lifted or c the Engin DEPARTM D RESULT S ting of the asp age to the asp system shall ed record of th asphalt bind irements of th e 1 - Performa ht storage in s ed asphalt co ion into the p Content : maximum m harged from t aggregate sh ut not limited occur .
paving opera d in the Contra roducing Hot y from the pla on of Asphalt or transportin s. hall be cover xes and be tie shielded to pr oxes may be s required , b rocarbon fuels ns shall be tely prior to d ving Operatio operations sha continue afte neer .
ST MENT of TR SPECIFICATI PAVEMENT ST phalt mix shal phalt binder .
be equipped he mix tempe er recovered he Pressure ance Graded ilos shall not b oncrete shall lant .
moisture cont he mixing uni hall be dried to the presen ations the C act .
Recycled Asp ant operating s Concrete ng asphalt co red with tarpa ed down on th revent air infilt e lightly lubr ut must be ra s or solvents rolled back umping the lo ons all not comme r the dates s TANDARD RANSPORT ION ( ERS ) RUCTURE l be controlled d with automa erature at disc by extractio Aging Vesse Asphalt Binde be permitted .
not be expo tent allowed it shall be 0.1 sufficiently so nce of foamin Contractor sh phalt the Con system detail oncrete shall aulins of suff hree sides an tration .
ricated with a aised and dra shall not be u and the hot oad into the p ence in the sp pecified in Ta SPECIFICA TATION an d to prevent t atic burner c harge .
on from the a el ( PAV ) as s er Specificatio osed to direc in the asph 0 % .
o that visual g , slumping o hall produce ntractor shall ling the daily have tight , m ficient size to d the front sh an environm rained after e used .
t asphalt con paver .
pring until the able 261-3 w ATIONS nd INFRAS the fracture of controls and s asphalt mix s pecified in AA on .
ct flame durin halt concrete evidence of m or Stripping of only the as submit the d mix proportio metal boxes o overhang th hall be tight to entally accep each applicati ncrete shall e DTI weight r without written TRUCTUR ITEM : 26 January , 20 f the aggregat shall provide shall meet th ASHTO M32 ng and/or afte e mix as it moisture , suc f the mix , doe sphalt mix ( es aily productio ons .
free of foreig he fully loade o the box of th ptable releas ion and befor be uncovere restrictions ar n permission o RE 61 15 te a he 0 , er is ch es s ) on gn ed he se re ed re of DEPA ASPHA Janua 261.4 .
261.4 .
ARTMENT ALT CONCR ary , 2015 3.5 .2 .3 .4 3 .6 Pla .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 STAN of TRANS RETE - END R Glo Re Paving ope altered by w The placem commencem entire milled When the R asphalt con milling oper received a lif acing Asphalt The Contrac .1 Asphalt precipita .2 When p to be ov When pavin water .
All prepared asphalt conc .1 Milled a coat in a Existing app paved surfa Contract Do .1 The rem prepare Contact ed Sidewalks a asphalt conc NDARD SP PORTATIO RESULT SPE PAV County ucester , Mada estigouche , V All others rations shall written approv ent of the ne ment of the co surface has r RAP is being r crete shall c ration and sh ft of asphalt co Concrete ctor shall plac concrete s ation .
placing asphal verlaid shall be ng on Aggreg d surfaces sha crete .
and aged asp accordance w proaches to r aces or other ocuments or a moved mater d as identified ges of exist and Bridge St crete .
PECIFICAT ON and INF ECIFICATION VEMENT STRUC Cut-of awaska , Victoria s only be con al of the Engi ew asphalt co old milling op received a lift o reused in a re commence wi hall continue oncrete .
ce asphalt con hall not be lt concrete su e a minimum o gate Base , th all be cleaned phalt concrete with Item 259 railway cross r Structures , as directed by rial shall be d in the Contr ting mats an tructures shal TIONS FRASTRUC N ( ERS ) CTURE Table 261-3 ff Dates for P Surfa Oct Oct nducted durin ineer .
oncrete mix sh peration and s of asphalt con ecycled aspha ithin 21 Days on a daily ba ncrete on a d placed und urface mix , th of 5C .
he Aggregate d of loose or f e surfaces s prior to the p sings and Brid shall be rem y the Enginee disposed of ract Documen nd contact f ll receive an CTURE Paving ace mixes ober 07 tober 22 ng Daylight h hall commenc shall continue ncrete .
alt concrete m s of the com asis until the e ry surface .
der adverse e surface tem e Base must foreign mater hall be treate lacing of asph dge Structure moved to the er .
and the exp nts or as direc faces of cur application of P Base m Octobe Octobe hours unless ce within 14 D on a daily ba mix , the place mmencement entire milled s weather co mperature of t t be free fro rial prior to pla ed with bitum halt concrete .
es , or areas e depths sho posed surface cted by the E rbs , gutters , f tack before ITEM : 261 Page 261-17 mixes er 22 er 31 specifically Days of the asis until the ement of the of the cold surface has onditions of the material m standing acing of the minous tack .
adjacent to own on the es shall be ngineer .
manholes , placing the AS Pag 261 PHALT CON ge 261-18 1.4.3.6 . . . . . . . NCRETE - EN .6 The temp .1 A mi .2 A mi .7 The max temperat .8 The max .1 The incre .2 The temp .9 When lay by a stan alignmen 10 Irregulari shall be rolled .
11 The cros measure Contract 12 In narro driveway methods hand pla 13 Paving o and as d laying , sh mat , unle .1 Drive layin 14 Spreadin out conc approved 15 Adjacent complete 16 For ESAL placed a permitted .1 Wate Item DEPARTM D RESULT S perature prior nimum of 115 nimum of 90° ximum tempe ture recomme ximum temper allowable m eased for Wor temperature perature probe ying base and ndard method nt designated ities in alignm corrected by ss slope of the ed over 3 m , p Documents o ow base wid ys where it is , the asphalt cement pract of intersection defined in the hall be carried ess otherwise eway entranc g operation o ng of asphalt urrently with d by the Engin asphalt con ed to approxim L counts equa asphalt concre d to cool to 60 er required to 191 .
ST MENT of TR SPECIFICATI PAVEMENT ST r to initial com 5°C for hot mi °C for warm m erature of the ended by the a rature of the W maximum tem rk after Octob e shall be c e. d/or surface c d , such as fol by the Engin ment and gra y the addition e asphalt con perpendicular or provided by dening , deep s impractical t concrete sh tices .
s , extra width e Contract D d out concurr e approved by ces and apron of the regular concrete by h the machine neer .
ncrete mats , mately the sam al to or greate ete until finish 0C .
o lower the m TANDARD RANSPORT ION ( ERS ) RUCTURE mpaction shall ixed asphalt c mixed asphalt e hot mixed a asphalt binder WMA behind mperature of ber 1st , if appr checked with course the al lowing a strin eer .
ade along the n or removal ncrete surface r to the centre y the Enginee p or irregula to spread a all be spread hs and other v Documents , w rently with the y the Enginee ns shall be p mat .
hand shall be laying operat including th me location at er than 3 millio h rolling is co mat temperatu SPECIFICA TATION an be : concrete .
t concrete .
asphalt conc r supplier .
the screed sh the WMA b roved by the E h a calibrat lignment of th ngline , placed e outside ed of asphalt co e shall be wit eline ) of the c er .
ar sections , and finish asp d by hand in variations fro whether by h e machine lay er .
paved concur e kept to a mi tion of the reg hose placed t the end of ea on , no traffic s omplete , and ure shall be s ATIONS nd INFRAS crete shall be hall be 125°C behind the sc Engineer .
ted stem th he paver shal d by the Cont ge of the as oncrete befo thin ± 0.5 % ( cross slope s intersections phalt concret n accordance m standard L and spreadin ying operation rrently or afte nimum and s gular mat , un on Shoulde ach day 's pav shall be perm the finished supplied in ac TRUCTUR ITEM : 26 January , 20 e 165oC or th C. creed may b ermometer o ll be controlle tractor from a phalt concret re the edge ( ±15 mm whe specified in th , turn-outs o te by machin with standar Lane alignme ng or machin n of the regula er the machin shall be carrie nless otherwis er ( s ) , shall b ing .
mitted on new mat has bee ccordance wit RE 61 15 he be or ed an te is en he or ne rd nt ne ar ne ed se be wly en th DEPA ASPHA Janua 261.4.3 261.4 .
261.4 .
261.4 .
261.4 .
ARTMENT ALT CONCR ary , 2015 3.6 .17 .18 .19 3 .7 Pad .1 3 .8 Driv .1 3 .9 Joi 3.9 .1 STAN of TRANS RETE - END R Damage to t be immediat All placemen and any load be rejected b The speed o continuous o dding Padding sha .1 Material specified .2 Asphalt by other .3 The com .1 For .2 The com .4 Padding construc .5 For pad tonnes o .1 A m veways and A Material pla paved concu nts General .1 Joints s a smoot .2 Dirt or o which jo .3 The Co construc week .
NDARD SP PORTATIO RESULT SPE PAV the mat as a r tely repaired b nt , spreading ds arriving at by the Engine of the paver s operation of th all not be inclu l for padding d in the Contr concrete for r methods ap mpaction Equ padding , 261 e Contractor mpaction of th g is intended t ction of the su dding , loose of mix to dete minimum of on Aprons ced in drivew urrently with t hall be constr th riding surfa other foreign oints are to be ntractor shall ction or other PECIFICAT ON and INF ECIFICATION VEMENT STRUC result of conta by the Contrac , compacting the Work Site eer .
shall be match he paver .
uded as part g shall be t ract Documen padding sha proved by the ipment shall b 1.4.5.4 , 261.4 shall establ e asphalt con to be a separ ubsequent lift mix sampling ermine the act ne sample sha ways and apr the main lane ructed to ens ace .
and loose m e made .
l remove and r Work activit TIONS FRASTRUC N ( ERS ) CTURE aminant spills ctor to the sat and rolling s e such that th hed to the pro of a Lot .
the same as nts .
ll be placed b e Engineer .
be in accorda 4.5.5 , 261.4.5. ish a rolling ncrete used fo rate operation t of asphalt co g will be don tual binder co all be obtaine rons shall onl es .
ure thorough material shall d dispose of ty , outside th CTURE from the Con tisfaction of th hall occur on ese requirem oduction of the sphalt concre by means of ance with 261 .6 and 261.4. g pattern to or padding .
n and shall no oncrete .
ne at a rate ontent .
ed for quantitie ly be include and continuo be removed waste mater he Work Site P ntractor ’ s Equi he Engineer .
ly during Day ments can not b e asphalt plan ete mix desi a self-powere .4.2.4 .
5.8 shall not achieve the ot be done as of one samp es less than 5 d as part of ous bond , and d from the fac rials , resulting before the e ITEM : 261 Page 261-19 ipment shall ylight hours , be met shall nt to ensure ignation as ed paver or apply .
e maximum s part of the ple per 500 500 tonnes .
a Lot when d to provide ces against g from joint end of each AS Pag 261 261 261 PHALT CON ge 261-20 1.4.3.9 1.4.3.9 1.4.3.9 NCRETE - EN .2 Transver .1 A Tra and a asph .1 B .2 B .2 Whe the c .3 Whe back broke .3 Transver .1 Whe pave betw pavin .1 I s l .2 P s w .2 Whe as th asph begin termi .4 Longitud .1 The f .1 W .2 C m p E . .3 A s 2 DEPARTM D RESULT S rse Construct ansverse Con at other times halt concrete t Below 115°C Below 90°C fo re the asphal conditions not n paving res k to full mat en or loose m rse Key Joint n the elevatio ement , a trans ween the existi ng limits and o f a transvers shall immedia ong taper at t Prior to the p shall be clean with 259.2 , 25 n the elevatio he existing pav halt Pavemen nning and at t inates against inal Joint following requ Widths of suc Contractors u may leave a production wi Engineer .
1 Before M to tack the All longitudina shall receive 259.4 .
ST MENT of TR SPECIFICATI PAVEMENT ST ion Joint nstruction Join s when pavin to cool .
for hot mixed or warm mixe lt concrete su ted in 261.4.3 sumes , tapers thickness to material and ta on of the new sverse key jo ng and new a other locations se key is cut ately construc the joint area lacement of t ned of loose fo 59.3 , and 259.4 on of the new vement , a stra t shall be co the end of the t an existing p uirements sha cceeding indiv sing a one pa an exposed thout an app ay 15th and a e longitudinal al joints left e an applicatio TANDARD RANSPORT ION ( ERS ) RUCTURE nt shall be co g is halted fo d asphalt conc ed asphalt con rface and/or 3.9.2.1 , a smo s from surfac expose fres acked in acco asphalt conc oint shall be c asphalt concre s , as determin in advance o ct with hot m , as shown in the asphalt co oreign materia 4. w asphalt conc aight vertical s onstructed be e project and pavement .
all apply when vidual courses aver operatio longitudinal lication of tac after Septemb joint in accor exposed over on of tack coa SPECIFICA TATION an onstructed at t or a period of crete .
ncrete .
base course ooth 1.5 m lon ce courses p sh , straight v ordance with 2 crete pavemen constructed p ete pavement ned by the Eng of paving the mixed asphalt n Standard Dr oncrete , all tr al and a tack crete Paveme surface equa etween the n other location n constructing s shall be offs on between M joint for up ck coat unles ber 15th the C rdance with 2 rnight or whic at in accorda ATIONS nd INFRAS the end of ea time which s has been term ng taper shall previously lai vertical surfac 259.2 , 259.3 nt is higher th per Standard t , at the begin gineer .
e joint area , t concrete a rawing 260-1. ransverse key k coat applied ent is at the s l to the thickn ew lift of Pa ns where the g longitudinal set by 50-100 May 15th and S to one-half s otherwise d Contractor sh 259.2 , 259.3 a ch are expose ance with 259 TRUCTUR ITEM : 26 January , 20 ach Day ’ s Wo shall permit th minated due t be paved .
d shall be c ces , free fro and 259.4. han the existin Drawing 260- ning and at th the Contracto smooth 1.5 y joint surface in accordanc same elevatio ness of the ne avement at th new paveme l joints .
0 mm .
September 15 f of the day directed by th all be require and 259.4. ed to moistur 9.2 , 259.3 an RE 61 15 rk he to ut m ng -1 he or m es ce on ew he nt 5th y 's he ed re nd DEPA ASPHA Janua 261.4 .
261.4 .
261.4 .
ARTMENT ALT CONCR ary , 2015 3.9.4.1 3 .10 Co .1 .2 3 .11 Add .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9 STAN of TRANS RETE - END R .4 Lon the .5 Lon und .6 On mat mat mpaction of A If damage t vibratory co Equipment a Along curbs rollers , the m as vibrating ditional Requ The Contra accordance The Contrac resulting from .1 Should stopped paving r Expansion j passing ove .1 The pla indicated The Contrac A steel-drum pressure on roller require The breakdo After breakd not to displa The mat sha For Bridge d NDARD SP PORTATIO RESULT SPE PAV gitudinal joint final lift of asp gitudinal join er rolling is a surface cour terial is not s terial shall be Asphalt Concr to Highway c ompaction Eq and proceed w s , manholes mixture shall plate tamper irements for B ctor shall pl with the wate ctor shall be m any aspect the membran and repairs m recommences joints and de r them .
acing of the d on Standard ctor shall subm m tandem roll compression ed for Bridge d own roller sha down rolling , t ce the mat wh all be finish ro decks , 261.4.5 PECIFICAT ON and INF ECIFICATION VEMENT STRUC ts shall not be phalt concrete ts shall be co chieved .
rses , the me cattered on t carefully rem rete components a quipment , the with the Work and similar S be compacte s , or by hand Bridge Deck P ace asphalt erproofing man e responsible of the paving ne become d made , in acco s. eck drains sh asphalt conc d Drawing 260 mit a rolling pa er , operating n roll of at leas deck paving .
all be required the mat shall hen stopping lled to remove 5.4 , 261.4.5.6 TIONS FRASTRUC N ( ERS ) CTURE e permitted b e. onstructed to thod of maki the surface o moved .
and/or adjace e Contractor k using static Structures an ed with either d tampers .
Paving concrete on nufacturer ’ s re for all dama g operation .
damaged , pav ordance with t hall be prote crete at expa 0-2. attern for the a in the non-v st 3.0 kg/mm to run off the be rolled with or turning .
e any marks .
and 261.4.5.8 CTURE between the e o ensure that ing joints sha of the freshly ent property shall immed rolling Equip nd places no smaller comp n the deck w ecommendati age to the w ving operatio the manufactu ected from d ansion joints approval of th vibratory mode of drum width e deck to stop h a pneumati 8 shall not ap P edges of drivin maximum co all be such t laid mat and is occurring w diately cease ment .
ot accessible pactive Equip waterproofing on and/or pro waterproofing ns shall be i urer ’ s instruct amage from shall be co he Engineer .
e and exertin h shall be the and turn .
c tired roller , pply .
ITEM : 261 Page 261-21 ng Lanes in ompression that excess d all excess while using e using this to full size pment , such system in ocedures .
membrane immediately ions , before Equipment mpleted as ng a contact breakdown taking care AS Pag 261 261 261 261 261 261 261 PHALT CON ge 261-22 1.4 .4 Qua 1.4.4 .1 1.4.4 .2 1.4.4 .3 1.4.4 .4 1.4 .5 Qua 1.4.5 .1 NCRETE - EN ality Control T General .1 The Con stage of product , Specifica Inspection Te .1 The Con all phase the ITP , w .2 The ITP and requ .3 The ITP Contracto processe .4 Once ac enforced .5 The ITP Sampling and .1 Where sp random s by the Co .2 The Con determin the requi .3 The Con .1 Resu at all Asphalt Com .1 For each a nuclea shall imm ality Assuranc General .1 The Con detail to t .1 While prod DEPARTM D RESULT S Testing ntractor shall the Work from to ensure m ation .
esting Plan ( IT ntractor shall es of the Con within 10 Day shall include uired test proc shall be suffi or ’ s willingne es .
cepted by the accordingly .
may have to d Test Result pecified , rand sampling pro ontractor .
ntractor shall ation of any a rements of th tractor shall m ults of all qua times and co mpaction Rollin h asphalt conc ar gauge or e mediately sub ce Testing and ntractor shall the dimension e the Contrac uct , acceptan ST MENT of TR SPECIFICATI PAVEMENT ST be totally res m the crushin materials and TP ) submit , upon ntract perform ys after the Co e , but not be cedures to be ciently comp ess and ab e Engineer th be updated a ts dom sampling cedure is spe be responsib action to be ta he Contract .
maintain reco lity control tes opies shall be ng Pattern crete mix type equivalent .
U mit a copy to d Adjustment provide an nal and tolera ctor shall be fu nce testing is TANDARD RANSPORT ION ( ERS ) RUCTURE sponsible for ng and produc workmanship request , in w mance and the ontract award limited to , ide used during rehensive an bility to con he plan becom and revised , b g procedures ecified the sa ble for the in aken to ensur rds of all insp sts shall be a e provided if re e the Contrac pon completi the Engineer ts end product ance requirem ully and exclu the responsib SPECIFICA TATION an quality contr ction of aggre p conform wi writing to the e name of th d. entification an the entire life d detailed to ntrol the con mes a part o by the Contrac shall be follo ampling proce nterpretation re that all mat pection and te available for e equested by t ctor shall esta ion of the rol r. conforming ments of the P usively respon bility of the En ATIONS nd INFRAS rol testing thr egates to the th the requir Engineer , an e party retain nd description e of the Contra assure the E nstruction pr of the Contrac ctor , as condi owed , and wh edure shall b of the test re terials and W ests .
examination b the Engineer ablish a rolling lling pattern in quality an Plans and Spe nsible for prod ngineer .
TRUCTUR ITEM : 26 January , 20 roughout eve final accepte ements of th n ITP coverin ned to condu n of inspectio act .
Engineer of th roduction an ct and shall b itions warrant ere no specif be as identifie esults and th Work conform t y the Enginee .
g pattern usin the Contracto nd accuracy o ecifications .
ducing the en RE 61 15 ry ed is ng ct on he nd be t. fic ed he to er ng or of nd DEPA ASPHA Janua 261.4 .
S C Ig P S B T V F M S S A A T In A 261.4 .
ARTMENT ALT CONCR ary , 2015 5.1.1 .2 Sampling Mixe Coring gnition Metho Percent Fractu Sieve Analysis Bulk Relative Theoretical Ma Voids Calculat Forming Supe Moisture Cont Smoothness o Stratified Rand Appeal Testing Asphalt Binde TSR ( Average n all test meth ASTM E11 sh 5.1 .3 STAN of TRANS RETE - END R .2 For Wo shall inc assuran .3 For Wor the Con Certain req materials an .1 The Eng as desc .2 The tes characte Test D es od ure s Density aximum Rela tions , Asphalt erpave Specim tent , Oven Me of Pavements dom Test Site g r : Fla Vis Rh Ro Ac Fle e of Condition hods used as all be substitu The Enginee or materials .1 Such ins to contro .2 The En Contrac in accor NDARD SP PORTATIO RESULT SPE PAV rk Category corporate the nce test result rk Category 1 tractor shall p uirements , li nd workmansh gineer and th ribed in 261.4 st methods in eristics .
Description tive Density t Concrete Sp mens , Field M ethod Asphalt s , Profiler Met es for A.C.P .
ash and Fire P scosity heological Pro olling Thin Film ccelerated Ag exible Creep S ed & Freeze/ reference in uted for any o er reserves th and those of spections and ol quality .
gineer ’ s appr ctor from her/ rdance with th PECIFICAT ON and INF ECIFICATION VEMENT STRUC 1 acceptance quality contr ts from the En 1 the Enginee perform the q mits and tol hip to be supp e Contractor 4.5. ndicated in T Ta Tes pecimens Method t Concrete Mi hod Projects Points operties m Oven ing ( PAV ) Stiffness /Thaw TSR va this specifica other specified he right to ins f subcontracto d tests shall n roval of any his obligation he Specificatio TIONS FRASTRUC N ( ERS ) CTURE e testing is th rol test results ngineer in acc er shall perfo uality control lerances are plied .
shall test for Table 261-4 s able 261-4 st Methods As ix A alues ) ation , metric s d wire cloth s pect and/or te ors and suppl not relieve the materials or n to provide m ons .
CTURE he responsibi s from the Co cordance with orm the qualit testing .
e specified re r compliance shall be used Test AST AST DTI Asphalt ssurance Tec Manual , DTI ASTM C 13 AST AASH AST AASH AST AST AST as outlined AASHTO T 4 AASHTO T31 AASH AASH AAS AASH AST sieves as spec sieves .
est any of the liers , regardle e Contractor o mixture sha materials , mix P ility of the En ontractor with h this Item .
ty assurance egarding the with these re d to determi t Method TM D 979 M D 5361 Concrete Qu chnician Certi Procedure # I Method 36/ASTM C 1 M D 2726 HTO T209 M D 3203 HTO T 312 M D 2172 TM E 950 M D 3665 in Specificati 48 or ASTM D 6 or ASTM D HTO T315 HTO T 240 SHTO R28 HTO T313 M D 4867 cified in e Contractor ’ s ess of location of his/her resp ll in no way xtures and wo ITEM : 261 Page 261-23 ngineer and h the quality testing and e quality of equirements ne material uality fication 9 117 ons D 92 D 4402 s operations n. ponsibilities relieve the orkmanship AS Pag 261 PHALT CON ge 261-24 1.4.5.1 NCRETE - EN .4 The loos Engineer .1 The .2 The them for th .3 The .4 The to the .5 The conju hot m comp .5 The Eng within on .6 The QA available .1 For W who .2 For W appr .7 Tests pe .8 Random .1 Are 261 .2 Sma han .9 The proc .1 Whe resul Prac signi .1 A .2 If the test r DEPARTM D RESULT S e mix and co r. random locat Engineer will m to the Owne he Lot .
Engineer sha Contractor sh e Owner 's La Contractor s unction with r mixed aspha pacting each ineer shall pr ne working Da results for th e , provided the Work Catego has successf Work Catego oved by the E rformed by th sampling me as of obvious .4.5.11.2. all areas suc ndwork , and a cedure for dea n an individu lt in question ctice for Deal ficance level .
An appeal is r e outlier test result shall be ST MENT of TR SPECIFICATI PAVEMENT ST re samples s tions shall be l label the loo er ’ s laborator all be respons hall be respon boratory , with shall reinstat removal of th alt concrete i lift with 25 blo ovide the Con ay of their ava e loose samp e cores have ry 1 , the qua fully complete ory 1 , the qu Engineer befo he Engineer s ethods shall n s surface defe ch as tapers asphalt mix us aling with an o ual test result shall be det ling with Out required befo procedure sh e used in the TANDARD RANSPORT ION ( ERS ) RUCTURE hall be taken determined b ose mix sam ry once all of sible for labell nsible for the hin 2 hours of te the Pavem e core by de n 50 mm lif ows using a s ntractor with a ailability .
ples will be re been delivere lity control tes ed the NBDTI ality control t ore plant prod shall not be co ot be applied ects shall be s , aprons , Br sed for isolate outlier test res t from a Lot termined in a tlying Observ re the Outlier hows that the calculations .
SPECIFICA TATION an by the Contr by the Engine mples , and the f the loose sa ing the cores e storage and f coring , for te ment at each ewatering the fts to the Pa standard com a copy of the eported to th ed to the DTI sting shall be certification testing equip duction begins onsidered to b d to the follow marked and r ridge approa ed levelling an sult shall be a is questiona accordance w vations using r Test applies e challenged ATIONS nd INFRAS ractor in the p eer .
e Contractor amples have .
transportatio esting .
h core samp core hole an avement surf mpaction devic e results of ac e Contractor lab .
e performed b program .
pment shall b s. be quality con wing areas : repaired in ac aches , gores nd repair of fa as follows : able , the valid with ASTM E g a “ t ” test a s. test result is TRUCTUR ITEM : 26 January , 20 presence of th shall transpo been obtaine on of the core ple location nd filling it wit face elevatio ce .
cceptance tes once they ar by a technicia be verified an ntrol tests .
ccordance wit and areas o ailed areas .
dity of the te 178 , Standar at a 5 perce valid then th RE 61 15 he ort ed es in th n , ts re an nd th of st rd nt he DEPA ASPHA Janua 261.4 .
261.4 .
ARTMENT ALT CONCR ary , 2015 5 .2 For .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 5 .3 For .1 .2 STAN of TRANS RETE - END R r Work Categ For Work C every Lot on If the results control and mean of dev The toleranc characteristi sample mea Acce Mix Chara Air Voids Binder Con 4.75 mm 75 µm Note : The M If any of the acceptance quality assu If any of the Table 261-7 other contro r Work Categ For Work C a delayed ba For Work C using rando .1 If the te further t Test Pro Air Voids Asphalt B Percent P Percent P .2 If the te Owner w characte NDARD SP PORTATIO RESULT SPE PAV ory 1 Category 1 , qu n the Contrac s for a given quality assur viation for pay ce referred to ic between t an is defined i ptance Toler acteristics ntent Mix Characteri mix characte test results rance test res e control char 7 then the Lot ol characterist ory 2 and Wo ategory 2 and asis for every ategory 2 and m numbers a est results fro esting will be A perties Binder Conten Passing 4.75 Passing 75 µm est results fro will test the eristics per Ta PECIFICAT ON and INF ECIFICATION VEMENT STRUC uality assura t. Lot are within rance test re yment adjustm o in Table 26 the quality c in 261.1.2.7 .
Ta rance for Co Acceptanc B stics in Table eristics are ou for that mix sults .
racteristics of t shall be reje tics .
ork Category d Work Categ y Lot on the C d Work Categ and it will be te om the selec required and Table 261 cceptance C nt mm Sieve m Sieve om the selec remaining sa ables 261-9 , 2 TIONS FRASTRUC N ( ERS ) CTURE nce testing s n the toleranc sults shall be ment .
61-5 is the sa control and able 261-5 mbining QA e Tolerance Base Mix ± 0.70 ± 0.30 ± 5.0 ± 0.50 261-5 are bas utside the acc characteristic f a Lot is outs ected automa 3 gory 3 , quality Contract gory 3 , one s ested for qua cted sample m d the Lot will b -6 Criteria 2.5 J cted sample amples from 261-10 and 2 CTURE shall be done ces stated in e combined t ample mean quality assur and QC Lot Between QA sed on the ave ceptable toler c shall be ca side the acce atically regard y assurance sample will be ality assurance meet the crit be paid at 100 Criteria 50 % - 5.00 % JMF ± 0.40 JMF ± 6.0 JMF ± 1.0 do not meet the Lot .
The 261-14 .
P e on a delaye Table 261-5 , together to es difference fo rance test re Test Results A and QC Tes Surface ± 0.60 ± 0.20 ± 3.0 ± 0.40 erage Lot test rance in Table alculated usin ptance limits dless of the va testing shall e selected fro e. teria in Table 0 % .
t the above c e Owner will ITEM : 261 Page 261-25 ed basis for , the quality stablish the or each mix esults .
The s st Results Mix 0 0 0 0 results .
e 261-5 , the ng only the as listed in alues of the be done on om each Lot e 261-6 , no criteria , the test all mix AS Pag 261 261 261 PHALT CON ge 261-26 1.4.5.3.2 1.4.5 .4 1.4.5 .5 NCRETE - EN .3 A Sa deter per T Asphalt Dens .1 Density t .2 Pavemen sampling .1 For W segm .2 For W one f .3 In ea the lo the e .4 In no .5 Core conc patte .6 Core .7 Core place .1 T w .2 T c .3 The perc densities samples .
Asphalt Cont .1 Loose sa the MTV follows : .1 A Lo .2 For e whic .3 Each the o Cont DEPARTM D RESULT S ample Mean rmined , and t Tables 261-9 , sity testing shall b nt samples s g procedures .
Work Catego ments of appro Work Categor from each of ach segment a ongitudinal di edge of the se o case shall a es shall not b crete surface ern to achieve es shall not be es shall be ob ement of the L The maximum when applicab The Engineer concrete plac cent density o s with the ave . tent , Gradatio amples shall b V discharge u t shall be divi each segmen h to obtain th h sample sha other shall b tractor .
ST MENT of TR SPECIFICATI PAVEMENT ST or the Mean this value wil 261-10 and 2 be based on a shall be take ry 1 , five sam oximately equ ry 2 and Wor four segment a test site sha istance from egment .
lateral distan be taken in th mix is place e the maximum e taken within btained in acc Lot .
m may be ex ble .
r may allow ement .
of a Lot shall erage of the on and Air Voi be taken on t using an app ded into 3 se nt random nu e sample .
all be split in be set aside TANDARD RANSPORT ION ( ERS ) RUCTURE n of Deviation ll be used for 261-14. a Lot average en on the ro mples per Lot ual length .
k Category 3 ts of approxim all be located the end of th nce be less th he Shoulder ed , for which m compaction n 25 m of a loo cordance with xtended to inc cores to be be determine Theoretical M ids the road behin proved hoppe egments of ap umbers shall two equal po in the even SPECIFICA TATION an ns for the co r acceptance e method .
oad by corin shall be sele , four sample mately equal l d by using ran e segment an han 0.3 m from area where the Contract n of the aspha ose sample lo h ASTM D536 clude Saturda obtained wit ed by compar Maximum Re nd the paver er , with 3 sa pproximately e l be used to ortions , one p nt that an ap ATIONS nd INFRAS ombined test and Unit Pri ng using stra ected , one fro es per Lot sha length .
ndom number nd the lateral m the edge of only a single tor shall esta alt concrete .
ocation .
61 , within 24 ays , Sundays thin 12 hours ring the avera elative Densit before comp mples per Lo equal quantity determine t portion shall b ppeal is requ TRUCTUR ITEM : 26 January , 20 results will b ce Adjustme atified rando om each of fiv all be selected rs to determin l distance fro f a mat .
e lift of aspha ablish a rollin hours after th s and holiday s after aspha age of the cor ty of the loos paction , or fro ot selected a y. he tonnage a be tested , an uested by th RE 61 15 be nt m ve d , ne m alt ng he ys alt re se m as at nd he DEPA ASPHA Janua 261.4 .
261.4 .
261.4 .
261.4 .
ARTMENT ALT CONCR ary , 2015 5.5 .2 5 .6 Sm 5.6 .1 5.6 .2 STAN of TRANS RETE - END R If the plant obtained , an moothness General .1 The smo IRI Smoothn .1 Definitio .1 Roa .1 .2 Inte .1 .3 Rep .1 .4 Loc .1 .5 Seg .1 .6 Proj .1 NDARD SP PORTATIO RESULT SPE PAV production is nd the produc oothness req ness ons adway Smoot The smoothn will be classi categories a number of classification rehabilitation may impact t rnational Rou IRI is a st roughness in mm/m and re this specifica porting Interva The reporting IRI , and 10 m alized Rough Localized ro exceeds an roadway cate gment A segment o length .
The s segment len segment leng ject Chainage The distance the Contract and acceptab PECIFICAT ON and INF ECIFICATION VEMENT STRUC s 800 t or les ction shall be uirements sha hness Catego ness category fied as either are determine factors , inclu n , geometry n strategies a the ability to a ughness Index tatistical mea n a measure eported to tw ation .
al g interval for metres for loca hness oughness is established v egory .
of roadway sh segment leng ngth shall be gths may exis e e as measure stake chaina ble for the sm TIONS FRASTRUC N ( ERS ) CTURE ss , one addit added to the all be specifie ory ry that applies r Category A , ed solely at uding but n y , access and the prese achieve pavem x ( IRI ) asurement u ed longitudina wo ( 2 ) decima r this specifica alized roughn reported in value as set hall be defined th shall be 10 e 100 metre st as outlined ed by the High age but will be moothness spe CTURE tional random previous Lot .
ed in the Con s for a partic Category B o the Owner ’ s ot necessar points ( inte ence of othe ment smooth used to dete al profile .
IR al places for a ation shall be ness .
10 metre i out in Table d by the full la 0 metres for lo es for overal in 261.4.5.6. h Speed Prof e the only cha ecification .
P m loose samp .
tract Docume cular section or Category C discretion b ily limited to ersections , er physical fe ness .
ermine the RI shall be m all procedures e 100 metres ntervals whe 261-12 , for ane width ove ocalized roug l IRI , howev 2.4.3. filer will be re ainage deeme ITEM : 261 Page 261-27 ple shall be ents .
of roadway C. Roadway based on a o : roadway driveways ) , eatures that amount of measured in s relating to s for overall ere the IRI a particular er a defined ghness .
The ver , shorter eferenced to ed accurate AS Pag 261 261 PHALT CON ge 261-28 1.4.5.6.2 1.4.5.6 NCRETE - EN .2 Refe .1 T p  .3 Equi .1 A l e m .4 Smo .1 T T a .
.2 P . .3 E . . . .3 Bump/Di .1 Indiv to pa .2 The DEPARTM D RESULT S erences This specific publications :  ASTM E of Travele Reference pment A Class 1 Ine ow pass 0.3 equipment s manufacturer ’ othness Test The Owner w The Owner ’ s adjustments a 1 Smoothne completio Profile Measu 1 The prof simultane at 10 me computed Exclusions 1 The 10 m excluded structures segments payment a 2 Areas req shall be e 3 Individual attributed curb/gutte p Profile Req vidual bumps/ ayment adjust Bump/Dip pro ST MENT of TR SPECIFICATI PAVEMENT ST cation refers 950 Standard ed Surfaces e rtial Laser Pr 3 m ) , shall shall be ins ’ s recommend ting Procedur will conduct sm smoothness and areas req ess testing on of the pavin urements filer will rec eously at 10 m etre intervals d from the 10 metre segmen from smooth s located with s immediately adjustments .
quiring hand excluded .
10 metre se to physical er match-ins , uirement /dips exceedin tment as desc ofile requirem TANDARD RANSPORT ION ( ERS ) RUCTURE s to the fo d Test Metho with an Acce rofiler , with mo be used for stalled and dations and A es moothness te testing resul quiring correct will be carr ng operation .
cord the rig metre interval s. The 100 metre interva ts at both end hness calculat hin any 10 m y before and a work , tapers egments exhi features of will be exclud ng 8.4 mm as cribed in 261. ments shall ap SPECIFICA TATION an ollowing sta od for Measur elerometer E oving averag r all smooth operated ASTM E 950. esting in acco lts will be us tive work .
ried out as ght and left s. The final IR metre interv al average IR ds of the sec tions .
Bridges metre segme after the struc , intersection ibiting roughn the roadwa ded from paym s detected by .5.3. pply to interch ATIONS nd INFRAS andards , spe ring the Long Established In e filter ( high p hness measu in accordan ordance with ed in determ soon as p t wheel pat RI readings w val averages I values .
ction under co s , underpass ent , including cture shall be ns , gore areas ness , which c ay including ment adjustm y the profiler s ange ramps .
TRUCTUR ITEM : 26 January , 20 ecifications o gitudinal Profi nertial Profilin pass 90 m an urements .
Th nce with th ASTM E 950 mining payme possible upo th IRI value will be reporte s will then b ontract shall b s and overpas the 10 metr excluded fro s , aprons , et can be direct iron works o ments .
shall be subje RE 61 15 or le ng nd he he 0. nt on es ed be be ss re m tc .
tly or ct DEPA ASPHA Janua 261.4 .
261.4 .
261.4 .
ARTMENT ALT CONCR ary , 2015 5 .7 Asp .1 5 .8 Thi .1 .2 .3 .4 5 .9 Sur .1 .2 STAN of TRANS RETE - END R phalt Binder Asphalt bind .1 Samples Contrac .1 The .2 For Wo 10 000 from th .3 For W asphalt .4 The Eng and type any add .5 If a sa 261.2.1. concrete .1 Com prod ckness The Contrac Contract Do For Work Ca For Work Ca of the cores .1 If the th area sha For Work C controlled by rface Defects The finished of visible s measured w Any obvious Pavement c .1 Multiple .1 If a NDARD SP PORTATIO RESULT SPE PAV der samples s s shall be a ctor ’ s storage e sample conta ork Category 0 t of asphalt c he Contractor ’ ork Category t binder samp gineer shall l e of asphalt b ditives added mple test re .1 , the Engin e mix product mpliance shal duction is allo ctor shall plac ocuments and ategory 1 , thic ategory 1 , the obtained acc hickness does all be repaired Category 2 an y the Owner .
s d surface of a igns of poor with a 3 m stra s defects , as course .
defects withi defect is cont PECIFICAT ON and INF ECIFICATION VEMENT STRUC shall be obtain a minimum s tank in accor ainers shall be 1 , the Contr concrete mix ’ s asphalt bin y 2 and Wo ple per Contra abel the sam binder , suppl to the asphal esult falls ou neer may re tion .
ll be verified owed to contin ce the aspha d/or as specifi ckness shall b e Pavement t cording to 261 s not meet th d as indicated nd Work Cat any Pavemen r workmansh aight edge .
determined b n a 10 metre tinuous beyon TIONS FRASTRUC N ( ERS ) CTURE ned and pack size of one rdance with A e supplied by ractor shall o production , t der storage ta ork Category act .
mples with the ier , refinery , a t binder .
utside of the equire that th by the Engin nue .
lt concrete in cally directed be evaluated thickness sha 1.4.5.4. he requiremen d in 261.4.5.1 egory 3 , the nt course sha hip and bum by the Engine section shall nd 10 metres CTURE kaged as follo litre and sh ASTM D 140. y the Engineer obtain one as aken in accor ank ( s ) .
3 , the Cont e Contract nu and the name material req he Contracto neer before th n lifts at the th d by the Engin on a Lot by L all be determi nts of Table 11. asphalt conc all have a unif ps and/or d eer , shall be c l be considere s it shall be co P ows : hall be taken r. phalt binder rdance with A tractor shall umber , date , e and the pro quirements s or suspend t he asphalt co hickness indic neer .
Lot basis .
ned from the 261-7 then th crete thickne form texture a ips exceedin cause for reje ed as one def onsidered as o ITEM : 261 Page 261-29 n from the sample per ASTM D140 obtain one time , grade oportions of specified in the asphalt oncrete mix cated in the test results he deficient ess shall be and be free ng 3mm as ection of the fect .
one defect .
AS Pag 261 PHALT CON ge 261-30 1.4.5.9 NCRETE - EN .3 Such def .1 Segr .2 Rave .3 Rolle .4 Crac .5 Impr .6 Tire .7 Sam .8 Impr .9 Cont .10 Flush .11 Pneu DEPARTM D RESULT S fects shall inc regated areas elling ; er marks ; cking or tearin oper matchin marks ; pling location operly constr taminant spills hed Areas ; an umatic-tired ro ST MENT of TR SPECIFICATI PAVEMENT ST clude but not n s ; ng ; g of longitudi ns not properly ucted patche s on the mat ; nd oller pickup .
TANDARD RANSPORT ION ( ERS ) RUCTURE necessarily b nal and trans y reinstated ; s ; SPECIFICA TATION an be limited to th sverse joints ; ATIONS nd INFRAS he following : TRUCTUR ITEM : 26 January , 20 RE 61 15 DEPA ASPHA Janua Bulk Re Theore Density Asphalt Deviatio Gradat ( Mean from JM ( See N Cores w Toleran Air Void Mean o Target NOTES ARTMENT ALT CONCR ary , 2015 Measuremen elative Density etical Maximum y ( % ) t Content ( % ) ( ons of Lot from ion ( % ) of Deviations o MF ) ote 1 ) with Thickness nce ( # ) ( See No ds ( % ) of Deviations fr Value of 4.0 % S : 1 ) Additio a ) If T b ) If  6.6  > 7 .
c ) Fo s If 2 ) Specifi a ) Sp s b ) Li  Tole  Tole c ) If n a v d ) If d 3 ) For Co STAN of TRANS RETE - END R A nt as ( % ) of m Relative ( Mean of m JMF ) of Lot C , Within ote 2 ) om onal Requirem the average of Table 261-1 , the the average of 6 % to 7.5 % the 5 % , the Lot sh or Work Catego elected sample f the average fo ied Thickness f pecified Thickn amples .
ft Thickness To erance = 0.80 x erance = 0.85 x the thickness o next lift of aspha as specified in t verified by corin the thickness o deficient Lot sha ontracts with ≤ NDARD SP PORTATIO RESULT SPE PAV Acceptance/R Types of Mix Size ) All All B , HRB , W ( 4.75 m ( 75 µm D , HRD , WMA ( 4.75 m ( 75 µm All All ments for Grada f Lot test result e Lot shall be r f Lot test result Lot Payment s all be rejected .
ory 2 and Work e , the remainin or all samples e for Work Categ ness = specified olerance by Ty x Specified Th x Specified Th of either lift of b alt concrete to the Contract .
T ng the two lifts i of the surface l all be verified b 3 million ESAL PECIFICAT ON and INF ECIFICATION VEMENT STRUC Table 261 Rejection Req ( & Sieve ) WMA-B : mm ) m ) A-C , WMA-D : mm ) m ) ation : ts for the 4.75 m rejected .
ts for the 75 µm shall be reduce .
k Category 3 , w ng samples sha exceeds 6.5 % gory 1 : d application ra ype of Mix ickness ( HRB ) ickness ( B , C , base mix is less achieve a thick The total thickn in the area of t ift is less than by coring all the L , a rejected Lo TIONS FRASTRUC N ( ERS ) CTURE -7 quirements b Increased > 92.5 N.A .
N.A .
N.A .
N.A .
N.A .
N.A .
N.A .
N.A .
mm sieve size m sieve size ex ed by $ 5.00/t ; when the 75 µm all be tested for refer to Note 1 ate ÷ bulk relat D ) s than the toler kness equivale ness of the two he deficient Lo the tolerance , e lifts in the are ot will be paid a CTURE by Lot Lot Payment Full 92.5 9 0.0– 0.4 0.0 – 0.3 0 0 0.0 – 6.0 0.0 – 0.8 6 0.0 – 5.0 0.0 – 0.5 4 of 5 1.00 falls outside th xceeds 6.5 % , th m sieve size ex r percent passi 1b .
tive density obt rance , the Con ent to the total t lifts for the def ot .
the total thickn ea of the deficie at 50 % of the C P Reduced 92.4 – 89.5 0.41 – 0.65 0.31 – 0.50 6.1 – 10.0 0.9 – 1.5 5.1 – 9.0 0.6 – 1.2 N.A .
1.01 - 2.0 he gradation lim he following sh xceeds 6.5 % fo ng the 75 µm s tained from cor ntractor shall pl thickness of the ficient Lot shal ness of all lifts f ent Lot .
Contractors Uni ITEM : 261 Page 261-31 Repair / Replace Reject < 89.5 > 0.65 > 0.50 > 10.0 > 1.5 > 9.0 > 1.2 3 of 5 > 2.0 mits of hall apply : or the sieve size .
re ace the e two lifts l be for the it Price .
AS Pag 261 PHALT CON ge 261-32 1.4.5 .10 NCRETE - EN Appeal of Lo .1 The Con content , .2 For Work mix char quality a calculate .3 Appeals .4 Any attem Lot for ac .5 The follo .1 The hour .2 The appe .1 T s .3 For Cont Engi .4 For W Cont Engi .5 If the rema Own .1 F C .2 F c s F L .6 The the C whic comm .1 P t DEPARTM D RESULT S t Test Results ntractor may gradation , air k Category 1 acteristic ( s ) f ssurance tes ed mean of de shall only be mpt to improv cceptance sh wing procedu Contractor s s of receipt of Contractor a eal of the Lot s The cores fo submission of Work Catego tractor shall neer .
These c Work Categor tractor shall neer .
These c e asphalt cont aining portion er ’ s Laborato For Work Ca Central Labor For Work Ca conducted at shall deliver t Fredericton .
A Laboratory .
Contractor m Contractor ’ s r h he does n ments in orde Prior to leavin testing proced ST MENT of TR SPECIFICATI PAVEMENT ST s appeal the r r voids and th , the Contrac from Table 26 st results are eviation indica considered fo ve density on all void the ap ures shall app hall serve no f the test resu nd the Engin shall be taken or the appea f the notice fo ory 1 , if the take 5 more cores shall be ry 2 and Wor take 4 more cores shall be tent , gradatio n of the sam ory .
ategory 1 , all ratory in Fred ategory 2 and the Owner's he Air Voids All other app may have a re representative not consider er to resolve t ng the testing dures are to b TANDARD RANSPORT ION ( ERS ) RUCTURE results of acc ickness for a ctor may app 61-5 , if the dif outside the t ates that the L or all tests wit n the appeale ppeal and the ply for an appe otice of appe ults .
eer shall agr n. l of the Lot or the appeal .
e density or e cores at ra e tested by th k Category 3 e cores at ra e tested by th on or air voids mples obtaine appeal testi ericton .
d Work Categ s Central Lab appeal samp eal testing s epresentative e shall comm to be valid hem .
g Laboratory a be given to the SPECIFICA TATION an ceptance test ny rejected o eal the result fference betw tolerance liste Lot will be reje thin the Lot .
ed Lot after th e original test eal : al to the Eng ree on a time shall be tak thickness of andom locatio e Owner .
, if the densit andom locatio e Owner .
s is appealed ed in 261.4. ing shall be gory 3 , air vo boratory in F ples to the Ow shall be cond present durin ment on anyth and the Eng any unresolve e Engineer in ATIONS nd INFRAS ting of the de r penalized L ts of any qua ween the qua ed in Table 2 ected .
he Engineer results shall gineer , in wri e at which the ken within 48 f the Lot is ons as deter ty of the Lot is ons as deter the Engineer .5.5 and tes conducted a oid appeal te Fredericton .
T wner 's Centra ducted in the ng the period hing concern gineer shall ed comments n writing .
TRUCTUR ITEM : 26 January , 20 ensity , aspha ot only once .
ality assuranc lity control an 261-5 , or if th has tested th apply .
iting , within 4 e cores for th 8 hours of th appealed th rmined by th s appealed th rmined by th r shall take th t them at th at the Owner esting shall b The Contracto al Laboratory Owner ’ s fie of the testing ing the testin respond to a s regarding th RE 61 15 alt ce nd he he 48 he he he he he he he he r ’ s be or in ld g ; ng all he DEPA ASPHA Janua 261.4 .
ARTMENT ALT CONCR ary , 2015 5.10.5.6 STAN of TRANS RETE - END R .2 Any sub be c .7 For Wor appeale .1 If th be cha set .2 If th com app .3 If th qua esta Con .4 Whe to c .8 The test new sam .1 A n resu Unit .2 For exce .3 The and .9 Analysis .1 Foll test at th Lot .2 An whic .3 If th to th be s .4 Any sha NDARD SP PORTATIO RESULT SPE PAV y comments , sequent to th considered .
rk Category 1 ed , the followi e appeal test combined to rged the Own out in Table 8 he appeal test mbined togeth eal testing .
e appeal test lity control lab ablish the me ntractor for the en the binder over the cost t results from mples .
new Sample ults shall be t Price adjustm Work Catego eed the lift thi e new Lot tes the Owner .
s of Rejected owing an app results conti he discretion is acceptable analysis , as ch segments e analysis ind he sample se subject to 261 y and all pric ll apply .
PECIFICAT ON and INF ECIFICATION VEMENT STRUC with respec he Contractor , when the re ng procedure t result ( s ) is c gether for pa ners lab testin 810-1. t result ( s ) is c her for payme t result ( s ) is s b , the results ean of devia e appeal testi r content is a of calibrating m the original Mean or the determined a ment .
ory 1 thicknes ickness tolera st results so o Lots peal of the en nue to indica of the Engin e. determined b may be acce dicates partia egment ( s ) in 1.4.5.11.2 or 2 ce adjustmen TIONS FRASTRUC N ( ERS ) CTURE ct to the tes r ’ s representa esults of the m es shall apply closer to the q ayment adjus ng fees to co closer to the ent adjustmen spaced equall from the thre ation for pay ing .
appealed , an g the ignition f Lot shall be e Mean of th and this valu ss appeals , 7 ance specified obtained sha ntire Lot , in ac ate rejection , t neer , to deter by the Engin eptable .
al Lot accepta which rejecte 261.4.5.11.3 , ts correspon CTURE sting proced ative leaving t mix character .
quality assura stment and t over the cost quality contro nt at no cost t ly between th ee labs shall yment adjustm additional $ 1 furnace .
combined wi he Deviations e shall be us 7 of the 10 te d in Table 26 all be binding ccordance wi the new test rmine whethe eer , will be c ance , only tho ed material p as determine ding to the r P dures , which the Laborator ristics in Table ance result ( s ) the Contracto of the appea ol result ( s ) th to the Contra he quality ass be combined ment at no c 1,300.00 will th the test re s for the com sed for acce est results mu 1-7. on both the th 261.4.5.10 results will be er or not a po carried out to ose areas cor placement occ ed by the Eng recalculated ITEM : 261 Page 261-33 are made ry , shall not e 261-5 are ) , they shall or shall be al testing as hey shall be actor for the surance and together to cost to the be charged esults of the mbined test ptance and ust meet or Contractor 0 , if the new e analyzed , ortion of the o determine rresponding curred shall gineer .
test results AS Pag 261 261 261 261 PHALT CON ge 261-34 1.4.5 .11 1.4.5.11 1.4.5.11 1.4.5.11 NCRETE - EN Repairs .1 General .1 Repa as p deter .2 The same .1 A s .3 Clau .2 Removal .1 The remo .2 All jo .3 Repa shall .4 Mate the m .3 Overlayin .1 The a fin mm f .2 A ke Draw .3 If an withi his/h .4 Repa .1 T .2 T .3 R a DEPARTM D RESULT S airs to correct er 261.4.5.11 rmined by the asphalt conc e asphalt con Any asphalt c shall not be in se 261.6.7 sh l and Replace full thickness oved by cold m oints shall be t aired areas sh require furth erial removed material outsid ng overlay shall ished compa for a surface ey shall be co wing 260-1. overlay resu n the Work A her own expen aired areas sh Those failing w The Contracto Removal dept and the origin ST MENT of TR SPECIFICATI PAVEMENT ST t surface defe 1.2 or routing e Engineer .
crete used for ncrete mix des concrete whic ncorporated in hall also apply ement s of the appr milling or othe tack-coated .
hall be retest er repair .
shall become de the Work S extend the fu cted thicknes course .
onstructed at lts in the nee Area , the Con nse and to the hall be reteste will be rejecte or shall then c th shall be su nal unsatisfact TANDARD RANSPORT ION ( ERS ) RUCTURE ects shall be g and crack r replacemen signation as t ch does not c n the Work .
y. ropriate lift of er means as a ed for accept e the property Site .
ull width of the ss of not less t each end o d for repairs ntractor shall c e satisfaction ed for accepta ed and a seco carry out repa ufficient to rem tory surface l SPECIFICA TATION an carried out b sealing .
The t to correct s hat which is r conform to th f Pavement i approved by t tance ; those f y of the Cont e underlying P s than 50 mm of the overlai or adjustmen carry out the of the Engine ance .
ond overlay s airs in accord move the full ift .
ATIONS nd INFRAS y removal an method of r surface defec removed .
e requiremen n the rejecte the Engineer failing shall b ractor , who s Pavement sur m for a base c id section as nts to the adja repairs and a eer .
shall not be pe ance with 26 thickness of TRUCTUR ITEM : 26 January , 20 nd replaceme repair shall b cts shall be th nts of this Ite ed Lot shall b . be rejected an shall dispose o rface and hav course and 3 s per Standar acent materia adjustments a ermitted .
1.4.5.11.2. the overlay l RE 61 15 nt be he m be nd of ve 34 rd als at ift DEPA ASPHA Janua 261.5 261.5 261.5 261.5 ARTMENT ALT CONCR ary , 2015 MEASURE .1 Genera .1 The con .1 .2 Unit Pr .1 The .1 .2 .3 .2 For sur 261 .3 For 261 .4 If re UP .5 The Lot .3 Payme .1 The inc .2 Ind Tab .3 For 261 STAN of TRANS RETE - END R MENT FOR P al e Quantity to ncrete placed For Work C calculated a [ 1.10  ( app ice Adjustme e UPAs for as For Work C 9 , 261-10 an For Work C and 261-14 be subjected For Work C and 261-14 be subjected r asphalt con rface mix ove 1-8 shall not a r asphalt conc 1-8 , 261-9 , 26 epairs are ca PA for the Lot e Unit Price ( t as follows : UPLot nt Adjustmen e Engineer w luding detaile ividual bump ble 261-13. r asphalt conc 1-11 , 261-12 NDARD SP PORTATIO RESULT SPE PAV PAYMENT o be measur , in accordan Category 1 , th as follows : plication rate ) nt ( UPA ) of th sphalt concre ategory 1 , the nd 261-14 .
Category 2 , th will be subjec d to 100 % of Category 3 , th will be subjec d to 100 % of ncrete placed er granulars is apply .
crete placed a 61-10 and 26 rried out by re shall be base ( UP ) for asph = UP +  ( UP nt for Smoothn will provide t ed payment ad ps and dips s crete placed o and 261-13 s PECIFICAT ON and INF ECIFICATION VEMENT STRUC red for paym ce with this It he Quantity of  ( length )  ( he Lot te are shown e UPAs for a he UPAs for cted to 75 % o the values lis he UPAs for cted to 50 % o the values lis d on Shoulde s specified a as padding , d 1-14 shall not emoval and re ed on quality a halt concrete PADensity + UP ness the Contracto djustment sum shall be asse on Bridge dec shall not apply TIONS FRASTRUC N ( ERS ) CTURE ment shall be tem , subject t f asphalt con ( specified wid in Tables 26 sphalt concre asphalt conc of the values sted .
asphalt conc of the values sted .
er areas whe and on Bridge driveways and t apply .
eplacement o assurance tes base or surfa PAAsphalt Content or with a co mmaries and essed in acco cks , the paym y. CTURE e the numbe to payment ad ncrete for a L dth ) ]  1000 61-8 , 261-9 , 2 ete are as sho crete as show listed and the crete as show listed and the ere a single e decks , the d aprons , the or overlay of t sting carried ace mixes sh + UPAGradation opy of the s mandatory re ordance with ment adjustm P er of tonnes djustments .
Lot shall not e 61-10 and 26 own in Table wn in Table 2 e UPAs in Ta wn in Table 2 e UPAs in Ta lift of aspha UPA as show e UPA as show the asphalt co out on the rep hall be adjuste + UPAAir Voids moothness t epair requirem the schedule ents as show ITEM : 261 Page 261-35 of asphalt exceed that 61-14. s 261-8 , 261- 261-9 , 261-10 able 261-8 wil 261-9 , 261-10 able 261-8 wil alt concrete wn in Table wn in Table oncrete , the paired Lot .
ed for each s ) est results , ments .
e set out in wn in Tables - 0 l 0 l AS Pag 261 PHALT CON ge 261-36 1.5.3 .4 .5 .6 .7 NCRETE - EN 100 Metre Se .1 Payment average Table 26 Localized Ro .1 With the an IRI va roughnes payment roughnes Total Payme .1 The tota adjustme payment value , th adjustme section o .2 If the tota shall be localized results in summatio Segments Le .1 For segm from 10 261.4.5.6 these are Price adj segment DEPARTM D RESULT S egments t adjustment IRI in mm/m 61-11. oughness exception of alue greater ss , resulting adjustment ss payments nt Adjustmen l payment ad ents for each adjustments he Contracto ent , and the of roadway .
al 100 metre assessed eit roughness p n a greater pe on .
ess Than 100 ments less th 0 metre seg 6.2.4.3 .
Paym eas based on justments sh s in the 100 m ST MENT of TR SPECIFICATI PAVEMENT ST for 100 metre m for each 10 f areas descr than those s in negative p shall be the adjustments f nts djustment sh 100 metre s . If the total 1 or shall be total localize segment pay her the total payment adju enalty to the C Metres han 100 metr gments that ment adjustm n the actual n all be prorate metre segmen TANDARD RANSPORT ION ( ERS ) RUCTURE e segments s 00 metre seg ibed in 261.4 shown in Tab payment adju numerical su for the define all be the su segment in e 100 metre se assessed th ed roughnes yment adjustm 100 metre se stment , which Contractor ) .
T res in length , are not su ments under 2 number of 10 ed based on nt , as detailed SPECIFICA TATION an shall be calcu gment in eac 4.5.6.2.4.3 , ea ble 261-12 sh ustments .
The ummation of ed section of r ummation of ach lane , inc gment payme he total 100 s payment a ment is a neg egment paym hever is num The two pena price adjust ubject to ex 261.5.3.4 an 0 metre segm the number d in Table 261 ATIONS nd INFRAS ulated based ch lane in ac ach 10 metre hall be define e total localiz all the indiv roadway .
all the indiv cluding localiz ent adjustme metre segm adjustment fo gative value , ment adjustme merically less alties shall no tments shall xclusions as nd 261.5.3.5 ments that are of non-exclu 1-11 .
TRUCTUR ITEM : 26 January , 20 on the overa ccordance wit e segment wit ed as localize zed roughnes vidual localize vidual payme zed roughnes nt is a positiv ment payme or the define the Contracto ent or the tot ( i.e .
whicheve ot be applied be determine described shall apply t e not excluded uded 10 metr RE 61 15 all th th ed ss ed nt ss ve nt ed or tal er in ed in to d. re DEPA ASPHA Janua ARTMENT ALT CONCR ary , 2015 % Ma ( C Ty STAN of TRANS RETE - END R % of Theoretic aximum Relat Density ( Lot Average ) 93.0 92.9 92.8 92.7 92.6 92.5 92.4 92.3 92.2 92.1 92.0 91.9 91.8 91.7 91.6 91.5 91.4 91.3 91.2 continue U Mean of the Content From ype B/HRB/W Type C/D/HR WMA-C/WM NDARD SP PORTATIO RESULT SPE PAV Unit Price al ive ) Un Adj ( $ pe + + + + + - - - - - - - - - - - - - ed next colum Unit Price Ad e Deviations m the Approv WMA-B RD/ A-D PECIFICAT ON and INF ECIFICATION VEMENT STRUC Table e Adjustmen nit Price ustment er Tonne ) +1.00 +0.80 +0.60 +0.40 +0.20 0.00 -0.20 -0.40 -0.60 -0.80 -1.00 -1.20 -1.40 -1.60 -1.80 -2.00 -2.20 -2.40 -2.60 mn Table djustment Fo s of Actual As ved Asphalt 0.00 to 0 0.41 to 0 0.46 to 0 0.51 to 0 0.56 to 0 0.61 to 0 > 0.65 0.00 to 0 0.31 to 0 0.36 to 0 0.41 to 0 0.46 to 0 > 0.50 TIONS FRASTRUC N ( ERS ) CTURE 261-8 nt For Densit % o Maxi ( Lo 261-9 or Asphalt Co sphalt Content 0.40 0.45 0.50 0.55 0.60 0.65 5 0.30 0.35 0.40 0.45 0.50 0 CTURE ty ( UPAd ) of Theoretical imum Relative Density ot Average ) 91.1 91.0 90.9 90.8 90.7 90.6 90.5 90.4 90.3 90.2 90.1 90.0 89.9 89.8 89.7 89.6 89.5 89.5 ontent ( UPAa Unit Pric Asphalt Co P e Unit Adju ( $ per -2 -3 -3 -3 -4 -4 -5 -5 -5 -6 -6 -7 -8 -9 -1 -1 -1 re a ) e adjustmen ntent ( $ per T 0.00 -1.00 -2.00 -3.00 -4.00 -5.00 reject 0.00 -1.00 -2.00 -3.00 -4.00 reject ITEM : 261 Page 261-37 t Price stment r Tonne ) 2.80 3.00 3.40 3.80 4.20 4.60 5.00 5.40 5.80 6.20 6.60 7.00 8.00 9.00 0.00 1.00 2.00 eject nt for Tonne ) AS Pag PHALT CON ge 261-38 A In sh ( a ) ( b ) ( c ) NCRETE - EN Sieve Si ASTM Desig 4.75 mm 75 µm addition to t all apply : ) If the avera limits of Tab ) If the avera shall apply :  6.6  > 7. )
For Work Ca 6.5 % for the passing the 1b .
DEPARTM D RESULT S Unit Price A ze gnation B m m the above ac ge of Lot test ble 261-1 , the ge of Lot test 6 % to 7.5 % the .5 % , the Lot w ategory 2 and e selected sam 75 µm sieve ST MENT of TR SPECIFICATI PAVEMENT ST Table 2 Adjustment F Mean of the Gradatio Type B/HRB/WMA- 0.0 to 6.0 6.1 to 6.2 6.3 to 6.4 6.5 to 6.6 6.7 to 6.8 6.9 to 7.0 7.1 to 7.2 7.3 to 7.4 7.5 to 7.6 7.7 to 7.8 7.9 to 8.0 8.1 to 9.0 9.1 to 10.0 > 10.0 0.0 to 0.8 0.9 1.0 1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4 to 1.5 > 1.5 cceptance/rej t results for th Lot shall be r t results for th e Lot Paymen will be rejecte d Work Categ mple , the rem size .
If the av TANDARD RANSPORT ION ( ERS ) RUCTURE 261-10 For Gradatio e Deviations on from the J -B Type C WMA-C 0.0 t 5.1 t 5.3 t 5.5 t 5.7 t 5.9 t 6.1 t 6.3 t 6.5 t 6.7 t 6.9 t 7.1 t 8.1 t > 0.0 t 0 0 0 0 1 1.1 t > jection requir he 4.75 mm s rejected .
he 75 µm sie nt shall be red d. ory 3 , when t maining sampl verage for all SPECIFICA TATION an on ( UPAg ) s of the JMF U C/D/HRD C/WMA-D to 5.0 to 5.2 to 5.4 to 5.6 to 5.8 to 6.0 to 6.2 to 6.4 to 6.6 to 6.8 to 7.0 to 8.0 to 9.0 9.0 to 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0 to 1.2 1.2 rements for g sieve size fal eve size exce duced by $ 5.0 the 75 µm sie es shall be te samples exce ATIONS nd INFRAS Unit Price Ad for Grad $ per To 0.00 -0.5 -1.0 -1.5 -2.0 -2.5 -3.0 -3.5 -4.0 -4.5 -5.0 -10.0 -15.0 rejec 0.00 -0.5 -1.5 -3.0 -5.0 -7.5 -12.0 rejec gradation , the lls outside the eeds 6.5 % , th 00/t ; eve size excee ested for perc eeds 6.5 % re TRUCTUR ITEM : 26 January , 20 djustment dation onne 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 00 00 ct 0 0 0 0 0 0 00 ct e following e gradation he following eds cent efer to Note RE 61 15 DEPA ASPHA Janua ARTMENT ALT CONCR ary , 2015 IRI ( mm/m 0.00 – 0.10 0.11 – 0.20 0.21 – 0.30 0.31 – 0.40 0.41 – 0.50 0.51 – 0.60 0.61 – 0.70 0.71 – 0.80 0.81 – 0.90 0.91 – 1.00 1.01 – 1.10 1.11 – 1.20 1.21 – 1.30 1.31 – 1.40 1.41 – 1.50 1.51 – 1.60 1.61 – 1.70 1.71 – 1.80 1.81 – 1.90 1.91 – 2.00 2.01 – 2.10 2.11 – 2.20 2.21 – 2.30 2.31 – 2.40 2.41 – 2.50 2.51 – 3.00 Roadway C Cate Cate Cate STAN of TRANS RETE - END R P Payment m ) Cate 0 + $ 7 0 + $ 6 0 + $ 5 0 + $ 4 0 + $ 4 0 + $ 3 0 + $ 2 0 + $ 1 0 - $ 2 0 - $ 2 0 - $ 4 0 - $ 7 0 - $ 1 0 - $ 1 0 - $ 1 0 - $ 2 0 - $ 2 0 - $ 3 0 - $ 4 0 - $ 4 0 - $ 4 0 - $ 4 0 - $ 4 0 - $ 4 0 - $ 4 0 - $ 4 Classificatio egory A egory B egory C NDARD SP PORTATIO RESULT SPE PAV Payment Adj t Adjustmen egory A 750.00 670.00 580.00 490.00 400.00 305.00 205.00 100.00 20.00 250.00 490.00 760.00 040.00 350.00 700.00 110.00 630.00 800.00 690.00 700.00 700.00 700.00 700.00 700.00 700.00 700.00 Payment Ad on Loca ( mm/m ) PECIFICAT ON and INF ECIFICATION VEMENT STRUC Table 261- justment 100 t for each 10 Catego + $ 950 + $ 860 + $ 770 + $ 670 + $ 570 + $ 470 + $ 370 + $ 270 + $ 160 + $ 50 - $ 70 - $ 190 - $ 320 - $ 450 - $ 590 - $ 740 - $ 900 - $ 1070 - $ 1260 - $ 1480 - $ 1720 - $ 2040 - $ 2750 - $ 3290 - $ 3300 - $ 3300 Table 261- djustment 10 alized Rough ) for 10 metr > 1.10 > 1.40 > 1.50 TIONS FRASTRUC N ( ERS ) CTURE -11 0 Metre Segm 00 metre Seg ory B 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 .00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 -12 Metre Segm hness IRI re Segments CTURE ments gment in eac Category + $ 1010.0 + $ 920.0 + $ 830.0 + $ 740.0 + $ 650.0 + $ 560.0 + $ 460.0 + $ 360.0 + $ 260.0 + $ 150.0 + $ 50.00 - $ 60.00 - $ 190.0 - $ 310.0 - $ 440.0 - $ 570.0 - $ 720.0 - $ 870.0 - $ 1040.0 - $ 1220.0 - $ 1430.0 - $ 1670.0 - $ 1980.0 - $ 2670.0 - $ 3190.0 - $ 3200.0 ments Paymen each P h Lane y C 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 nt Adjustmen h occurrence - $ 250.00 - $ 250.00 - $ 250.00 ITEM : 261 Page 261-39 nt ( for e ) AS Pag 261 PHALT CON ge 261-40 1.6 BASIS O .1 Pay conc .2 Com cont spec .1 NCRETE - EN Mean o from Targ OF PAYMENT ment for Wor crete , as iden mpensation to tent as determ cified in 261.2 Payment to asphalt binde following limi .1 The max “ Approve adjustme DEPARTM D RESULT S Bump 8 9.5 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 Unit Price A of Deviations get Value Air 0.00 to 1 .
1.01 to 1 .
1.11 to 1 .
1.21 to 1 .
1.31 to 1 .
1.41 to 1 .
1.51 to 1 .
1.61 to 1 .
1.71 to 1 .
1.81 to 1 .
1.91 to 2 .
> 2.00 T rk under this ntified under t o the Contra mined by QA 2.2.1 for the to the Contracto er content sp tations : ximum amou ed Asphalt ents , plus 0.65 ST MENT of TR SPECIFICATI PAVEMENT ST Table 2 p And Dip Pe Bump/Dip .5 to 9.4 mm 5 to 10.4 mm .5 to 11.4 mm .5 to 12.4 mm .5 to 13.4 mm .5 to 14.4 mm .5 to 15.4 mm .5 to 16.4 mm .5 to 17.4 mm .5 to 18.4 mm  18.5 mm Table 2 Adjustment s of Air Voids r Voids ( 4.00 .00 .10 .20 .30 .40 .50 .60 .70 .80 .90 .00 Item shall in he Contract .
actor or the A ignition furna otal payable t or shall be m pecified in 26 nt of asphalt Binder Cont 5 % for Type TANDARD RANSPORT ION ( ERS ) RUCTURE 261-13 enalty Sched m m m m m m m m 261-14 for Air Voids s 0 % ) clude a sepa Owner for d ace results , a tonnage , sha made for asp 61.2.2.1 for th t content use tent ” , from B/HRB mix a SPECIFICA TATION an dule Penalty $ 100.00 $ 200.00 $ 400.00 $ 600.00 $ 800.00 $ 1000.00 $ 1200.00 $ 1400.00 $ 1600.00 $ 1800.00 $ 2000.00 s ( UPAAV ) Unit Price - - - - - - - - - - R arate Unit Pri differences be and the assum ll be as follow phalt content he total paya ed in the ab the JMF a and 0.5 % for ATIONS nd INFRAS e Adjustmen ( $ /t ) 0.00 0.50 1.00 2.00 4.00 6.00 8.00 10.00 12.00 14.00 16.00 Reject ce for each t etween the a med asphalt ws : in excess of ble tonnage , ove calculati and subsequ Type C/D mix TRUCTUR ITEM : 26 January , 20 nt type of aspha asphalt binde binder conte f the assume subject to th on will be th uent approve x .
RE 61 15 alt er nt ed he he ed DEPA ASPHA Janua 261.6 .
ARTMENT ALT CONCR ary , 2015 2.1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .3 Payme accorda .4 In the c .1 If th the be .1 .2 If th rem pro .5 If the C and/or .1 The .6 For eac shall pa until pa Day for .7 For eac per defe STAN of TRANS RETE - END R If the actual Contractor s for the mont If the actual Owner shall Contractor .
Payments a This determ determining The asphalt ignition furna .1 For RAP the ignit .2 For pad ignition .3 No bind nt adjustmen ance with Item case that the C he new test r en the testing borne by the Payment to he new test r mains valid fo ocedure shall Contractor car dips , the smo Contractor s ch occurrence ay the Owner aving commen r more than 40 ch surface def ect .
NDARD SP PORTATIO RESULT SPE PAV asphalt binde shall reimburs th preceding t asphalt binde l reimburse t nd credits sh mination is in Unit Price ad t binder cont ace results ob P mixes , the a tion furnace re dding , the act furnace resul er adjustmen nt for chang m 821 .
Contractor in results after t costs incurre Owner .
the Contracto results after th or that Lot , be charged , i rries out impro oothness shal hall be charg e that paving a penalty of nces ; and $ 10 0 % of the Con fect as per 26 PECIFICAT ON and INF ECIFICATION VEMENT STRUC er content is se the Owne the month of er content is h the Contracto all be determ ndependent fr djustments as ent for each btained throu actual asphalt esults obtaine tual asphalt b ts obtained u t shall be req ge in the P itiates an app the appeal pr ed by the Ow or shall be ma he appeal pro the testing c in accordance ovements for ll be retested .
ed for the sm is not perform $ 1000 for eac 000 for each ntractor ’ s norm 61.4.5.9 , the C TIONS FRASTRUC N ( ERS ) CTURE less than the er using the M the tender op higher than the or at the actu mined on a Lot from and has s determined mix type wil ghout the con t binder conte ed throughou binder conten under 261.4.3 quired for mat G asphalt b peal under 26 rocess indica wner during th ade for the sa ocess verify t costs incurre e with Item 81 r smoothness .
moothness rete med per 261.4 ch Day after Day that pavi mal Work hour Contractor sha CTURE e assumed as MTO ’ s PG as pening .
e assumed as ual invoiced t by Lot basis s no relation under 261.6.3 ll be calculat ntract .
ent in the RAP t the contract nt will be calc .7.1.5. terial placed in binder price 61.4.5.10 , the ates that a pe he appeal pro ampling costs that a penalty ed by the Ow 10 , to the Con including rep esting in acco 4.3.5.3 or 26 the 14th Day ing is not con rs ) , until pavin all pay the Ow P phalt binder c sphalt binder sphalt binder amount supp s. nship to calc 3. ted by averag P will be subt t. culated by av n driveways a shall be ca following sha enalty no long ocedures for t s. y still applies wner during ntractor .
pairs to individ ordance with 61.4.3.5.4 , the or 21st Day , r ntinuous ( stop ng resumes .
wner a penalty ITEM : 261 Page 261-41 content , the price index content , the plied by the ulations for ging all the tracted from eraging the and aprons .
alculated in all apply : ger applies , that Lot will or rejection the appeal dual bumps Item 810. e Contractor respectively , pped on any y of $ 500.00 AS Pag 261 PHALT CON ge 261-42 1.6 .8 Man .1 .2 .3 .9 Com .1 .2 .3 .10 Rete .1 .11 Cos .1 NCRETE - EN ndatory Penalt The Contract segment with The Owner r with an IRI > Owner will wa The Owner sh mpulsory Corre Corrective wo concrete .
The On each of th replace the f concrete affec The asphalt c esting Followin After correcti corrective wo IRI values sh indicate furthe stated in 261. t for Correctiv All costs asso Contractor .
DEPARTM D RESULT S ty for IRI Cate tor shall be h an IRI > 3.00 eserves the r > 3.00 mm/m aive the - $ 250 hall notify the ective Work P ork shall cons e minimum len he 10 metre s full width of th cted .
concrete repai ng Corrective ive work has ork shall be re hall be used a er Mandatory .6.8 and as pe ve Work ociated with c ST MENT of TR SPECIFICATI PAVEMENT ST egory A subjected to 0 mm/m , with e right to require m. In sections 00 penalty .
Contractor if C Procedures sist of “ remov ngth of any re segments affe he driving lan ir shall conform Work s been comp etested , using and recalculate Penalty , the C er 261.6.11.1 corrective wor TANDARD RANSPORT ION ( ERS ) RUCTURE a mandatory exceptions of e Compulsory s where Com Compulsory C val and replac pair area shal ected , the Con ne and the fu m to 261.4.5.1 pleted , each the same pro ed results sha Contractor sha rk , including r SPECIFICA TATION an y penalty of areas defined y Corrective W mpulsory Corre Corrective Wo cement ” of th ll be 10 metre ntractor shall r ll depth of th 11. of the 100 m ofiler used in t all be binding all be subject retesting , shal ATIONS nd INFRAS - $ 2500 for e d in 261.4.5.6 Work on any ective Work ork is required e surface cou es .
remove ( by co e surface cou metre segme the original te .
Should the to the Manda ll be the respo TRUCTUR ITEM : 26 January , 20 each 10 metr .2.4.3. of the section is required th .
urse of aspha old milling ) an urse of aspha ents containin esting .
The ne new IRI resul atory Penalty a onsibility of th RE 61 15 re ns he alt nd alt ng ew ts as he DEPA PART Janua 262.1 262.2 262.2 262.2 262.2 262.2 ARTMENT IAL DEPTH R ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite recyclin placem .1 Alte .2 Alte MATERIAL .1 All mate .2 The Co .3 Alternat .1 The .2 The tes .3 The D9 .4 Alterna .1 The .2 Per Tab foa .5 Water .1 Wa age .6 Prelimin .1 Prio ma test .1 STAN of TRANS RECYCLING TION em consists ng the reclaim ment of a recyc ernative A – U ernative B – U LS erials shall be ontractor shal tive A- Emulsi e emulsified a e emulsified a ts conducted e emulsified a 77 for anionic ative B- Aspha e asphalt bind rformance G ble 1 – Perfo aming agents .
ater shall be ency/agencies nary Sampling or to comme aterial to be p ting necessar The sample concrete the NDARD SP PORTATIO PAV of in-place p med asphalt cled cold bitu Using Emulsif Using Expand supplied by t l process the ified Asphalt asphalt shall b asphalt may b in the initial p asphalt shall m c. alt Binder der grade sha rade ( PG ) as ormance Gra e obtained s , and shall be g of Materials ncing the Wo produced duri ry to establish es shall be ta e same day as ECIFICATI ON and INF VEMENT STRUC partial depth Pavement ( R minous mixtu fied Asphalt .
ded Asphalt .
he Contractor RAP to conta be a CSS-1 o be cationic or phase of the D meet the requ all be PG 58– sphalt binder aded Asphalt from a so e free of any d ork , the Cont ng the reclaim the DMF .
aken from the s sampling , to IONS FRASTRUC CTURE reclamation o RAP ) using ure .
r. ain 100 % pas or CSS-1H or r anionic , bas Design Mix F uirements of –28 .
r shall meet Binder Spec ource approv deleterious ma tractor shall o ming operatio e Roadbed , w the satisfactio CTURE of the existin Mobile Recy ssing the 31.5 an Engineer sed on the pe ormula ( DMF ASTM D2397 the requirem cification , an ved by the aterials .
obtain repres on , and shall which shall b on of the Engi ng asphalt Pa cling Equipm 5 mm sieve .
approved eq rformance in F ) .
7 for cationic , ments of AAS d shall conta appropriate sentative sam carry out the be restored w ineer .
ITEM : 262 Page 262-1 avement , ment , and uivalent .
the coating and ASTM SHTO MP1 , ain no anti- regulatory mples of the e laboratory with asphalt PA Pag 262 262 262 RTIAL DEPT ge 262-2 2.2 .7 Des 2.2.7 .1 2.2.7 .2 D TH RECYCLIN sign Mix Form Alternative A .1 The emu Basic As Institute a .2 The emu of 0.8 % .
.3 The DM without a emulsifie .4 If the co submit a .5 The DMF the asph .6 Correctiv propertie .1 The 0.5 % Alternative B .1 An expan outlined Contracto .2 The DMF density , t tensile st .3 The Con Laborato design of .4 The DM without a asphalt b .5 If the co submit a .6 The total asphalt b .1 The conte EPARTME NG mula ( DMF ) A ulsified aspha sphalt Emuls and the Asph ulsified aspha F shall ident adverse effec ed asphalt des mposition of separate DM F report shall alt emulsion , ve aggregate es of 262.2.7. maximum am % .
nded asphalt in the Wirtge or ’ s responsib F shall identify target dry den rength ratio .
ntractor shall ry to assess f , the expande F shall ident adverse effec binder design mposition of separate DM asphalt bind binder .
design rate o ent of 0.8 % , u STA ENT of TRA PAVEMENT ST alt DMF shall sion Manual halt Emulsion lt by mass of tify the maxim cts on mix pr sign rate is ad the existing MF .
contain all in and its techn or Portland c 1.1 can not be mount of cem mix design s en Cold Rec bility .
y total asphalt nsity of the m use Profess the aggregat ed asphalt mix tify the maxim cts on mix pr rate is adjust the existing MF .
er content of f expanded a nless otherwis ANDARD S ANSPORTA RUCTURE be in accord l – Manual S Manufacture f RAP shall h mum allowab roperties .
A n djusted by 0.5 Pavement ch nformation on nical specifica cement shall e met .
ment allowable shall be condu cycling Manu t binder conte mixture , dry te sional Engine e materials p x. mum allowab roperties .
A ted by 0.5 % o Pavement ch the DMF incl asphalt by ma se approved b SPECIFICA ATION and dance with th Series No .
19 r ’ s Associatio ave a minimu ble field adju new DMF sh 5 % or greater hanges signif n the type , m ations .
be incorpora e for incorpo ucted in acco ual .
Preparati ent , aggregate ensile strengt eering service proposed for u ble field adju new DMF sh or greater .
hanges signif ludes the exis ss of RAP sh by the Engine ATIONS INFRASTR he procedures 9 , 3rd Ed .
fro on ( AEMA ) .
um residual a ustment to th hall be submi r. ficantly , the C manufacturer a ated into the m ration into th ordance with t on of the DM e gradation , c th , wet tensile es and a q use in , and to ustment to th hall be subm ficantly , the C sting aged bin hall have a mi eer .
RUCTURE ITEM : 26 January , 20 s outlined in om the Aspha asphalt conte he design rat itted when th Contractor ma and supplier o mix if the DM e mix shall b the procedure MF shall be th compacted bu e strength , an ualified testin o carry out th he design rat itted when th Contractor ma nder and virg inimum aspha 62 15 A alt nt te he ay of MF be es he ulk nd ng he te he ay in alt DEPA PART Janua 262.2.7 262.3 ARTMENT IAL DEPTH R ary , 2015 7.2 .7 .8 .9 .10 SUBMITTA .1 The Co .1 At l .1 .2 .2 At we pro STAN of TRANS RECYCLING The water c maximum ex .1 The exp water co values o .2 The rate minimum The combine 262-1 .
Fi Sieve S 3 4 0 The mix sha ITS ( Soake ITS ( Dry Corrective a properties of ALS ontractor shal least 10 Days A listing of a The DMF as recycled , an least 7 Days ighing and o oduction ; NDARD SP PORTATIO PAV content of the xpansion ratio pansion ratio ontents , with obtained shall e of water inje m half-life of 1 ed aggregate nal Grading Size ( mm ) 31.5 4.75 .075 ll conform to t Stre Test ed ) / MTO LS- y ) / MTO LS-29 TSR aggregate or f Table 262-1 l submit the fo s in advance o all pieces of E s established nd a copy of a s in advance other controlli ECIFICATI ON and INF VEMENT STRUC e expanded a o and maximum and half-life s a minimum o be used in the ection into the 0 seconds .
e shall compri Table 262 Limits for Co the strength re Table 262 ength Requir Min -297 97 Portland cem and Table 26 ollowing : of the Work : Equipment inte on the basis all calculations e of the Wor ng devices t IONS FRASTRUC CTURE asphalt shall m half-life .
shall be dete of two trials fo e final analysi e expanded a se a mix con 2-1 ombined Agg % Pa 1 45 5 equirements o 2-2 rements nimum Requi 100 225 50 ment shall be 62-2 can not b ended for use s of the prelim s done to det rk , recent ca to be used in CTURE be establishe rmined at a m for each wate is .
asphalt shall nforming to th gregate assing 100 5-70 5-20 of Table 262-2 rement ( kPa ) 0 5 incorporated e met .
e in the Work minary sampl ermine the de alibration cert n controlling ed so as to minimum of f er content .
T be selected t he grading lim 2. )
into the mix ; and ing of the ma esign binder r tificates of a and monitori ITEM : 262 Page 262-3 provide the five different The average to provide a mits of Table if the DMF aterial to be rate .
ll metering , ing the mix PA Pag 262 262 262 262 RTIAL DEPT ge 262-4 2.3.1 .3 .4 .5 .6 .2 Befo and Eng .3 Sub 2.4 CONST 2.4 .1 Gen .1 .2 .3 .4 2.4 .2 Equ .1 .2 .3 .4 D TH RECYCLIN Prior to the W supplier ; On a daily b amount of em Upon reque certification o No later than design report ore commenc super eleva ineer .
bmittals are re RUCTION neral The Contract specifically di In-place partia binder and wa to the averag The recycled specified in th The Work sh underlying A contains a ne uipment The cold mil the asphalt P slope .
The screenin size specifie design .
Single-Unit R required grad The mixing u deposited dir EPARTME NG Work , in writin basis , all fiel mulsified asph est , the meth of approval of n 6 months a ts and results cing Work und tion on curve equired in acc tor shall carry rected by the al depth recla ater ( if require e width specif cold bitumino he Contract Do all be carried Aggregate Bas egligible amou ling machine Pavement to ng and sizing ed and consi Recycling Eq dation .
unit shall prod rectly into the STA ENT of TRA PAVEMENT ST ng , the name d testing and halt or asphal hod propose f the water so after completi s of all field an der this Item es of the exi cordance with y out the Wo Engineer .
aiming of exist ed ) shall be co fied in the Con ous mixture s ocuments .
out in-place o se and that unt of granular shall be self the required equipment sh stently produ quipment mu duce a uniform placing Equi ANDARD S ANSPORTA RUCTURE of the propo d sampling r t binder used ed for withd urce ; and on of the Wo nd laboratory the Contract isting Pavem any cross-re rk as indicate ing asphalt co ompleted to an ntract Docume hall be spread on the Roadb ensures the r material .
f-propelled wi d depth , and hall be capab ucing the gra ust be capab m , thoroughly pment and no SPECIFICA ATION and osed emulsifie reports and d d ; drawal and a ork , a final w tests .
tor shall ident ment and sha eferenced Item ed in the Con oncrete Pavem n average de ents .
d and compa bed in a mann in-place part ith a cutting d automaticall ble of reducin adation requ ble of sizing y mixed cold- ot windrowed ATIONS INFRASTR ed asphalt or daily reports application o written report tify cross-slop ll submit the m forming par ntract Docum ment , sizing , a pth of 100 mm cted to an av ner that does tial depth rec drum capable ly controlled ng the RAP to ired for the the RAP m mix product , .
RUCTURE ITEM : 26 January , 20 asphalt binde indicating th of water , an containing m pe on tangen values to th rt of this Item .
ents and/or a and mixing wit m ± 10 mm an verage width a not disturb th cycled materi e of reclaimin for grade an o the maximu approved m material to th which shall b 62 15 er he nd mix ts he .
as th nd as he al ng nd m ix he be DEPA PART Janua 262.4 .
262.4 262.4 262.4.4 262.4 .
ARTMENT IAL DEPTH R ary , 2015 2 .5 Pla vib sm .6 Pla .7 Co pne sm .3 Test St .1 The dem .2 The .3 If t rew .4 Operati .1 In-p Wo .2 If c com ent 4 .3 Alte .1 4 .4 Alte .1 .2 STAN of TRANS RECYCLING acing Equipm ratory screed ooth and unif acing Equipme mpaction Eq eumatic-tired aller compact trip e Contractor monstrate his e test strip sh the test strip work the test s onal Constrai place partial d ork Area is abo cold milling is mmencement tire milled sur ernative A Asphalt con upon approv .1 The rec days of g .2 After all .3 The in-s less with .4 The spe ernative B The minimu Asphalt con upon approv .1 The rec maximu NDARD SP PORTATIO PAV ment shall ev d , and shall be form textured ent shall be a uipment shal roller of at le tors as requir shall initially s ability to pro hall be free of is not acce strip .
nts depth recyclin ove 10oC , and s required , p of the cold m rface has rece crete may be val of the Engi ycled cold bit good curing w soft spots an situ mean mo h no single tes ecified density m binder tem crete may be val of the Engi cycled cold m of 7 Days ; ECIFICATI ON and INF VEMENT STRUC enly distribut e capable of s surface , to th automatically c ll consist of east 10 t ma red .
stabilize a te duce a stabili visual defects ptable , as de g shall only b d/or when the partial depth r milling operati eived a lift of r e placed once neer : tuminous mix weather ( sunny nd areas exhib isture content st greater than has been ach mperature sha e placed once neer : bituminous m IONS FRASTRUC CTURE te the stabili spreading the he required th controlled for a vibratory d ss , and for a est strip 0.5 k ized Roadbed s after placem etermined by be carried out Roadbed is fr recycling sha ion , and sha recycled cold e all of the fo xture has bee y , warm , low h biting surface t of the recyc n 3.5 % ; and hieved .
ll be 145oC .
e all of the fo mixture has CTURE ized mix in f e mix , without hickness in on r grade and sl drum roller o areas inacces m in length a d in conforma ment and com y the Engine when the am ree of standin all commence all continue o d bituminous m ollowing requi en allowed to humidity ) ; e defects have cled cold bitum ollowing requi cured for a front of a ta t segregation ne continuous lope .
of at least 15 ssible to full s and one lane ance with this mpaction .
er , the Cont mbient temper g water .
e within 14 D n a daily bas mixture .
irements have cure for a mi e been repair minous mixtu irements have t least 48 h ITEM : 262 Page 262-5 mper bar / , and with a s pass .
5 t mass , a size rollers , in width , to Item .
ractor shall rature at the Days of the sis until the e been met inimum of 5 red ; ure is 3 % or e been met hours , to a PA Pag 262 262 RTIAL DEPT ge 262-6 2.4.4.4.2 2.4 .5 Plac .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9 D TH RECYCLIN .2 After .3 The s cement of Co Emulsified as The emulsifi required , to p specified den Water may b emulsified as The stabilize and super el 0.035 m/m , i than 0.035 m .1 All alignm tangent , .2 If the En under 26 The finished not limited to contaminatio .1 Soft spo approxim 120 kg/m the comp Overlapped processed ar the Work .
If the Engine the Contracto If the asphal value , the Co The recycled the average AASHTO T20 .1 Seconda 10 days a EPARTME NG r all soft spots specified dens ld Bituminous sphalt , or asp ed asphalt o produce a un nsity .
be required to sphalt to facili ed mat shall b evation , or , w it shall be sh m/m , respectiv ment and grad and where cr gineer determ 62.4.5.4 , the C surface shal o ravelling , se n. ts or areas e mately 100 mm m³ each per 2 pacted , stabili joints and reas outside er determines or shall be req t content bei ontractor shal d cold bitumin in-place recy 09. ary rolling , if n after placing .
STA ENT of TRA PAVEMENT ST s and areas e sity has been s Mixture phalt binder sh or asphalt bi niform , thorou o be added to tate uniform m be shaped an where existin aped and co vely .
de transitions ross-slope va mines that the Contractor wil ll be uniform egregation , fl exhibiting sur m depth and 60.2 , or 261.2 ized material repaired are the specified s that 40 % or quired to repr ng added to l suspend Wo nous mixture s cled mix The ecessary to a ANDARD S ANSPORTA RUCTURE xhibiting surfa achieved .
hall be added inder rate sh ughly coated , o the RAP pri mixing .
nd compacted g cross-slope mpacted to a s shall be smo ries per 262.4 e Contractor l be required in texture an lushing , pot-h rface defects paved with tw 2 , and 260.4 , adjacent to th eas in the r areas of sta r more of the rocess the en the field mix ork and subm shall be comp oretical Maxi achieve the re SPECIFICA ATION and ace defects h d to the RAP a hall be adjus recycled cold or to or conc d to the pre-e e was less th a value not le ooth , includin 4.5.4. has not met to reprocess nd free of su holing , cracki prior to pav wo lifts of asp , or 261.4 , to he repair .
recycled cold abilization , sh area in a sec ntire section o x varies by ± mit a revised D pacted smoo mum Relative equired densi ATIONS INFRASTR have been rep at the design sted by the d bituminous currently with existing rates han 0.01 m/m ess than 0.01 g tangent to c the requirem or pad the en rface defects ing , deflection ving shall be phalt concrete match the fin d bituminous hall be consid ction of the W of the Work un 0.5 % from th DMF for appro oth , to a minim e Density as ity , shall be p RUCTURE ITEM : 26 January , 20 paired ; and rate .
Contractor a mixture of th addition of th of cross-slop m or more tha 1 m/m or mor curve , curve t ments specifie ntire section .
s , including b ns , rutting an cold milled t e B at a rate o nal elevation o s mixture , a dered as part Work is defecti nder this Item he DMF targe oval .
mum of 83 % o determined b permitted with 62 15 as he he pe an re to ed ut nd to of of nd of ve m. et of by in DEPA PART Janua 262.4 .
262.4 ARTMENT IAL DEPTH R ary , 2015 5 .10 Tra rec .1 .2 .6 Quality .1 The the .2 The ver .1 .3 Em per sup com .1 .4 For rate .1 .5 For mix freq Day .6 QC thic .7 QC me .8 QC lan con STAN of TRANS RECYCLING affic including cycled cold bit The Contra Equipment a a maximum The Contra damaged by Control ( QC ) e Contractor e quality of Wo e Contractor rification of the The accura binder rate s slip that acc mulsified asph r 10 lane-km pplied by the mpleted label Samples sh the transfer r Alternative A e of 1 sample Samples sh ( ASTM C13 be tested fo r Alternative xture meets t quency of 1 ys of samplin C testing sha ckness requir C testing shal eets the requir C tests for 262 e-km .
QC te ncrete .
NDARD SP PORTATIO PAV construction tuminous mix ctor shall su and material convoy spee ctor shall be y traffic while shall implem ork .
shall be res eir accuracy d cy of the me shall be verifi companies ea halt or asphalt or a minimum e Owner .
Eac .
hall be taken line , after at l A , the RAP s e per lane-km hall be tested 36 ) and moist r residual asp B , QC sampl the requirem per lane-km .
g. all ensure tha ements speci ll ensure tha rements of 26 2.4.6.6 and 2 est results s ECIFICATI ON and INF VEMENT STRUC n vehicles , sh xture until the upply any pil required to c ed of 30 km/h .
e responsible curing .
ment a compr sponsible for during the co etering devic ed by the Co ch tanker del t binder samp m of 1 per co ch sample sh from a samp least 4000 kg shall be samp .
by the Cont ure content .
A phalt content ing and testin ents of Table QC test res at the depth ified under 26 t density of t 62.4.5.9 .
62.4.6.7 shal hall be subm IONS FRASTRUC CTURE hall be kept o mat is able to lot vehicles w convoy traffic .
for ensuring rehensive qua calibration o urse of the W ces controllin ontractor by ch livered at the ples shall be ontract , to be hall be a mi pling spigot on g has been dr pled by the C tractor if requ A composite ( ASTM D217 ng shall ensu e 262-2 .
Sam ults shall be of recycled 62.4.1.2. the compacte ll be performe mitted to the CTURE off the freshly o carry traffic with operato through or a g that the rec ality control ( of measuring Work .
ng the emuls hecking the q Work Site .
taken at the tested by the nimum of 1 n the transfer rawn from the Contractor from uested by the sample of ea 72 ) .
ure that the r mples shall b submitted to cold bitumin ed recycled c ed at a minim e Engineer p y placed and without dama r , and all ot round the Wo cycled Pavem ( QC ) program equipment a sified asphalt quantities on t Work Site at e Owner , with L and identi r line or from e tanker .
m behind the e Engineer fo ach Day ’ s sa recycled cold be taken at o the Enginee nous mixture cold bitumino mum frequenc prior to plac ITEM : 262 Page 262-7 compacted age .
ther labour , ork Area , at ment is not m to ensure and regular or asphalt the delivery t a rate of 1 h containers ified with a m the end of e paver at a r Gradation mples shall bituminous a minimum er within 10 meets the ous mixture cy of 10 per ing asphalt PA Pag 262 262 RTIAL DEPT ge 262-8 2.4 .7 Qua .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 2.4 .8 Gua .1 .2 .3 .4 D TH RECYCLIN ality Assuranc The Contract requirements Owner to ver Thickness m edge of the s .1 Thicknes greater th the spec For Alternativ Contractor s locations as d .1 The slab Each slab s packaged in labelled wate Engineer with Prior to the perform a vis .1 The recy deflection Emulsified as arantee The Contract Work against Owner blam workmanship inadequate t other factors Structural fai construed as reprocessed Reprocessing promptly and two years aft 262.4.8.1 and For the purp areas that co shall be con entire Work u EPARTME NG ce ( QA ) tor shall , in th s , and shall la rify test result easurements stabilized mat ss requiremen han the spec ified thicknes ve A , prior to shall obtain t directed by th samples will ample shall non-absorptiv erproof conta hin four hours planned ove sual compacti ycled cold bitu n , cracking or sphalt or asph tor shall , for a t failure and d meless in all p , poor or i raffic control , .
ilure of the m s failure ; ho in accordanc g , consisting d efficiently a fter its comple d 262.4.8.2. poses of this omprise 40 % sidered a co under this Item STA ENT of TRA PAVEMENT ST he presence o abel and provi s. s shall be take t with a shove nts are met w ified thicknes s. o the planned two 150mm he Engineer .
be tested for be dry cut , r ve materials t ainers and de s of sampling erlay of the on assessme uminous mixtu r shoving und alt binder sam a period of tw defects , includ claims aris incompatible , failure to pr mat , and area wever , the E ce with Work u of full-lane r as directed by etion , guaran Item and at % or more of t omplete failur m. ANDARD S ANSPORTA RUCTURE of the Engine ide the duplic en by the Eng el , at a minimu when at least 9 ss , and no ind d overlay of t x 150mm s r moisture con removed from to protect the elivered by t . recycled cold ent of the surf ure shall be c der the weight mples shall be wo years afte ding surface d sing from the materials , i ractice proven as of rutting o Engineer sha under this Item reprocessing y the Enginee ntee the repro the discretion the area proc e , and the C SPECIFICA ATION and eer , obtain do cate samples gineer by mea um frequency 90 % of all me dividual meas he recycled c slab samples ntent .
m the recycle sample integ he Contracto d bituminous face to be ove compacted sm t of a loaded t tested by the r completion defects per 2 e Work , wh improper de n partial dep or other depr all decide as m. at specified er .
The Cont ocessing aga n of the Eng cessed or re Contractor sha ATIONS INFRASTR ouble samples to the Engine ans of excava y of 5 per lane easurements surement is 30 cold bituminou s per kilomet ed cold bitum grity , sealed in or in good co s mixture , the erlaid .
mooth and sh tandem truck e Owner .
of the Work , 262.4.5.5 , and hether resulti esign of app th recycling p ressions , sha s to what a depth , shall ractor shall , f ainst defects a ineer , failure processes on all be require RUCTURE ITEM : 26 January , 20 s for all testin eer to allow th ating along th e-km .
are equal to o 0mm less tha us mixture , th tre at rando minous mixture n appropriate ondition to th e Owner sha howing minim k. guarantee th d shall hold th ng from poo plication rate procedures , o all generally b reas must b be carried o for a period o and failure pe of intermitte n this Contra ed to redo th 62 15 ng he he or an he m e , ely he all al he he or s , or be be ut of er nt ct he DEPA PART Janua 262.5 262.6 ARTMENT IAL DEPTH R ary , 2015 MEASURE .1 The Qu cold bit BASIS OF .1 Payme identifie .2 The Ow correct .1 Ha .3 Payme accorda .1 Adj the em ave .4 For eac shall pa and $ 1 more th .5 For eac Owner paving work ho .6 Portlan 262.2.7 .1 The den STAN of TRANS RECYCLING MENT FOR P uantity to be tuminous mixt PAYMENT nt for Work u ed under the C wner shall r ive aggregate ulage for corr nt adjustmen ance with Item justments for e end of eac mulsified asph eraged for the ch occurrence ay the Owner 000 for each han 40 % of th ch occurrence a penalty of is not contin ours ) , until pa d cement a 7.1.6 and 262 e quantity of nsity x mix de NDARD SP PORTATIO PAV PAYMENT measured fo ture reclaime under this Ite Contract .
reimburse the e supplied and rective aggreg nt for a cha m 821. a change in ch month ba alt is used , th e volume rece e that partial r a penalty of Day that par he Contractor ’ e that paving $ 1000 for ea nuous ( stoppe aving resumes pproved by .2.7.2.10 sha Portland cem esign cement ECIFICATI ON and INF VEMENT STRUC or payment s d , recycled a em shall inclu e Contractor d incorporate gate shall be nge in the P the PG aspha ased on the he percent re eived during t depth recycli f $ 1000 for e rtial depth rec ’ s normal wor is not perform ach Day until ed on any Da s. the Enginee all be paid in a ment to be pa application ra IONS FRASTRUC CTURE hall be the n nd placed in a ude a separat the actual ed into the mix paid under Ite PG asphalt alt binder pric weigh slips esidue and sp hat month to ing is not per each Day unti cycling is not rk hours ) , unt med per 262.4 paving comm ay for more t er , supplied accordance w aid shall be c ate x theoretic CTURE number of sq accordance w te Unit Price cost , to a m x per 262.2.7 em 801. binder price ce payment q received du pecific gravity calculate the rformed per 2 l partial depth t continuous ( til partial dept 4.4.4.2.1 , the mences ; and $ than 40 % of and incorpo with Item 810. calculated us cal length x w uare metres with this Item .
for each alte maximum of .1.6 & 262.2.7 shall be ca quantity shall ring that mo y of the emul e monthly adju 262.4.4.2 , the h recycling co ( stopped on a th recycling re Contractor s $ 1000 for eac the Contract rated into th sing the mix d width x depth .
ITEM : 262 Page 262-9 of recycled .
ernative , as $ 8.00/t , of 7.2.10. alculated in be made at onth .
When sion will be ustment .
e Contractor ommences ; any Day for esumes .
hall pay the ch Day that tor ’ s normal he mix per design bulk DEPA FULL Janua 263.1 263.2 263.2 263.2 263.2 263.2 ARTMENT DEPTH REC ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite underly MATERIAL .1 All mate .2 Asphalt .1 The .2 Per MP foa .3 The arri with .3 Water .1 Wa age .4 Asphalt .1 The det .1 .5 Mix De .1 An out ( DM .2 The den ten .3 The Lab des .4 The Co ma STAN of TRANS CYCLING TION em consists o ying granular LS erials shall be t Binder e asphalt bind rformance G P1 , Table 1 - P aming agents .
e Contractor iving at the W h ASTM D140 ater shall be ency/agencies t Binder Cont e percent by termined by th For the pur assume an a binder requ length x wid sign expanded a tlined in the W MF ) shall be t e DMF shall nsity , target d sile strength e Contractor boratory to a sign of , the ex e DMF shall ntractor to a aterial is enco NDARD SP PORTATIO PAV of in-place ful material , and supplied by t der grade sha Grade ( PG ) Performance shall provide Work Area or 0 .
Sample co e obtained s , and shall b tent of Expand y mass of vi he mix design pose of esta asphalt binde ired shall be th x depth .
sphalt mix d Wirtgen Cold the Contracto identify total dry density of ratio .
r shall use assess the ag xpanded asph correctly sim adjust the DM untered in the ECIFICATI ON and INF VEMENT STRUC l depth reclam placement o he Contractor all be PG 58-2 asphalt bind Graded Asph e one asphalt r a minimum ntainers and from a sou be free of any ded Asphalt M irgin asphalt n. blishing the er content of 2 e calculated u esign shall b d Recycling or 's responsib asphalt bind f the mixture , Professional ggregate mat halt mix .
mulate field co MF each time e Work .
IONS FRASTRUC CTURE mation of the of an expande r. 28. der shall me halt Binder Sp t binder samp of one samp labels shall b urce approv deleterious m Mix binder adde Unit Price fo 2.5 % for the e using a mix be conducted Manual .
Pre ility .
der content , a dry tensile s Engineering terials propos onditions and e a significa CTURE e existing Pav ed asphalt mix eet the req pecification , a ple every fifth ple per contra be supplied by ved by the materials .
ed to the un or expanded a expanded asp density of 2 d in accordan eparation of t aggregate gra trength , wet t g services a sed for use i d it shall be nt variation i vement incorp x. uirements of and shall cont h tanker load act , taken in a y the Owner .
appropriate nstabilized m asphalt the B phalt mix .
The 200 kg/m3 x nce with the the Design M adation , comp tensile streng and a qualif in , and to ca the responsi in the prope ITEM : 263 Page 263-1 porating the f AASHTO tain no anti- of material accordance regulatory mix shall be Bidder shall e amount of theoretical procedures Mix Formula pacted bulk gth , and the fied testing arry out the bility of the rties of the FU Pag 263 263 263 LL DEPTH R ge 263-2 3.2.5 .5 .6 .7 3.2.5 .8 3.3 SUBMIT .1 The of E .2 The Form pulv with Eng .1 D RECYCLING The total asp virgin expand The water c maximum ex .1 The exp water co obtained .2 The rate minimum The combine 263-1 .
Corrective ag the existing a the minimum .1 The max IT TTALS Contractor s Equipment inte Contractor s mula ( DMF ) b verizing opera hot mix asp ineer .
The DMF su design perce EPARTME phalt binder c ded binder .
content of the xpansion ratio ansion ratio ntents , with a shall be used e of water inj m half-life of 10 ed aggregate Final G Sieve ggregate or P aggregate ble m requirement ximum amoun Test / M TS ( Soaked ) / ITS ( Dry ) / M TS shall submit a ended for use shall submit , based on repr ation .
The sam phalt concrete ubmission sha entage by ma STA ENT of TRA PAVEMENT ST content of th e expanded and maximu and half-life a minimum of d in the final a ection into th 0 seconds .
s shall comp T Grading Lim e Size ( mm ) 50 4.75 0.075 Portland cem end fails to co s of Table 26 nt of cement a T Streng Method / MTO LS-297 MTO LS-297 SR at least 10 Da e in the Work .
at least 10 D resentative sa mples shall be e on the sam all include a ss of new as ANDARD S ANSPORTA RUCTURE e design mix asphalt shal m half-life .
shall be det two trials for analysis .
he expanded prise a mix co Table 263-1 its for Comb ent shall be s onform to the 3-2 are not m allowable for i Table 263-2 th Requirem Minim 7 ays prior to co Days prior to amples of the e obtained fro me Day that s copy of all c phalt binder t SPECIFICA ATION and x includes the ll be establis termined at a each water c asphalt sha onforming to bined Aggreg % Passing 100 45-70 5-20 supplied for i e grading limi met .
ncorporation ments mum Requir 100 225 50 ommencing th commencing e material to b om the Roadb samples are calculations p to be added t ATIONS INFRASTR e existing ag shed so as t a minimum o content .
The a ll be selected the grading gate incorporation its of Table 2 in the mix sh rements ( kPa 0 5 he Work , a li g the Work , th be produced b bed which sh taken , as ap performed to to the unstab RUCTURE ITEM : 26 January , 20 ged binder an to provide th of five differe average value d to provide limits of Tab into the mix 263-1 , and/or hall be 1 % .
a ) st of all piece he Design M by the in-plac hall be restore pproved by th determine th bilized materia 63 15 nd he nt es a le if if es ix ce ed he he al .
DEPA FULL Janua 263.3 263.4 263.4 263.4 263.4 .
263.4 .
ARTMENT DEPTH REC ary , 2015 .3 Before and su Engine .4 The Co asphalt .5 The Co used .
.6 The Co applica .7 The Co report c .8 Submit CONSTRU .1 Genera .1 The spe .2 Equipm 2 .1 Ge .1 .2 2 .2 Ful .1 .2 .3 .4 STAN of TRANS CYCLING commencing per elevation er .
ontractor shal t binder suppl ontractor sha ontractor shal ation of water , ontractor shal containing mix tals are requi CTION al e Contractor ecifically direct ment neral Equipment s the requirem Equipment s l Depth Recla The pulveriz Pavement a corrective a asphalt in a The pulveriz sensor to ac The aggreg corrective ag The pulveriz injecting and and the follo .1 A syste percenta NDARD SP PORTATIO PAV g Work under n on curves l submit in wr lier .
all submit a d l submit in w and certifica l submit , no l x design repo red in accord shall carry ou ted by the Eng shall be desig ments of this I shall be of ad amation and S zer-stabilizer and underlyin aggregate or controlled ma zer-stabilizer ccurately main gate delivery ggregates int zer-stabilizer d blending ex owing addition m to control age of water f ECIFICATI ON and INF VEMENT STRUC this Item the of the existin riting , prior to daily report in riting , upon re tion of approv ater than 6 m orts and resul dance with an ut the Work a gineer .
gned and ope tem .
equate capac Stabilizing Eq shall be ca ng aggregate Portland cem anner ; and pr shall have a ntain a preset vehicle sha o the pulveriz shall have a xpanded asph nal features : and monitor for optimum c IONS FRASTRUC CTURE e Contractor s ng Pavement commencing ndicating the equest , the m val of the wat months after c ts of all field a y cross-refere as indicated i erated to pro city and in go quipment pable of pulv e to the dept ment into the roducing a un cutting drum t depth of cut all have a s zed material , an expanded halt uniformly the percenta compaction ; CTURE shall identify t and shall s g the Work , th e amount of methods prop ter source .
completion of and laborator enced Item fo in the Contra oduce an end ood working o verizing and h specified in e mix , if requ niform expand m at least 2 m t. system for c if required pe asphalt injec throughout t age of aspha cross-slope o ubmit the va he name of th asphalt conc posed for with the Work , a ry tests .
orming part of act Documents d product com rder .
reclaiming t n 263.4.4 ; in uired ; adding ded asphalt m m wide and an controlled int er 263.2.5.8. ction system he unstabilize alt binder add ITEM : 263 Page 263-3 on tangents alues to the he proposed crete binder hdrawal and final written f this Item .
s and/or as mplying with the existing ncorporating g expanded mix .
n automatic tegration of capable of ed material , ded and the FU Pag 263 263 263 263 263 LL DEPTH R ge 263-4 3.4.2.2.4 3.4.2 .3 3.4.2 .4 3.4.2 .5 3.4.2 .6 D RECYCLING .2 A sys treat .3 A sy trave .4 A he Asphalt Bind .1 Each as equipped .1 Ther .2 Rear is ca .2 The Con Area so a Water Tanke .1 Each wa 500 L/m diameter .2 The Con Area so a Grader/Pave .1 The grad slope con .2 The Con .3 The pave a vibrato .1 The conti .2 The longi Compaction .1 Compact pneumat rollers , s EPARTME stem of nozzl ment and is a stem to contr el speed and m ating system er Tankers phalt binder d with the follo rmometer to s r feed valve , w pable of drain ntractor shall as to provide ers ater tanker in , and flexib r of 100 mm a ntractor shall as to provide r der used to s ntrol .
tractor shall u er shall be eq ry screed cap paver shall be inuous pass t paver shall itudinal grade Equipment tion Equipme tic-tired roller maller compa STA ENT of TRA PAVEMENT ST les that unifor adjustable for rol and regula mass of mate to maintain o tanker shall owing : show binder te with minimum ning the conte determine the a continuous shall be eq ble , non-colla and quick-rele determine the a continuous shape the pu use a paver fo quipped with pable of vibra e capable of to the specifie be equipped e and transver ent shall cons r of at least actors as requ ANDARD S ANSPORTA RUCTURE rmly applies e varying width ate the applic erial ; and operating tem have all-roun emperature in m internal dia ents of the tan e number an s mixing opera quipped with apsing supply ease coupling e number an s supply of wa ulverized mat or placement distributing a ting the full w spreading the ed cross slope d with autom rse slope .
sist of a vibra 10 t mass , a uired .
SPECIFICA ATION and expanded asp hs of treatme cation of expa mperature .
nd heat reten n the bottom t meter of 75 m nk .
d size of tan ation and min h pumps of y hoses that gs .
d size of tan ater to the mix terial must b of the expand ugers for the width of the m e mix evenly e and grade .
matic screed atory drum rol and , for area ATIONS INFRASTR phalt across t nt ; anded aspha ntion cladding third of the ta mm when full kers deliverin nimal disruptio f a minimum t have a min kers deliverin xing operation be equipped w ded asphalt m full width to ix placed .
in front of the controls for ller of at leas as inaccessib RUCTURE ITEM : 26 January , 20 the full width o lt in relation t g and shall b nk ; y opened , tha ng to the Wo on to traffic .
m capacity o nimum intern ng to the Wo n. with automat mix .
be paved , an e screed in on the control o st 15 t mass , ble to full siz 63 15 of to be at rk of al rk tic nd ne of a ze DEPA FULL Janua 263.4 263.4 ARTMENT DEPTH REC ary , 2015 .3 Test St .1 The dem .2 The .3 If t rew .4 If t req .4 Pulveriz .1 The spe .1 .2 Pul rem .3 Co the .4 Afte spe .5 Suc .6 Bef tan the .1 .2 .7 The def def .1 STAN of TRANS CYCLING trip e Contractor monstrate his e test strip mu the test strip work the test s the material quest , as appr zing , Stabilizi e existing asp ecified in the C In areas wh Work , includ the DMF , pr grade , and a lverized but u moved from th rrective aggre e pulverized s er pulverizing ecified in the C ccessive pass fore commen gents and su e Engineer .
The stabilize slope and s more than 0.01m/m or All alignmen tangent , and e finished ex fects , includin flections , rutti Soft spots o depth , repla asphalt con compacted , NDARD SP PORTATIO PAV shall initially s/her ability to ust be free of is not acce strip .
changes sign roved by the E ng , Grading a phalt concrete Contract Doc here the exist ding milling to rovision of ad all related Wo unstabilized m he surface of egate or Port urface prior to g is complete , Contract Doc ses of the pul ncing Work u uperelevation ed mat shall superelevatio 0.035m/m , it more than 0. nt and grade t d where cross xpanded asp ng but not lim ng and conta or areas exh aced with 31.5 crete `` B '' at stabilized ma ECIFICATI ON and INF VEMENT STRUC stabilize a te produce a st visual defect ptable , as de nificantly , ano Engineer .
and Compact e and underly cuments , and ing Pavemen o reduce Pave dditional Equip ork , shall be th material partic the Work .
tland cement , o stabilization , the Contract cuments .
lverizer-stabil under this Ite on curves of be shaped a n , or , where t shall be sh 035m/m , resp transitions sh s-slope varies halt surface mited to rave mination .
hibiting surfac 5 mm Aggreg a rate of 120 aterial adjace IONS FRASTRUC CTURE est strip 0.5 k tabilized Road ts after gradin etermined by other test str tion ying Aggregat to a combine nt is thicker th ement thickne pment , provis he responsibi cles exceedin , if required t n. tor shall stab lizer shall be em the Cont f the existing and compacte existing cro haped and c pectively .
hall be smooth s per 263.4.4. shall be uni elling , segreg ce defects pr gate Base as 0 kg/m3 each nt to the repa CTURE m in length a dbed in confo ng and compa y the Engine rip can be d te Base shall ed depth suffic han anticipate ess prior to p sion of additio ility of the Co ng 50 mm in to satisfy the bilize to the w a minimum o tractor shall g Pavement a ed to the pre oss-slope was compacted to h , including ta .6.1. form in textu gation , flushin rior to paving s required , an h to match th air .
and one lane ormance with action .
er , the Cont one at the C be pulverized cient to satisf ed by the Co ulverizing , ad onal material ntractor .
any dimensi DMF , shall b idth and mini f 100 mm .
identify cros and submit th e-existing rate s less than 0 o a value no angent to curv ure and free ng , pot-holing g , shall be re nd paved with he final eleva ITEM : 263 Page 263-5 in width , to this Item .
ractor shall Contractor 's d to a width fy the DMF .
ontractor , all djustment of to maintain on shall be be added to mum depth ss-slope on he values to es of cross- 0.01m/m or t less than ve , curve to of surface g , cracking , emoved full h two lifts of ation of the FU Pag 263 263 263 LL DEPTH R ge 263-6 3.4.4 .8 .9 3.4 .5 Ope .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 3.4 .6 Qua .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 D RECYCLING The expande place expan AASHTO T20 If the asphal target value , erational Cons The Contract when the s temperature The minimum Prior to term this Item has completed , fo Neither publ asphalt surfa surface .
Paving with a cured for at exhibiting sur ality Control ( Q The Contract to the require A Lot is that the area of e the Contract QC sampling 263.2.2 .
QC samplin requirements per lane-km .
sampling .
QC testing s requirements QC testing s expanded as QC tests for lane-km .
The concrete .
EPARTME ed asphalt su ded asphalt 09. lt content bei the Contracto straints tor shall not c tabilized mix is below 10  m binder temp mination of op s begun shal or the specifie ic nor const ace until the C asphalt concr least 48 hou rface defects QC ) tor shall be re ements of this portion of the xpanded asp limits .
g and testing s g and testin s shown in Ta .
The QC tes shall ensure t s of 263.4.4.4 hall ensure th sphalt mix The 263.4.6.5 an e QC test res STA ENT of TRA PAVEMENT ST rface shall be mix Theoret ng added to or shall suspe conduct and/o x shows sig C. perature shall perations each l have been ed widths .
ruction traffic Contractor ha rete shall be urs , to a max have been re esponsible fo s Item .
Sampl e Work being phalt stabilizat shall ensure t ng shall en able 263-2 .
S st results sha that the dept .
hat the expan eoretical Max d 263.4.6.6 s sults shall be ANDARD S ANSPORTA RUCTURE e compacted tical Maximu the field mix end Work and or continue th ns of free-s be 145 C .
h Day , the le pulverized , a c shall be al as determined allowed only ximum of 7 D epaired to the r all QC samp ling and testin considered f tion comprisin that the PG a sure that th Samples shal all be submit h of the expa nded asphalt ximum Relativ shall be perfo e submitted t SPECIFICA ATION and to a minimum um Relative x varies by  d submit a rev e expanded a standing wat ength of Road and all mixing llowed on th d that such t after the exp Days , and aft e approval of t pling and test ng shall be ca for acceptanc ng one lane-k asphalt binder he expanded l be taken at tted to the E anded aspha mix is compa ve Density .
ormed at a mi to the Engine ATIONS INFRASTR m of 83 % of t Density as d 0.5 % from t vised design f asphalt proce ter ; or when dbed on whic g , shaping , an he newly plac traffic shall no panded aspha ter all soft sp the Engineer ting to ensure arried out by L ce , and is furt kilometre of R r meets the re d asphalt m a minimum f Engineer with alt mix meets acted to at lea inimum frequ eer prior to p RUCTURE ITEM : 26 January , 20 the average in determined b the mix desig for approval .
ess during rai n the ambie ch Work unde nd compactin ced expande ot damage th alt surface ha pots and area .
e conformanc Lot .
ther defined a Roadway with equirements o mix meets th frequency of hin 10 Days o s the thicknes ast 83 % of th ency of 10 pe placing aspha 63 15 n- by gn n ; nt er ng ed he as as ce as in of he 1 of ss he er alt DEPA FULL Janua 263.4 263.4 263.5 ARTMENT DEPTH REC ary , 2015 .7 Quality .1 The req Ow .2 Thi edg .1 .3 Prio visu .1 .8 Guaran .1 The Wo sha wo ina pro .2 Str con rep .3 Re pro two 263 .4 For are sha ent MEASURE .1 The Qu asphalt .2 Overlap areas o STAN of TRANS CYCLING Assurance ( Q e Contractor quirements , a wner 's verifica ckness meas ge of the stab Thickness re greater than the specified or to the plan ual compactio The expand deflection , c ntee e Contractor ork against fa all hold the O rkmanship ; p dequate traf ocedures ; and uctural failure nstrued as fa processed in a processing , c omptly and ef o years after 3.4.8.1 and 26 r the purpose eas that comp all be conside tire Work und MENT FOR P uantity to be t mix placed i pped joints an of stabilization NDARD SP PORTATIO PAV QA ) shall , in the p nd shall labe tion of test re surements sh bilized mat wit equirements a n the specified d thickness .
nned overlay on assessme ded asphalt cracking or sh shall , for a pe ailure and def wner blamele poor or inco ffic control ; d/or other fact e of the mat , ailure ; howev accordance w consisting of fficiently as d its completio 63.4.8.2. es of this Item prise 40 % or ered a comp er this Item .
PAYMENT measured fo n accordance nd repaired a n , shall not be ECIFICATI ON and INF VEMENT STRUC presence of th el and provide esults .
hall be taken th a shovel , a are met when d thickness , a of the expan nt of the surfa surface sha hoving under t eriod of two y fects , includin ess in all claim ompatible m failure to p tors .
and areas o ver , the Eng with Work und f full-lane pu directed by th on , guarantee m and at the more of the plete failure , a r payment sh e with this Item reas in the st e measured s IONS FRASTRUC CTURE he Engineer , e duplicate s by the Engi at a minimum n at least 90 % and no individ nded asphalt ace to be ove ll be compa the weight of years after co ng surface de ms arising fro aterials ; imp practice prov of rutting or o gineer shall der this Item .
ulverizing and he Engineer .
e the reproces e discretion o area proces and the Cont hall be the nu m. tabilized surfa eparately for CTURE obtain doubl samples to th neer by mea frequency of % of all measu dual measure t surface , the erlaid .
acted smooth a loaded tand ompletion of t efects as des om Work , whe proper design ven expande other depress decide as to d stabilizatio The Contract ssing against f the Enginee ssed or repro tractor shall umber of squ ace , and pulv payment .
le samples fo he Engineer t ans of digging 5 per lane-km urements are ment is 30 m e Owner shal h and showin dem truck .
the Work , gu scribed in 263 ether resulting n of applica ed asphalt s sions , shall g o what area n , shall be tor shall , for t defects and er , failure of ocesses on th be required t are metres o verized areas ITEM : 263 Page 263-7 or all testing to allow the g along the m. e equal to or m less than l perform a ng minimal arantee the 3.4.4.7 , and g from poor ation rates ; stabilization generally be as must be carried out a period of d failure per intermittent his Contract to redo the of expanded outside the FU Pag 263 LL DEPTH R ge 263-8 3.6 BASIS O .1 Pay .2 Com cont the 263 .1 .2 .3 .3 Pay acco .1 .4 The agg .1 .5 For Own pavi work .6 Port 263 .1 D RECYCLING OF PAYMENT ment for Wor mpensation to tent , as verifi supplier to v .2.4.1.1 , for th If the actual Contractor s the month pr If the actual a shall reimburs Determinatio ment adjustm ordance with Adjustments the end of emulsified as averaged for Owner shall regate suppli Haulage for c each occurre ner a penalty ing is not con k hours ) , unti tland cement .2.5.8 shall be The quantity density x mix EPARTME T rk under this I o the Contrac ed by the Co verify the amo he total payab asphalt bind hall reimburs eceding the m asphalt binde se the Contra n of payment ment for a c Item 821. for a change each month sphalt is used the volume r reimburse th ed and placed corrective agg ence that pav of $ 1000 for ntinuous ( sto l paving resum t as approve e paid in acco of Portland x design ceme STA ENT of TRA PAVEMENT ST tem shall be ctor or the O ontractor 's da ount in the la ble tonnage , s er content is se the Owner month of the t er content exc ctor at the act ts and credits change in th e in the PG as based on th d , the percen received durin e Contractor d , if required .
gregate shall ving is not pe r each Day un pped on any mes .
d by the En ordance with cement to be ent applicatio ANDARD S ANSPORTA RUCTURE at the Unit Pr Owner for diff aily weigh slip ast tanker , an shall be as fo s less than th r using the M tender openin ceeds the ass tual invoiced a shall be mad he PG aspha sphalt binder he weigh sli nt residue and ng that month the actual co be paid unde erformed per ntil paving co y Day for mor gineer , supp Item 810. e paid shall b n rate x theor SPECIFICA ATION and rice .
ferences betw ps plus appro nd assumed ollows : he assumed MTO ’ s PG asp ng .
sumed asphal amount suppli de upon comp alt binder pr price paymen ps received d specific gra h to calculate ost , to a maxim er Item 801 .
263.4.5.5 , th ommences ; an re than 40 % plied and inco be calculated retical length ATIONS INFRASTR ween actual opriate docum asphalt bind asphalt binde phalt binder lt binder conte ied by the Con pletion of the rice shall be nt quantity sh during that avity of the em the monthly a mum of $ 8.00 he Contractor nd $ 1000 for of the Contr orporated int d using the m x width x dep RUCTURE ITEM : 26 January , 20 asphalt binde mentation fro er content pe er content , th price index fo ent , the Owne ntractor .
Work .
calculated hall be made a month .
Whe mulsion will b adjustment .
0/t of correctiv r shall pay th each Day tha ractor ’ s norm to the mix pe mix design bu pth .
63 15 er m er he or er in at en be ve he at al er lk DEPA MICRO Janua 264.1 264.2 264.2 264.2 ARTMENT OSURFACIN ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite seal the MATERIAL .1 All mate .2 Polyme .1 The app .2 Em sho .3 The will ASTM ASTM ASTM ASTM .3 Aggreg .1 Agg 17 % .2 Gra by STAN of TRANS G TION em consists o e existing Pav LS erials shall be er Modified Em e binder sha proved equiva mulsified asph ow no signs o e addition of not be perm Test M D244 M D36 M D5 M D2170 gate gregate shall % when teste adation of ag more than the A Si 9 4 2 1 6 3 1 NDARD SP PORTATIO PAV of supply , pro vement surfac supplied by t mulsified Asph all be a quic alent conform halt and polym of separation w polymers or itted .
Residue by D ( Test Tempe Softening Po Penetration a Kinematic Vi consist of 10 ed in accordan gregate shall e specified gr Aggregate G ASTM eve Size 9.5 mm 4.75 mm 2.36 mm .18 mm 600 µm 300 µm 150 µm 75 µm ECIFICATI ON and INF VEMENT STRUC oduction and ce , improve s he Contractor halt ( Binder ) ck-set polym ming to the req mer modified within 14 Day other additive Tab Binder R Prop Distillation % erature should Tests o oint at ( 25 o C , 10 iscosity at 135 00 % crushed nce with MTO l be within the rading limits .
Tab Grading Limit Perce 7 4 2 1 1 IONS FRASTRUC CTURE placement o skid resistanc r. mer modified quirements in asphalt sha ys after delive es after the m ble 264-1 Requirements perty by Mass d be < 138 o C on Residue 00 g , 5 s ) 0.1 m 5 o C d rock having O LS-618 .
e grading lim ble 264-2 ts and Grada ent Passing 100 70 - 90 45 - 70 28 - 50 19 - 34 12 - 25 7 - 18 5 - 15 CTURE of polymer-mo e , and correc cationic type dicated in Ta ll be homoge ery .
manufacture o s C ) mm g a Micro-Dev mits of Table 2 ation Toleran Tolera ± ± ± ± ± ± ± ± odified micros ct rutting .
e CSS-1H e ble 264-1. eneous after of the emulsif Require 62 % 57o C 40 – 650 mm2 val loss not g 264-2 and sh nces ance Limits ± 5 % ± 5 % ± 5 % ± 5 % ± 5 % ± 4 % ± 3 % ± 2 % ITEM : 264 Page 264-1 surfacing to emulsion or mixing and fied asphalt ement min .
C min – 90 2/s min .
greater than hall not vary MIC Pag 264 264 IS IS IS IS IS IS IS 264 CROSURFAC ge 264-2 4.2 .4 Othe .1 .2 .3 .4 4.2 .5 Mix .1 .2 Test SSA TB-139 SSA TB-109 SSA TB-114 SSA TB-100 SSA TB-147A SSA TB-144 SSA TB-113 4.3 SUBMIT .1 The agg Tab .2 The tota the q D CING er Materials Mineral filler free of lumps Water shall b Polymer mod residue .
Th incorporated Additives ma quick-set pro mix design a Design The Contract mix design sh All compone proposed by Wet Co Excess Wet St Wet Tr Latera Specif Classif Mix Tim TTALS Contractor s regate gradat le 264-3 .
Contractor s l quantity and quantities use DEPARTME shall be Port s. be clean and f difiers shall co e polymer so into the emu ay be added operties and to nd are compa tor shall desig hall conform t nt materials the Contracto Micr ohesion : At 3 At 60 m s Asphalt by L tripping rack Abrasion l Displaceme ic Gravity afte fication Comp me at 25 °C shall submit , tion , final mix shall submit , d distribution ed for each co STA ENT of TRA PAVEMENT ST tland cement free of harmfu onsist of a m olids , along w lsified asphal to the emuls o increase ad atible with the gnate mix pro to the require used in the or for use in t Table rosurfacing M Propert 0 minutes mi minutes min .
LWT Sand Ad n Loss : - One- - Six-D nt er 1000 cycle patibility ( AAA at least 7 D x design , and at the beginn rate of micro omponent : ag ANDARD S ANSPORTA RUCTURE , hydrated lim ul salts , oil , ac inimum of 3 % with special q t at the colloid ion mix durin dhesion , only e other compo oportions and ements listed mix design s he Work .
264-3 Mix Properti ty n. ( set ) ( traffic ) dhesion -Hour Soak Day Soak s of 57 kg A , BAA ) Days prior to results of the ning of each osurfacing pla ggregate , emu SPECIFICA ATION and me or approv cid and other % polymer so quick-setting d mill .
ng constructio if they have b onents of the d prepare the in Table 264- shall be repr es placing any e Micro-Deva Day of Work aced the prev ulsion , minera ATIONS d INFRAST ed equivalen r deleterious m olids by mass emulsifier ag on to provide been included microsurfacin e job mix form -3. resentative of Requ 12 kg 20 kg 538 g Pass 53 80 5 % 2 .
11 grad Cont 120 y material in al test and the k , a written su vious Day , inc al filler and ad TRUCTURE ITEM : 26 January , 20 t , and shall b materials .
s of the aspha gents , shall b e control of th d as part of th ng mix .
mula .
The fin f the materia uirements g-cm min .
g-cm min .
g/m2 max .
( 90 % min . )
38 g/m2 07 g/m2 % max .
1 max .
e points min .
trollable to 0 s min .
the Work , th e tests listed ummary of th cluding a list o dditive ( s ) .
E 64 15 be alt be he he al als he in he of DEPA MICRO Janua 264.4 264.4 264.4 ARTMENT OSURFACIN ary , 2015 CONSTRU .1 Genera .1 The spe .2 Mic .3 The com .4 Mic .5 The pro cali .6 The 200 dur .1 .2 .7 The kep .8 On ope aro .2 Equipm .1 Equ pro .2 Rot bitu .3 Mix ma .1 .2 STAN of TRANS G CTION al e Contractor ecifically direct crosurfacing s e application mbined minim crosurfacing s e Contractor oportioning de ibration results e proportionin 00 t of micros ration of the W A change in A mechanic repair is requ e Contractor pt off the fresh two-lane , tw erator , and ot ound the cons ment uipment for t oduct complyi tary power br uminous surfa xing Equipme achine specific The machin and deliveri water to a re on a continu The machin materials to NDARD SP PORTATIO PAV shall carry ou ted by the Eng shall be place shall consis mum rate of ap hall not be ap shall , upon evices to the s prior to begi ng devices sha surfacing plac Work : aggregate so cal failure to uired .
shall be resp hly placed mix wo-way high ther labour , e struction .
the Work sha ng with the re rooms shall b aces .
ent shall be a cally designed e shall be a c ng aggregate evolving mult uous flow bas ne shall have the proportio ECIFICATI ON and INF VEMENT STRUC ut the Work a gineer .
ed to a width a st of a minim pplication of 1 pplied before J no less than satisfaction inning any mic all be recalibr cement , and ource since the the applicatio ponsible to e xture for the t hways the C quipment and all be designe equirements o be capable of an automatic d and manufa continuous-flo e , emulsified ti-blade doub is .
sufficient sto oning controls IONS FRASTRUC CTURE as indicated i as specified in mum of a sc 14 kg/m2 .
June 1st or afte n 24 hours n of the Engin crosurfacing o rated to the s also when e e previous cal on system an ensure that tr time required Contractor sh d/or materials ed , operated , of this Item .
f cleaning gra c-sequenced , actured to lay ow mixing un asphalt , mine le-shaft mixe orage capacit s. CTURE in the Contra n the Contrac cratch coat a er August 31st notice to the eer , and sha operation .
satisfaction of ither of the fo libration ; or nd/or proporti affic , includin to prevent da hall supply a s required to , and mainta avel , sand , di self-propelle y microsurfaci it capable of eral filler , con er , and discha ty to maintain act Documents ct Documents and a final c t. Engineer , c all submit a c the Engineer ollowing occu oning device ng constructio amage to the any pilot veh convoy traffic ined to produ irt and other d microsurfac ng .
accurately pr ntrol-setting a arging the mix n an adequat ITEM : 264 Page 264-3 s and/or as s. coat with a calibrate the copy of the r after every urs over the s for which on traffic , is surface .
hicles , with c through or uce an end debris from cing mixing roportioning additive and xed product te supply of MIC Pag 264 264 264 CROSURFAC ge 264-4 4.4.2.3 .4 .5 .6 .7 4.4 .3 Stoc .1 .2 .3 .4 4.4 .4 Qua .1 .2 .3 D CING .3 Individua mix shall counters at any tim A 3 m metal The spreadin evenly throug attached to th .1 There sh and an a .2 The spre uniform c .3 The spre compens The rut-filling of a rut box is A stringline o and meet the ckpiling The Contract Stockpiles sh contaminatio Throughout t stockpile to c Aggregates f ality Control a Quality contr the Work , fr asphalt emul The Contract 24 hours of te Quality assur these tests s Contractor of DEPARTME al volume or w be provided or similar de me .
or wood strai ng machine s ghout the box he mixing ma hall be a front adjustable rea eader box an consistency a eader box s sate for variat g spreader bo s at the discre or other devic e existing pav tor shall be fu hall be placed n of the stock the duration cover 3 Days from different nd Quality As rol testing sha rom and incl sion to the de tor shall provi esting .
rance testing shall be made f , or replace t STA ENT of TRA PAVEMENT ST weight contro and properly vices used in ght edge sha shall be equip x , with an att achine , and sh t seal to ensu ar seal for fina d rear strike- and a free flow shall have s tions in the Pa ox shall be sp etion of the C ce must be p vement edge .
ully responsib d on a level w kpiled materia of the Contr of production sources shal ssurance Tes all be the resp uding the pr esign and pla ide the Engin may be cond e available to he specified q ANDARD S ANSPORTA RUCTURE ols for proport marked .
Pro n material cali ll be provided pped with pad tached conve hall be used t ure no loss of al strike-off .
-off shall be s w of material t uitable mean avement surfa pecifically des ontractor .
rovided to en le for stockpil well-drained b al .
ract , the Con n of microsurfa ll be stockpile ting ponsibility of t roduction of cement of the eer with a co ducted by the the Contract quality contro SPECIFICA ATION and tioning each oportioning de ibration and t d for checking ddles to agita entional auge to spread the f mixture at th so designed to the rear str ns provided ace .
signed for rut- nsure the long le sites .
base , in such ntractor shall acing Work .
ed separately the Contracto the aggrega e final produc py of all quali e Owner durin tor , upon requ ol testing .
ATIONS d INFRAST material to be evices are usu o determine m g surface dev ate and sprea red surfacing mixture unifo he Pavement and operated rike-off .
to maneuve -filling applica gitudinal edg a manner so be sufficient .
or throughout ates and poly ct. ity control tes ng the Work .
uest , but will TRUCTURE ITEM : 26 January , 20 e added to th ually revolutio material outp iations .
ad the materi g spreader bo ormly .
t contact poin d to achieve er the box t ations .
The us es are straig o as to preve t aggregate every stage o ymer modifie st results with The results o not relieve th E 64 15 he on ut al ox nt , a to se ht nt in of ed in of he DEPA MICRO Janua 264.4 264.4 264.4 .
ARTMENT OSURFACIN ary , 2015 .5 Guaran .1 The are .2 The aga .1 .2 .3 .4 .3 Ge fail .4 Ret effi its and .5 For are dee Are .6 Placem 6 .1 Ge .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 STAN of TRANS G ntee e warranty pe eas , 60 Days a e Contractor ainst factors t Poor workm Poor or inco the cover ag Improper de Inadequate nerally , areas ure ; however treatment is ciently as dir completion , g d 264.4.6.6.2. r the purpose eas that const emed a comp ea under this ment of Micros neral The Contrac successfully production o The microsu below 10°C are above 7 The microsu will freeze w opening the The Work A and other de broom shall Water shall spreader at flowing wate NDARD SP PORTATIO PAV eriod for rutt after the repa shall guaran that may inclu manship and fa ompatible ma ggregate supp esign of applic traffic control s of delamina r , the Enginee defined as a ected by the guarantee the .
es of this Item titute 40 % or plete failure , Item .
surfacing ctor shall dem y placing a tr of the Work .
urfacing shal and falling , b °C and rising urfacing shall within 24 hou Work to traff Area shall be ebris .
Dried be removed be applied t a rate to da er .
ECIFICATI ON and INF VEMENT STRUC ing shall be airs .
tee for two y ude but may n ailing to pract aterials , includ plied by the O cation rates ; a . ation and flus er shall be the a full lane ap Engineer .
Th e retreatment m and at the more of the and the Con monstrate the rial mix over l not be app but may be a . not be applie rs after place fic .
thoroughly cl mud or other by hand blad to pre-wet th ampen the su IONS FRASTRUC CTURE 60 Days afte years after th not be limited tice proven m ding incompa Owner ; and shing or blee e sole judge a pplication and he Contractor against failur e discretion o area treated ntractor shall e ability to p an area 100 plied if either pplied when ed when ther ement , or whe leaned of all r foreign matt de or other ap he surface , if urface withou CTURE er initial place e completion to the followi microsurfacing atibility of the eding surface as to areas th d shall be ca r shall , for a p re and defects f the Enginee or retreated be required produce and 0 m long an the Paveme both Paveme re is danger t en weather c vegetation , lo er not remov pproved metho f required , im ut allowing an ement , and f n of the Work ing : g procedures ; e bituminous es shall be co at must be re arried out pr period of two s as noted in er , failure of on the Contra to redo the e place micros d one wide ent or air tem ent and air te that the finish conditions wo oose materia ed with the ro od .
mmediately ah ny free-stand ITEM : 264 Page 264-5 for repaired k performed binder with onstrued as e-treated .
romptly and years after 264.4.6.6.1 intermittent act shall be entire Work surfacing by prior to full mperature is emperatures hed product ould prolong al , sand , dirt otary power head of the ing or free- MIC Pag 264 264 264 264 264 CROSURFAC ge 264-6 4.4.6.1 4.4.6 .2 4.4.6 .3 4.4.6 .4 4.4.6 .5 D CING .6 Manhole the micro Application U .1 The mixt uniform s .2 Any ove prior to d .3 A sufficie times , so .4 Water fo .5 Ruts sha not be o straight e .6 Edges of the Road line or sh Handwork .1 In restric formula m .2 The mixt covered , tools .
Joints .1 Longitud .2 No exce appearan .3 Longitud .4 Longitud shall not and tape with a 3 m .5 Transver elevation Rolling .1 The micr DEPARTME s , valve boxe osurfacing .
Using a Mecha ture shall be surface .
rsized aggreg delivery to the ent amount o o that complet r spraying the all be filled to overfilled mor edge .
f the microsu dway centerli houlder ) , with cted areas wh may be used ture shall be d and spread inal and trans essive build-u nce will be pe inal joints in t inal joints in overlap more ers ) , and sha m straight edg rse joints sha n across the jo rosurfacing sh STA ENT of TRA PAVEMENT ST es , drop inlets anical Spread spread to fill gate or foreig mixing mach of mixture sh te coverage is e spreader bo have no depr e than 3 mm urfacing scratc ne , lane lines a maximum h here hand sp to retard the deposited in uniformly ove sverse joints s up , uncovere ermitted at join the scratch co the surface c e than 100 m ll not have m ge .
all be construc oint , as meas hall be rolled a ANDARD S ANSPORTA RUCTURE s and other se der ruts , minor c gn materials hine .
all be carried s obtained .
ox to facilitate ression after t m per 25 mm ch coat shall s and edges horizontal var preading is n setting time .
a small windr er the surface shall be neat ed areas , no nts .
oat shall be co coat shall be m , except wh more than 6 m cted so as to sured with a 3 at the discret SPECIFICA ATION and ervice entran cracks and sh shall be scr d in all parts spreading sh the final coat m of rut depth have a unifo ( white edge riance of  50 ecessary , slig row along on e with squeeg in appearanc on-homogene onstructed as e placed on la here Pavemen mm difference o have no mo 3 m straight ed ion of the Con ATIONS d INFRAST ces shall be hallow pothole reened from of the sprea hall not harm of microsurfa h as measure orm neat app line , paveme 0 mm in any 3 ght adjustme e edge of the gees or other ce and uniform eous mixture s butt joints .
ane lines .
Ad nt width varie e in elevation ore than 6 mm dge .
ntractor .
TRUCTURE ITEM : 26 January , 20 protected fro es and leave the aggregat ader box at a the mix .
acing , but sha ed with a 3 pearance alon ent edge , cur 30 m section .
ents to the m e surface to b r suitable han m. e or unsight djacent passe es ( as in ramp n as measure m difference E 64 15 m a te all all m ng rb mix be nd tly es ps ed in DEPA MICRO Janua 264.4 .
264.4 .
264.4 .
ARTMENT OSURFACIN ary , 2015 6 .6 Re .1 .2 6.6 .3 .4 6 .7 Cle .1 .2 STAN of TRANS G quirements fo The finished of surface d finished surf Any surface microsurfaci in Table 264 .1 The blee rut/fill op 1 ) Tear ma long , o 2 ) Total ru based 3 ) Longitud measu 4 ) Total ar 5 ) Total ar exceed 6 ) Bleedin 7 ) Bleedin Any 400 m l re-applicatio .1 All Wor Contrac Any part of within 20 Da case later th .1 If the 20 shall co ean-Up Any microsu Shoulders a The Contrac with the perf NDARD SP PORTATIO PAV or Finished Su d microsurfac defects .
No lu face .
e defects , as ing .
Such def 4-4. eding defects peration .
Una arks : in any 1 or any marks ts > 6 mm de on 10 random dinal ripples ( red with a 3 m reas exhibiting reas exhibiting ding 2 % in an g and flushing g and/or flush lane segment on of microsur rk required ctor ’ s expense f completed m ays from the han August 31 0-Day period mplete the re urfacing mix o and gutters , sh ctor shall , on formance of t ECIFICATI ON and INF VEMENT STRUC urface cing shall hav umping , ballin determined b fects shall inc s as defined i acceptable D 2 m2 per lane  25 mm x 2 eep , as measu m samples pe ( raking ) or wa m straight edg g raking and c g loss of surfa y 100 m2 area g exceeding 2 hing at joints .
t with repairs rfacing over t for reconstru e. microsurfacin time the Con 1st of the curre extends pas epairs betwee on areas outs hall be remov a daily basis , the Work .
IONS FRASTRUC CTURE ve a uniform t ng or unmixe by the Engine clude but are in 6 ) and 7 ) i Table 264-4 Defects in Fin e , four or mor 5 mm .
ured with a 3 er lane-km .
ash-boarding ge .
chatter excee ace ( debondin a .
2 % in any 10 or defects ex the entire seg uction of un ng rejected fo ntractor receiv ent year .
st August 31s en June 1st an side the spec ved as specifi , remove from CTURE texture and b ed aggregate eer , will be c not necessar n Table 264- nished Surfa re marks  12 m straight ed ( chatter ) > 5 eding 2 % in a ng , delaminat 0 m2 area .
xceeding 5 % gment .
nacceptable or surface de ves notificatio st of the curre nd June 15th o cified limits of ed by the Eng m the Work Si be free from v will be perm ause for reje rily limited to t -4 shall also a ace 2 mm wide x1 dge , exceedin mm deep , as any 100 m2 ar tion , potholing of the area s areas shall efects shall b on of rejection ent year , the of the followin microsurfacin gineer .
te any debris ITEM : 264 Page 264-7 visible signs mitted in the ction of the those noted apply to the 00 mm ng 2 % s ea .
g ) shall require be at the be repaired n , but in no Contractor g year .
ng , such as s associated MIC Pag 264 264 CROSURFAC ge 264-8 4.5 MEASU .1 The supp .2 In a warr 4.6 BASIS O .1 Pay .2 Pay acco D CING REMENT FO Quantity to b plied , produce areas where r ranty period .
OF PAYMENT ment for Work ment adjustm ordance with DEPARTME OR PAYMENT e measured fo ed and placed rutting has be T k under this Ite ment for a c Item 821 .
STA ENT of TRA PAVEMENT ST T for payment sh d in accordan een corrected em shall be at change in th ANDARD S ANSPORTA RUCTURE hall be the nu ce with this Ite d , the Engine t the Unit Pric he PG aspha SPECIFICA ATION and mber of squa em .
eer may withh ce .
alt binder pr ATIONS d INFRAST are metres of hold payment rice shall be TRUCTURE ITEM : 26 January , 20 microsurfacin for the ruttin calculated E 64 15 ng ng in DEPA CHIP S Janua 265.1 265.2 ARTMENT SEAL ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite .2 Chip se .1 Sin .2 Do .3 Single applica .4 Double of 16.0 applica .1 MATERIAL .1 All mate .2 Aggreg .1 Eac agg .3 The bit set out .1 Em HP STAN of TRANS TION em consists o eal shall be id ngle chip seal uble chip sea chip seals sh ation of 12.5 m e seals shall c 0 mm or 19.0 ation of 16.5 o Under certa approved pe a double sea LS erials shall be gates shall me ch project s gregate sourc uminous bind in the tables mulsified Asph P200 , HP200 ( NDARD SP PORTATIO PAV f the supply a dentified by th – S. al – D. hall consist of mm cover agg consist of an a 0 mm cover a or 12.5 mm co ain conditions enetration prim al .
e supplied by eet the require hall exhibit c ce to another der shall be s as follows : halt - HF-100S P ) , HFMS2 o ECIFICATI ON and INF VEMENT STRUC and placemen e following m f a single app gregate .
application of aggregate , a over aggregat s and at the mer plus a sin the Contracto ements of 20 consistency on the final c selected from S , HF-100S ( P r MS-2 per Ta IONS FRASTRUC CTURE nt of single ch mix designatio plication of bi bituminous b second appl te , as indicate discretion of ngle chip sea or .
1.2. of cover agg coat of a proje the following P ) , HF-150S , ables 265-1 , CTURE hip seals and ons : tuminous bin binder followe ication of bit ed in the Con f the Enginee al may be an a gregate colo ect shall not b g and shall m HF-150S ( P ) 265-2 , 265-3 double seals nder followed ed by a single uminous bind tract Docume er , the applic acceptable su our ; switching be accepted .
meet the requi , HF-250S , H and Figure 2 ITEM : 265 Page 265-1 . by a single e application der , and an ents .
cation of an ubstitute for g from one irements as HF-250S ( P ) , 265-1 .
CH Pag Requ Test Asph Disti Oil D by V Sayb Seco Siev 1000 Coat Settl Settl Dem 0.1 N Test Pene 100g Visco Float Solu Trich NO IP SEAL ge 265-2 Grad uirements t on Emulsion halt Residue by llation , % Distillate % Volume ; bolt Viscosity Fur onds at 50°C e Test % Retaine 0 m Sieve ting Test ement in 1 day , ement in 5 day , mulsiblity-50 ml of N CaCl2 , % t on Residue etration at 25C , g 5 s osity at 60C , Pa t Test at 60C , s bility in hloroethylene , % OTES : 1 ) Coat capa coat the s .1 C G F 2 ) Visc D de ASTM Test Method D244 D244 rol D244 ed D244 D244 % % D244 f D244 D5 a·s D139 D2042 ting Test : AST able of being m ed .
The mixtu stone shall not Coating Test R Good : 90 % or Fair : 75 % to 9 Poor : 75 % or osity @ 60C a EPARTME Requireme HF-100S M d min .
ma 62 0.5 4 50 15 0 .
Note ( 1 ) 1 75 100-175 Note ( 2 ) 1200 2 97.5 TM Method D24 mixed vigorously re shall then be be less than 9 Result : more of the ag 0 % of the agg less of the agg and Penetration STA ENT of TRA PAVEMENT ST Table 26 nts for Emul S HF-150S ax .
min .
m 62 4 0.5 4 50 50 1 10 0. )
Note ( 1 ) .5 - 1 75 5 150-250 ) Note ( 2 ) 1200 97.5 44 except that t y for 5 minutes e completely im 0 % coated .
ggregate surfac gregate surface gregate surface n @ 25C shal ANDARD S ANSPORTA RUCTURE 65-1 lsified Aspha S HF-250S ax .
min .
m 62 4 1 50 50 1 .10 0. )
Note ( 1 .5 - 1 N/A 0 250-500 ) Note ( 2 1200 97.5 the mixture of s , to ensure tha mmersed in tap ce coated .
e coated .
e coated not ac l fall within the SPECIFICA ATION and alt Binder S HP200 max .
min .
m 65 6 N/A 50 100 2 .10 0. )
Note ( 1 1.5 - N/A 0 100-250 ) N/A N/A 97.5 limestone and at the stone is t p water and the cceptable .
area described ATIONS INFRASTR 0 HFMS-2 ax .
min .
ma 62 0.5 3 50 50 30 .10 0. )
Note ( 1 - 3 1 N/A 0 100-250 N/A N/A 97.5 emulsified asp thoroughly and e water poured d in Table 265- RUCTURE ITEM : 26 January , 20 2 MS-2 ax .
min .
ma 65 3 - 1 00 100 40 10 0. )
Note ( 1 ) - 1 - 3 N/A 0 100-250 N/A N/A 97.5 phalt shall be d uniformly off , after which -1 65 15 ax .
0 00 10 ) - 3 0 h DEPA CHIP S Janua GRA EMU Visc shall b descr NOTE ARTMENT SEAL ary , 2015 ADE OF HIGH ULSIFIED AS cosity and Pen be within graph ribed by the le ordinates : Viscosity an Figure 265- STAN of TRANS H FLOAT SPHALT netration hic regions ttered co- nd Penetration -1 .
NDARD SP PORTATIO PAV Viscosity an For High Flo High Floa HF-250 S E , F , G , C n shall be with ECIFICATI ON and INF VEMENT STRUC Table 265 nd Penetratio oat Emulsifie at Emulsified A HF-150 S A , B , C , D hin graphic reg Figure IONS FRASTRUC CTURE 5-2 on Requirem d Asphalt Bi Asphalt Binde S HF-10 D L , M , N gions describe e 265-1 CTURE ments inder er 00 S HF N , O A , ed by the lette F-150 P B , C , D ered co-ordina ITEM : 265 Page 265-3 HF-100 P L , M , N , O ates in the CH Pag 265 265 265 IP SEAL ge 265-4 5.3 SUBMIT .1 The prio .2 Sub .3 The deliv adju 5.4 CONST 5.4 .1 Gen .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9 D TTALS Contractor s r to commenc bmittals are re Contractor s vered on the ustment for ch RUCTION neral The Contract specifically d The Contrac designated s The placeme avoid damag .1 The Con abutting .2 The Con to the en blameles .3 All other Contracto The Contrac For emulsifie otherwise dir Unless other constructed 7 For a double application b Intersections the discretion The Contrac against dama a period of tw Traffic contro 919 .
EPARTME hall submit , fo cing the Work equired in acc hall submit to contract .
Th hange in PG a tor shall carry irected by the ctor shall be tockpile ( s ) wh ent of single a ge to the adjac tractor shall , finished surfa tractor shall b nvironment th ss in all claims r damage c or , and the O tor shall desi ed asphalt b rected by the rwise directed 7.3 m wide .
e seal , all exc efore comme shall be dee n of the Engin ctor shall be age from incl wo weeks afte ol shall be the STA ENT of TRA PAVEMENT ST or approval b k. cordance with o the Enginee e total litres o asphalt binde y out the Wo e Engineer .
responsible hen material i and double ch cent and surr at his/her ow aces as a resu be responsib hrough the p s arising from laims related Owner shall be ign the bitum inder the mi Engineer .
d by the Engin cess aggrega encing the sec emed to be a neer .
responsible ement weath er the Work .
e Contractor's ANDARD S ANSPORTA RUCTURE y the Enginee any cross-re er a copy of th of Emulsion u r price shall b rk as indicate for loading is supplied by hip seals sha ounding Road wn expense , re ult of the Wor le , at her/his performance o m such damag d to this Wo e held blamele minous binder nimum appli neer , single c ate shall be s cond applicat normal part for the prote er , high amb s responsibility SPECIFICA ATION and er , a copy of eferenced Item he delivery sli used shall be be calculated , ed in the Con and hauling y the Owner .
all be carried dbed .
epair any dam rk .
own expense of the Work , ge .
ork shall be ess .
r and cover a cation rate s chip seals and swept off the ion .
of the Work ection of new ient temperat y in accordan ATIONS INFRASTR the design ap m forming par p for each loa e summed an , if necessary ntract Docum cover aggre out in such a mage to the a e , for any da and shall ho e the respon aggregate app shall be 2.20 d double chip first binder a and shall be wly construct tures and hig nce with Items RUCTURE ITEM : 26 January , 20 pplication rate rt of this Item .
ad of Emulsio d the payme y , per 265.6.2 ents and/or a egate from th a manner as t adjacent and/o mage suffere old the Owne nsibility of th plication rate 0 L/m2 , unles p seals shall b and aggregat chip sealed a ted chip sea gh humidity , fo s 916 , 917 an 65 15 es .
on nt .
as he to or ed er he s. ss be te at als or nd DEPA CHIP S Janua 265.4 265.4 .
265.4 .
ARTMENT SEAL ary , 2015 .2 Equipm .1 Equ in p .1 2 .2 Dis .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 2 .3 Bro .1 STAN of TRANS ment uipment for p proper workin Grader shal stributors Bituminous less than 50 Distributors application r rate both lon Distributors .1 A positiv bars ; .2 An elec measure which sh .3 A therm .4 Heating maintain .5 An adjus .6 A straine .7 A tank g .8 A samp The rear cha All nozzles s recommend slots are at obstructions The spray b or dripping a as to preven ooms Rotary powe from bitumin NDARD SP PORTATIO PAV lacing chip se ng order .
l be equipped pressure dist 000 L. shall provid rates , and sha ngitudinally an shall be equi ve displacem ctronic device e pump spee hall be visible ometer well a coils and bu n spraying tem stable length er in the circu gauge and a m ling cock .
assis shall be shall be of the ation for volu t a 30° angle s. bar shall be e and the spray nt streaking .
er brooms sh nous surfaces ECIFICATI ON and INF VEMENT STRUC eals shall be d with automa ributors shall e application all be capable nd transverse pped with at l ent asphalt p e to measure d , and a fifth e to the driver and accurate urners capab mperature ; and height sp ulating system measuring sti e modified to p e same manu me being spr e with the lon equipped with y bar height s hall be capab s to the satisfa IONS FRASTRUC CTURE specifically d atic slope con be self-prope n rates that e of applying ely .
least the follo pump develop e ground an wheel-driven r ; thermometer le of applying pray bar , and m and in the fi ck graduated prevent incre ufacture type rayed ; arrang ngitudinal axi h a positive sh shall be adju ble of removin action of the E CTURE esigned for th ntrol .
elled , and sha are within  material at a owing devices ping uniform p nd pump spe n speedomete r ; g even heat d hand spray a illing line ; d in litres ; and asing bar hei and size ; me ged in the spra is of the spra hut-off mecha usted for doub ng gravel , san Engineer .
hat purpose a all have a cap 5 % of the a continuous a s and applianc pressure withi eed or a tac er and odome to the bitume attachment ; d ght as the tan eeting the man ay bar so that ay bar ; and anism to prev ble or triple c nd , dirt and o ITEM : 265 Page 265-5 and shall be pacity of not established and uniform ces : in the spray chometer to eter , each of en so as to nk empties .
nufacturer 's t the nozzle free of any vent leaking coverage so other debris CH Pag 265 265 265 IP SEAL ge 265-6 5.4.2 .4 5.4.2 .5 5.4 .3 Prep .1 .2 D Spreaders .1 Aggregat uniformly ( 1.0 m to .2 Spreade towed tru rejecting .3 Both fron and closi Rollers .1 All rollers .2 Tandem 1300 mm .3 Vibratory mm .
Thre smooth-t .4 Pneumat uniformly .5 Combina are acce 265.4.2.5 paration Leveling with the responsib All other surf but not be lim .1 The road and supe Engineer .2 Sweepin before th .3 Repairing placed ; a .4 Sweepin applying EPARTME te spreaders y placing o 3.7 m per pa rs shall be eq ucks , and a fr oversize agg nt and rear ho ing can be co s shall be self steel rollers m. Three-whee y rollers shall ee-wheeled v tread rubber t tic-tired rolle y inflated to a ation tandem ptable alterna 5.4 , subject to h hot mix asp bility of the Ow face preparat mited to the fo d shall be com er elevation , a r ; g excess san he second app g irregularitie and g existing P a single chip STA ENT of TRA PAVEMENT ST shall be self aggregate ass ) .
quipped with ront hopper fi gregate .
oppers shall b ontrolled by th f-propelled an shall have a el steel rollers have a minim vibratory rolle tires .
rs shall have minimum pre rollers equiva atives to the c o the approva phalt concrete wner .
ions shall be ollowing : mpacted and and shall com nd , aggregate plication is pla s in the first m Pavement cle seal .
ANDARD S ANSPORTA RUCTURE f-propelled an over the a rear hoppe tted with adju be designed he operator .
nd capable of minimum ma s shall not be mum mass of rs shall not b e a minimum essure of 350 alent to the B compaction d al of the Engin e and crack fi the responsi shaped with mmence 1 Day e and other d aced ; mat of a doub ean of sand , SPECIFICA ATION and nd shall be c full width er capable of ustable discha and equipped f reversing wit ass of 7 t and e used .
f 7 t and a m be used unles m of seven 0 kPa .
omag BW161 devices descr neer .
illing ahead o bility of the C h a grader to y prior to chip ebris from th ble seal befor , aggregate ATIONS INFRASTR apable of con of the ap f accepting a arge gates an d so that met thout backlas d a minimum inimum drum ss the rear dr smooth-tread 1AC and Dyn ribed in 265.4 of single chip Contractor , an meet an acc p sealing , as d he first mat of re the second and other d RUCTURE ITEM : 26 January , 20 ntinuously an pplied binde aggregate fro nd a screen fo tering , openin sh .
drum width o m width of 150 rive wheels ar d rubber tire napac CC421 4.2.5.2 throug seals shall b nd shall includ ceptable crow directed by th f a double se d application debris prior t 65 15 nd er m or ng of 00 re es C gh be de wn he al is to DEPA CHIP S Janua 265.4 ARTMENT SEAL ary , 2015 .4 Placem .1 Ch hum .2 Bin .1 .2 .3 The 265 .4 Cov imm .5 Ro con pne com .1 .6 The or t STAN of TRANS ment ip seals sha midity is high , nder applicatio There shall transverse j Engineer .
No more th spreading o e temperature 5-3 .
Ty H H H ver aggregat mediately follo lling shall com ntinuous until eumatic-tired mpaction dev Roller speed e Contractor tacked onto c NDARD SP PORTATIO PAV all not be pla , when rain is on shall be at be a minim joints .
The C an 30 m of peration .
e of the binde Binder Spr ype of Bitumi Binder HFMS-2 HP200 / HP2 F-100S / HF- F-150S / HF- F-250S / HF-2 MS-2 tes shall be owing the app mmence imm all cover agg roller and o ices describe d shall not ex shall ensure completed sec ECIFICATI ON and INF VEMENT STRUC aced when t threatening , t a uniform rat mum of ove Contractor sha road surface er when spra Table 265 raying Tempe inous M 2 200 ( P ) 100S ( P ) 150S ( P ) 250S ( P ) applied unifo plication of bit mediately beh gregate place one pass wit ed in 265.4.2.5 ceed 10 km/h that no bitum ctions of chip IONS FRASTRUC CTURE the ambient or on damp s te determined erlap and no all repair una shall be spr ayed shall be 5-3 erature Rang Temperatur ( C ) Minimum M 65 65 65 65 65 65 ormly over th tumen .
hind the aggre ed has receiv th a steel-w 5.3 and 265.4 h. minous binder seals .
CTURE temperature surfaces .
d by the Cont o missed are acceptable jo rayed ahead e within the ra ges re Range ) Maximum 80 80 80 80 80 80 he full width egate placing ved a minimu heeled roller 4.2.5.5. r , fuel or solve is below 10 tractor .
eas at longit oints as direc of the cover anges specifi of the spray g operation a um of two pa r , or three p ents are spille ITEM : 265 Page 265-7 0 °C , when tudinal and cted by the r aggregate ed in Table yed surface and shall be sses with a passes with ed , sprayed CH Pag 265 265 265 IP SEAL ge 265-8 5.4 .5 Gua .1 .2 .3 .4 5.5 MEASU .1 The and 5.6 BASIS O .1 Pay .2 Pay acco D arantee The Contrac factors that m .1 Poor wor .2 Poor or the cove .3 Improper .4 Inadequa Generally , lo failure ; howe .1 A re-trea distributo compacte section 2 Re-treatment Contractor sh GC 34 .
For the purpo individual are deemed a co area of the W REMENT FO Quantity to double seal d OF PAYMENT ment for Wor ment adjustm ordance with EPARTME ctor shall gua may include b rkmanship an incompatible r aggregate ; r design of ap ate traffic con oss of cover a ver , the Own atment shall or truck , a lay ed with rolle 265.4.2. t shall be car hall guarante ose of the Co eas that comp omplete failu Work .
OR PAYMENT be measured designed , sup T rk under this I ment for a cha Item 821 .
STA ENT of TRA PAVEMENT ST arantee the W ut may not be nd failing to pr materials , in pplication rate trol .
aggregate , flu er shall be th consist of yer of 12.5 m rs .
All equip rried out prom e the re-treat ontract and at prise 40 % or re , and the C T d for paymen pplied and pla tem shall be ange in the PG ANDARD S ANSPORTA RUCTURE Work perform e limited to th ractice proven ncluding incom es ; and ushing and b e sole judge a an applicatio mm cover agg pment shall m mptly and effic tment agains t the discretio more of the e Contractor sh t shall be the aced in accor at the Unit Pr G asphalt bind SPECIFICA ATION and med in accord e following : n chip seal pr mpatibility of bleeding surfa as to areas th on of emuls gregate place meet the min ciently as dire st failure and on of the Own entire area tr hall be requir e number of rdance with th rice .
der price sha ATIONS INFRASTR dance with G rocedures ; the bitumino aces shall be hat shall be re sion binder p d with a chip nimum requir ected by the defects in ac ner , failure of reated or re-tr red to re-surf square metre his Item .
ll be calculate RUCTURE ITEM : 26 January , 20 GC 34 again ous binder wit e construed a e-treated .
placed with p spreader an rements unde Engineer .
Th ccordance wit f intermittent o reated shall b face the entir es of chip se ed in 65 15 st th as a nd er he th or be re al DEPA PULVE Janua 267.1 267.2 267.3 267.4 267.5 267.6 ARTMENT ERIZING ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite MATERIAL .1 None id SUBMITTA .1 None id CONSTRU .1 The Co specific .1 Wo tran .2 All Wor .3 The Co 100 mm .4 The Co conditio 75 mm .5 Oversiz shall be .6 The re- of 95 % .7 The Co elevatio .8 Grader MEASURE .1 The Qu comple BASIS OF .1 Payme STAN of TRANS TION em consists o LS dentified .
ALS dentified .
CTION ontractor sha cally directed b ork under this nsitions to ma rk shall be ca ontractor shal m into the Agg ontractor shal on , with al sieve , when ze pieces rem e disposed of -graded surfa of the maxim ontractor sha on .
r shall be equ MENT FOR P uantity to be m eted in accord PAYMENT nt for this Wo NDARD SP PORTATIO PAV f the pulveriz all carry out t by the Engine Item shall al atch into the ex rried out to th l carry out the gregate Base ll ensure that ll material measured in maining after f outside the W ace material s mum dry dens all shape the ipped with au PAYMENT measured for dance with this ork shall be at PECIFICAT ON and INF VEMENT STRUC ing , shaping a the Work as er .
lso include ex xisting conditio he full Roadbe e Work such t e/Subbase lay t this pulveriz sized such accordance w pulverizing s Work Site .
shall be comp sity as establis road with a utomatic slope r payment sh s Item .
t the Unit Pric TIONS FRASTRUC CTURE and compact indicated in xcavating and ons , as directe ed width to int that the pulve yer .
zed region is h that 100 % with ASTM C shall become pacted in acc shed by a tes grader to m e control .
all be the nu ce .
CTURE ion of a Road the Contrac d moving of p ed by the Eng tercept the ex erizing extend in a complet % of the 136. e the propert cordance with st strip .
meet an accep mber of squa dbed surface .
ct Documents pulverized ma gineer .
xisting Foresl ds to a minimu tely mixed an material p ty of the Con h Item 936 to ptable crown are metres of ITEM : 267 Page 267-1 s and/or as aterial in the opes .
um depth of nd loosened asses the ntractor and a minimum and super f pulverizing DEPA SHOU Janua 284.1 284.2 284.3 284.4 ARTMENT ULDER PROC ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite MATERIAL .1 None id SUBMITTA .1 None id CONSTRU .1 The Co specific .1 Thi .2 A longit shall be .3 The in- of the conditio .4 Oversiz shall be .5 The Co process .1 Re with .2 Wh 70 with .6 The ma .7 Final s grade o of the F .8 The Co surface STAN of TRANS CESSING TION em consists o LS dentified .
ALS dentified .
CTION ontractor sha cally directed b s Work shall tudinal cut be e formed havi -situ material abutting asph on with all ma ze pieces rem e disposed of ontractor sha sing operation gardless of t hin 7 Days fo here the differ mm in any p hin 48 hours o aterial shall be haping of the of the abutting Foreslope and ontractor shal e shall be free NDARD SP PORTATIO PAV f the process ll carry out t by the Engine be carried ou etween the ed ing a straight shall be proc halt concrete aterial sized s maining after f outside the W all not permit n is in progres he length of r any portion rence in eleva portion of the of the comme e compacted e processed g asphalt con d shall be ble l keep clean e of Shoulder PECIFICAT ON and INF VEMENT STRUC ing , shaping a he Work as er .
ut before pavi dge of the exis vertical face .
cessed , to a m , so that the o that 100 % o processing s Work Site .
t more than ss .
the Work Ar of the Work o ation betwee Work , the S encement .
to the maxim Shoulder ma crete surface nded and sha the adjacent material prior TIONS FRASTRUC CTURE and compact indicated in ng .
sting asphalt minimum dep material is i of the materia shall become 4 km to be rea , the Shou open to traffic n the asphalt Shoulder proc mum density a aterial shall b e and shall ex aped to match Pavement su r to opening t CTURE tion of materia the Contrac concrete ma pth of 150 mm in a complete al passes the e the propert open to traf ulder process c. t concrete an cessing opera as determined be consistent xtend at the sp h the Foreslo urface and in the Work Area al on the Sho ct Documents t and the Sho m and/or to th ely mixed an 75 mm sieve ty of the Con ffic where th sing shall be nd the Should ation shall be d by a rolling p t and continu pecified Slope pe intersectio all cases the a to traffic .
ITEM : 284 Page 284-1 ulder .
s and/or as oulder Work he full depth d loosened e. ntractor and e Shoulder e completed der exceeds e completed pattern .
uous to the e to the line on .
e Pavement SH Pag 284 284 OULDER PR ge 284-2 4.5 MEASU .1 The proc 4.6 BASIS O .1 Pay .2 The Sho ROCESSING REMENT FO Quantity to cessing comp OF PAYMENT ment for this Contractor s oulder process DEPARTM OR PAYMENT be measured pleted in acco T Work shall be shall be subje sing operation STA MENT of TR PAVEMENT ST T d for paymen rdance with t e at the Unit P ect to a pena n is not carrie ANDARD S RANSPORT RUCTURE t shall be the his Item .
Price .
alty of $ 500.0 ed out in the p SPECIFICA TATION an e number of 00 per Day , prescribed pe ATIONS nd INFRAS square metre for each occ riod as define TRUCTUR ITEM : 28 January , 20 es of Shoulde currence , if th ed in 284.4.5 .
RE 84 15 er he .
STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS DEPARTMENT of TRANSPORTATION and INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARD DRAWINGS ITEM : 299 Shoulder Rumble Strip Installation January , 2015 PAVEMENT STRUCTURE Standard Drawing 210-1 RUMBLE STRIPS RUMBLE STRIPS A A PAINTED SHOULDER LINE PAINTED SHOULDER LINE | A A | 200mm 400mm PAVED OR CHIPSEALED SHOULDER 1500mm MIN .
800mm TYPICAL 200mm 400mm PAINTED EDGE LINE +- 10 2mm STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS DEPARTMENT of TRANSPORTATION and INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARD DRAWINGS ITEM : 299 Shoulder Subdrain and Outlet Details January , 2015 PAVEMENT STRUCTURE Standard Drawing 231-1 STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS DEPARTMENT of TRANSPORTATION and INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARD DRAWINGS ITEM : 299 Construction Detail of a Transverse Key Joint January , 2015 PAVEMENT STRUCTURE Standard Drawing 260-1 EXISTING ASPHALT CONCRETE SURFACE EXISTING ASPHALT CONCRETE BASE EXISTING ASPHALT CONCRETE BASE EXISTING ASPHALT CONCRETE SURFACE NEW ASPHALT CONCRETE SURFACE SEE NOTE # 1 SEE NOTE # 2 STAGE 1 STAGE 2 200 x THICKNESS OF FINAL LIFT THE EXISTING ASPHALT CONCRETE SHALL BE COLD MILLED TO THE SHAPE INDICATED .
WHEN THE EXISTING PAVEMENT HAS BEEN REMOVED IN ADVANCE OF PAVING THE IS RESUMED .
THE TRANSVERSE JOINT SHALL BE STRAIGHT AND HAVE A VERTICAL FACE WHEN THE TAR PAPER IS REMOVED .
NOTE # 1 : NOTE # 2 : File : 260-1 1500 THE TAPER MAY BE PLACED ON TAR PAPER AND SHALL BE REMOVED WHEN PAVING JOINT AREA , THE CONTRACTOR SHALL CONSTRUCT A SMOOTH 1500mm LONG TAPER .
STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS DEPARTMENT of TRANSPORTATION and INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARD DRAWINGS ITEM : 299 Construction Details at a Structure January , 2015 PAVEMENT STRUCTURE Standard Drawing 260-2 DEPA TABLE Janua IT 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 ARTMENT E OF CONTE ary , 2015 TEM 301 Por 302 Co 304 Re 305 Ten 311 Ste 312 Ste 321 Ste 322 Exc 331 Pre 332 Pos 335 Ste 341 Ste 342 Brid 343 Sea 344 Fin 345 Ste 346 Gu 348 Ser 351 Wa 361 Sho 365 Eng 366 Fre 371 Re 372 Re 381 Re 399 Sta 30 30 30 31 31 31 31 31 31 31 33 34 34 35 35 35 36 STAN of TRANS ENTS rtland Cemen ncrete in Stru inforcing Stee nsion Splices eel H Piles .... eel Pipe Piles eel Sheet Pile cavation With ecast Prestres st-Tensioning eel Superstruc eel Laminated dge Pot Bear aled Expansio nger Joint Ass eel Ballastwal ide Rail Syste rvice Duct - S aterproofing .. oring ............ gineered Fill ee-Draining B moval of Asp moval of Dec moval of Stru andard Drawin 02 - 1 Roa 02 - 2 Roa 02 - 3 Con 11 - 1 Stee 11 - 2 Stee 11 - 3 Stee 11 - 4 Stee 11 - 5 Stee 12 - 1 Stee 12 - 2 Stee 31 - 1 Pres 42 - 1 Brid 45 - 1 Balla 51 - 1 Dec 51 - 2 51 - 3 Balla Wat 66 - 1 Free NDARD SP PORTATIO DESC nt Concrete .. uctures ......... el .................. .................... .................... .................... e Cofferdams hin Cofferdam ssed Concret g System ...... cture ............ d Bearings .... rings ............. on Joint Asse semblies ....... l Angle ......... em - Structure Structures ..... .................... ..................... ..................... ackfill ........... halt Concrete ck Concrete .. uctures ......... ngs adway Drain F adway Drain D ncrete Limits F el H Piles - Pi el H Piles - Pi el H Piles - Sp el H Piles - Se el H Piles - Se el Pipe Piles - el Pipe Piles - stressed Bea ge Pot Bearin astwall Protec ck at Barrier W ast Wall Wate terproofing Re e Draining Ba PECIFICAT ON and INF STRUCTURES RIPTION ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... .................... .................... ms ................. te Beams ..... ..................... ..................... .................... ..................... emblies ......... .................... ..................... es ................ ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... e - Structures ..................... ..................... For Structures Details For Foundatio le Cap Detail le Point Deta plice Details equences for equences for - Pile Point De - Splice Detai m Lifting Dev ngs - Nomenc ction Details Wall/Curb Wat erproofing Sy equirements o ackfill Placeme TIONS FRASTRUC S ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... .................... ..................... ..................... s on Overexcav ls ails Welds for Ho Welds for Fla etails ils vice Details - V clature terproofing D ystem Details on Box Culve ent Details CTURE NUMBE PAG ..... 4 ..... 2 ..... 5 ..... 1 ..... 1 .... 1 .... 3 .... 1 ..... 1 .... 6 ..... 1 ..... 4 .... 1 .... 3 ..... 3 ..... 2 ..... 1 .... 3 ..... 2 ..... 2 .... 2 ..... 2 ..... 1 .... 4 ..... 2 vation orizontal Posi at Position Vertical Only Details ert or Rigid Fr DI ER OF GES 4 28 5 1 1 3 3 1 2 6 7 4 4 3 3 2 1 3 2 2 2 2 1 4 2 tion rame VISION 300 Page 300-1 DEPA PORT Janua 301.1 301.2 301.2 301.2 301.2 301.2 301.2 ARTMENT LAND CEME ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite MATERIAL .1 Genera .1 All .2 Ma .2 Cemen .1 The asc .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .3 Aggreg .1 Agg 302 .4 Other A .1 A w adm .5 Curing .1 Bur sur .2 For .3 Cu oth .4 Bur sha .5 Cu STAN of TRANS ENT CONCRE TION em consists o LS al materials sha aterial propert nts and Supple e following wo cribed to them Blended Hyd Supplement Blast- furnac Blended Sup Fly Ash .
gates gregates use 2.2 .
Admixtures No written statem mixture conta Materials rlap , absorpt rfaces .
r vertical surfa ring materials er substance rlap shall be all have a mas ring water sh NDARD SP PORTATIO ETE f the proportio all be supplied ies shall conf ementary Ce ords and phra m in CSA A30 draulic Ceme tary Cementin ce slag ; pplementary d in concrete ot Covered B ment shall be p ains no purpos tive mat , or aces , curing s s shall , at any e which would of a quality ss of not less all be free of PECIFICAT ON and INF STRUCTURES oning , supply d by the Cont form to CSA A menting Mate ases , whereve 001 : ent ; ng Materials ; Cementing M shall meet th y ASTM provided to th sely added ca non-woven shall be carrie y time of use , have a delet which will ab s than 237 g/m chlorides , oils TIONS FRASTRUC S y and placeme tractor .
A23.1 , if not o erials er used in this Materials ; he material pr he Engineer f alcium chlorid geotextile s ed out by usin , be in good c terious effect bsorb water r m2 when clean s , dirt and oth CTURE ent of Portlan otherwise spe s Item , shall h roperties spec from the man de .
shall be use ng burlap .
condition free upon concret readily when n and dry .
her deleteriou nd cement con ecified herein .
have the mea cified in acco ufacturer stat d for curing e from holes , te .
dipped or s us materials .
ITEM : 301 Page 301-1 ncrete. . aning rdance with ting that the g horizontal dirt , clay or prayed and PO Pag 301 301 301 301 301 ORTLAND CE ge 301-2 1.3 SUBMIT .1 The Eng but .1 .2 .2 The subm 1.4 CONST 1.4 .1 Gen .1 .2 .3 1.4 .2 Care .1 .2 1.4 .3 Prop .1 .2 .3 D MENT CONC TTALS Contractor s ineer in adva not be limited The Contract The Contract with Atlantic equivalent .
.1 The conc accordan .2 Only con plant cer until the w proposed m mitted at leas RUCTION neral The Contract specifically di Concrete sha No loads sha minimum com e and Storage All concrete segregation , All cement , accordance w portioning and The Contract Class of conc .1 Concrete If during the workability o submit a new All concrete s DEPARTME CRETE shall have the ance of the su d to : tor shall provid tor shall subm Provinces R crete supplier nce with CSA ncrete supplie rtification sha warranty peri mix proportion st 5 Days befo tor shall carry rected by the all meet the re all be applied t mpressive stre e of Materials materials s damage and aggregate a with the requi d Compositio tor shall be r crete specifie e shall meet th e progress of r does not m w mix design t shall be propo STA ENT of TRA STRUCTU e source of s upply of the co de the Engine mit certificatio Ready Mix C r shall submit A23.1 .
ed from such all be maintai od expires .
ns ( design ) , c ore concrete p y out the Wo Engineer .
quirements of to new concre ength of 10 MP s hall be hand contaminatio and other c rements of C n of Concrete esponsible fo d and propos he requireme f the Work , meet the requ to the Engine ortioned in ac ANDARD S ANSPORTA URES supply of Por oncrete to the eer with the na n that the con Concrete Asso t proof of cert certified plan ined for the d certified by th production is rk as indicate f CSA A23.1 , ete including v Pa. dled and pro on .
oncrete cons SA A3001 , an e or providing c sed for use .
ents of CSA A it is determi uirements of er , in accorda ccordance wit SPECIFICA ATION and rtland cement e Work , and th ame of the pro ncrete supplie ociation , Plan tification in th ts shall be ac duration of th he Contractor due to start .
ed in the Con if not otherwis vibration until otected in su struction ma nd CSA A23 .
concrete mix A23.1 Exposur ined that the the Specifica ance with the th the submitt ATIONS d INFRAST t concrete ap his approval s oposed ceme er is certified nt Certificatio he appropriate cceptable to t he fabrication r or his/her a ntract Docum se specified h the concrete uch a way aterials shall 1. designs for e re Class C-1 .
e concrete ha ations , the C e 301.3.2. ted mix desig TRUCTURE ITEM : 30 January , 20 pproved by th shall consist o nt supplier .
in accordanc on Program o e categories the Owner an n and erectio agent , shall b ents and/or a erein .
has attained as to preve be stored each Exposur as inadequat Contractor sha ns .
E 01 15 he of ce or in nd on be as a nt in re te all DEPA PORT Janua 301.4 301.4 301.4.5 301.4 301.4 ARTMENT LAND CEME ary , 2015 .4 Concre .1 Por A23 .5 Deliver .1 De ena .2 The bat .1 5 .3 Add .1 .6 Placem .1 The with .2 All .3 Flo .4 All unl for .5 For mo sur .6 Co .7 Curing .1 Cu .1 .2 For sur by STAN of TRANS ENT CONCRE ete Production rtland cemen 3.1. ry livery of conc able continuo e batch deliv tch of concrete The batch tic dition of Wate Water shall Engineer .
.1 Slump a ment e Contractor h CSA A23.1 concrete plac oats shall be w concrete sha ess otherwise a minimum o rm ties shall ore below the rface .
ncrete shall re and Protectio ring shall be c Curing comp r vertical surfa rface , supplyin keeping form NDARD SP PORTATIO ETE n t concrete sh crete shall be us deposition very ticket me e delivered to cket shall inclu er not be adde adjustment of shall be resp .
cement shall wood or magn all be placed e specified in of 24 hours pr be of such ty e finished su eceive an Ord on carried out in pound may be aces , curing ng a continuo mwork in place PECIFICAT ON and INF STRUCTURES hall be produ in accordanc n until the plac eeting the req o site .
ude quantities ed after batch superplasticiz onsible for al be in accorda nesium .
Steel in a space fr n the Contrac rior to ordering ype that they rface of the dinary Surfac accordance w e used where shall be carri ous source of e for the spec TIONS FRASTRUC S ced in accord ce with CSA A cement of eac quirements o s of materials hing for any zed concrete s l formwork de ance with CSA l floats shall n ree of standin ct Documents g and placing y can be enti concrete lea ce Finish in ac with CSA A23 e specifically r ied out by se moisture to t ified curing pe CTURE dance with th A23.1 and sh ch concrete s of CSA A23.1 batched .
purpose with shall be with a esign and con A A23.1 , unle not be permitt ng water , clea s. Water infiltr g concrete .
irely removed aving no met ccordance wit 3.1 and this It referenced by curing wet bu the burlap , an eriod .
he requireme hall be regulat section is com 1 shall accom hout the appr admixture onl nstruction in a ess otherwise ted .
an of all dirt ration shall be d or cut back tal within 25 th 302.4. tem .
y another Item urlap against nd sealing wit ITEM : 301 Page 301-3 ents of CSA ted so as to mpleted .
mpany each roval of the y. accordance e noted .
and debris , e controlled k 25 mm or mm of the m. the vertical h plastic , or PO Pag 301 301 301 ORTLAND CE ge 301-4 1.4 .8 Test .1 .2 1.5 MEASU .1 The conc 1.6 BASIS F .1 Pay iden D MENT CONC ting The Contract discharge , th The Owner s REMENT FO Quantity to b crete proportio FOR PAYMEN ment for Work ntified under th DEPARTME CRETE tor is respons he characteris shall carry out OR PAYMENT be measured f oned , supplied NT k under this It he Contract .
STA ENT of TRA STRUCTU sible for supp stics specified t Quality Assu T for payment s d and placed i tem shall inclu ANDARD S ANSPORTA URES plying concre d in the Contra urance Testin shall be the nu in accordance ude a separate SPECIFICA ATION and te which sha act Documen ng .
umber of cubic e with this Item e Unit Price fo ATIONS d INFRAST all have , at th ts .
c metres of P m. or each class TRUCTURE ITEM : 30 January , 20 e point of fin Portland ceme of concrete , a E 01 15 al nt as DEPA CONC Janua Artic 302 .
302 .
302 .
302 .
ARTMENT CRETE IN ST ary , 2015 cle 1 DESCRIPT .1 Concre .2 Concre .3 Concre .4 Concre .5 Concre 2 MATERIAL .1 Gener .2 Materi .1 Ag .2 Fin .3 Co .4 W .5 Ad .6 Cu .7 Ce .3 Compo .1 Ge .4 Associ 3 SUBMITTA 4 CONSTRU .1 Gener .2 Equipm .1 Ba .2 Mi .3 De .3 Falsew .4 Placem .1 Ge .2 Fo .3 Co .4 T- .5 Bo .6 De .7 Su .8 Pr .9 Br .10 M .5 Tremie STAN of TRANS RUCTURES TION .............. ete in Structur ete in Structur ete in Structur ete in Structur ete in Structur LS .................. ral .................. al Properties .
ggregates ...... ne Aggregate oarse Aggrega ater ............... dmixtures ...... uring Materials ement and Su osition of Conc eneral ........... iated Materials ALS ................ CTION ......... ral .................. ment and Prod atching .......... ixing .............. elivery………… work and Form ment .............. eneral ........... ootings and W olumns .......... Beam Spans ox Girders ..... ecks and Diap uperstructure R rofile of Bridge ridge Decks ... Multi-span Stee e Concrete .... NDARD SP PORTATIO C ...................... res `` A '' ........... res `` B '' ........... res `` C '' ........... res `` D '' .......... res `` E '' ........... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ..................... ate ................. ...................... ...................... s .................... pplementary C crete Mix ....... ...................... s .................... ...................... ...................... ...................... duction .......... ...................... ...................... ………………… mwork ............ ...................... ......................
Working Slabs .
...................... ...................... ...................... phragms .........
Reactions on e Superstructu ...................... el Girder Bridg ...................... PECIFICAT ON and INF STRUCTURES ONTENTS ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ......................
Cementing Ma ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ………………… ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... Bents , Piers a re Componen ...................... ges ................. ...................... TIONS FRASTRUC S ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... aterials .......... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ………………… ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... and Abutments nts .................. ...................... ...................... ...................... CTURE ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ……………… .. ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ....................... ...................... ...................... ...................... s ................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ......................
Page 302-3 302-3 .
302-3 302-3 302-3 .
302-3 .
302-3 302-3 302-4 302-4 302-5 302-5 302-6 302-6 302-6 302-7 302-7 302-7 302-7 302-7 .
302-8 302-8 .
302-8 .
302-8 302-8 .
302-8 .
302-8 .
302-9 302-9 .
302-9 .
302-10 .
302-10 .
302-10 302-11 .
302-11 302-11 302-12 .
302-12 .
302-12 ITEM : 302 Page 302-1 CO Pag 3 3 ONCRETE IN ge 302-2 Article .6 Co .1 .2 .7 Pla .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 Cu .9 Co .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .10 Hot .11 Finis .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .12 Qua .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 302.5 MEASU 302.6 BASIS F STRUCTURE nstruction Join Limitation in Use of Keys acing and Finis Tolerances .
Upper Horizo Bearing Surf Bridge Curbs Bridge Deck Deck Surfac Screed Mach ring and Prote ld Weather Re General ...... Materials ....
Placing .......
Enclosed Pro Heating with Insulation ... Withdrawal o Weather Req shing Hardene General ......
Defects Form Defects Brid Ordinary Sur High Quality 6 Bridge Deck ality Testing ... General ...... Quality Cont Quality Assu Age of Comp 5 Frequency o 6 Hardened A 7 Permeability 8 Compressive UREMENT FO FOR PAYMEN DEPARTM ES nts ................. Use of Constr ..................... shing Plastic C ...................... ontal Surfaces faces ............. s and Sidewal s ................... e Repairs to m hines ............. ection ............. equirements ... ...................... ...................... ...................... otective Heati in a Housing .
...................... of Protection .. uirements ..... ed Concrete .. ...................... med Surfaces .
ge Deck……… rface Finish ...
Surface Finis k Surface Prep ...................... ...................... trol Testing ..... urance Testing pressive Stren of Compressiv ir Void Testing y Testing Freq e Strength Tes R PAYMENT NT .................. STA MENT of TR STRUCTU CONTENTS ...................... ruction Joints ......................
Concrete ........ ...................... s .................... ...................... ks ................. ...................... meet Toleranc ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ng ................. ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ………………… ...................... sh ................... paration ... …… ...................... ...................... ...................... g ..................... ngth Testing… e Strength Te g Frequency… uency………… sting………… ..................... ...................... ANDARD S RANSPORT URES S ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... es ................. ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ....................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ………………… ...................... ...................... … .. …………… ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... …… .
............ sting………… ………… .. ……… ………………… ……………… ...................... ...................... SPECIFICA TATION an ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ………………… ...................... ...................... ………………… ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ………………… ………………… ………………… ……………… ...................... ...................... ATIONS nd INFRAS Page ...... 302-13 ..... 302-13 ..... 302-14 ..... 302-14 ..... 302-14 ..... 302-14 ...... 302-15 ..... 302-15 ..... 302-15 ...... 302-16 ...... 302-16 ...... 302-17 ...... 302-18 ...... 302-18 ...... 302-18 ..... 302-19 ...... 302-19 ...... 302-19 ..... 302-20 ..... 302-20 ..... 302-20 ...... 302-21 ...... 302-21 ...... 302-21 …… 302-22 ...... 302-22 ...... 302-22 … ... 302-23 ...... 302-23 ...... 302-23 ..... 302-23 ...... 302-24 ...... 302-24 …… .
302-24 … .. 302-25 …… 302-25 … .. 302-26 ...... 302-27 ..... 302-28 TRUCTUR ITEM : 30 January , 20 RE 02 15 DEPA CONC Janua 302.1 302.1 302.2 302.2 ARTMENT CRETE IN ST ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite .2 This Ite .1 Co .1 .2 Co .1 .3 Co .1 .4 Co .1 .5 Co .1 .3 A contin .4 Definitio .1 The asc .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 MATERIAL .1 Genera .1 All .2 Ma STAN of TRANS RUCTURES TION em consists of em is subdivid ncrete In Stru Concrete for safety-curbs .1 Concret ncrete In Stru Concrete for ncrete In Stru Concrete for ncrete In Stru Concrete fo barrierwalls , components .1 Concret Docume ncrete In Stru Concrete for nuous structu ons e following wo cribed to them Blended Hyd Supplement Blast- furnac Blended Sup Fly Ash .
S al materials sha aterial properti NDARD SP PORTATIO f the supply , p ed into , but no uctures “ A ” : r use in Bridg s , sidewalks a e for use in in uctures “ B ” : r use in buried uctures “ C ” : r use in Bridge uctures “ D ” : or use in Br safety-curbs s. e for use in d ents .
uctures “ E ” : r use as tremi re is defined a ords and phra m in CSA A30 draulic Ceme tary Cementin ce slag ; pplementary all be supplied es shall confo PECIFICAT ON and INF STRUCTURES placement and ot limited to , t ge abutments nd independe ntegral bridge d Bridge abutm e piers .
ridge deck s s , sidewalks , decks in integ e concrete in as the comple ases , whereve 001 : ent ; ng Materials ; Cementing M d by the Contr orm to CSA A TIONS FRASTRUC S d finishing of c the following t including but ent curb and g abutment , as ment approac slabs includin at grade app gral abutment footings .
ete deck slab er used in this Materials ; and ractor .
A23.1 , if not oth CTURE concrete in St types : t not limited to gutter at the e s indicated in t ch slabs .
ng but not proach slabs , t bridges , as between the e s Item , shall h herwise spec tructures .
o , abutment b nd of wingwa the Contract D limited to , d and other in indicated in th expansion joi have the mea ified herein .
ITEM : 302 Page 302-3 barrierwalls , lls .
Documents .
diaphragms , ntegral deck he Contract nts .
aning CO Pag 302 ONCRETE IN ge 302-4 2.2 .2 Mate .1 STRUCTURE erial Propertie Aggregates .1 The coar .2 Stockpile that segr .1 Stock the g .2 Segr .3 Stock the p .3 Fine and time of ba .4 Petrograp accordan .1 A Pe obse .2 Whe is su reque reque reque .3 The coate know maxi .4 The in an which .5 Whe know cons quan .1 A d .5 Blending .1 The exce DEPARTM ES es rse aggregate es shall be pla egation and c kpiles shall be grading limits s regated or con kpiles shall b production of c d coarse aggr atching .
phic examina nce with CSA etrographic ex erved change n the size of uch that more est for an ex est for extens ested as a mi petrographic ed grains , so wn to cause mum PN for c aggregate pe n aggregate s h is known to n the sample wn to have tituents shal ntitatively .
Additional tes deleterious eff of aggregate blending mat ption of the g STA MENT of TR STRUCTU and fine agg aced on a leve contamination e checked dur specified .
ntaminated sto e maintained concrete to be regates shall ation of the A23.2-15A an xamination of in the materia the crushing than two yea xtension to t sion shall incl nimum .
examination oft flaky partic harmful rea coarse aggreg etrographer sh ample and to be deleteriou e has been f specific unfa ll be descri sting shall be fect on concre s shall only be erials shall in rading require ANDARD S RANSPORT URES regate shall e el well drained does not occ ring the norma ockpiles shall so that there e placed in the only be com aggregates s nd as describe f the aggrega al at the pit or operation or t ars supply is the time requ ude details of shall detect t cles , chert , an actions in Po gate shall be r hall be respon o comment on us .
found to poss avourable effe bed qualitati e necessary ete .
e permitted to ndividually me ements .
SPECIFICA TATION an each be stockp d base and co cur .
al course of th not be incorp e is a sufficie e following 14 bined in the shall be mad ed below .
ates shall be quarry .
the usage of stockpiled , th uirement for f inventory m the presence nd all deleter ortland ceme reported .
nsible to desc n the unfavour sess properti fects on con ively and , t to prove the o meet the gra eet the require ATIONS nd INFRAS piled separate onstructed in s he Work , for c porated into th ent supply of 4 Days .
specified pro de on an an initiated whe material from he Contractor the petrogra anagement a e of deleteriou rious substan nt concrete cribe each roc rable effects o ies or constit ncrete , those to the exten e aggregate ading requirem ements of this TRUCTUR ITEM : 30 January , 20 ely .
such a manne conformance t he Work .
aggregates fo oportions at th nnual basis ere there is a m that operatio r may submit aphic test .
Th and time perio us shale , mic nces which ar mixtures .
Th ck type prese of any materi tuents that ar properties o nt practicabl shall have n ments .
s Item with th RE 02 15 er to or he in an on a he od a , re he nt al re or e , no he DEPA CONC Janua 302.2.2 302.2.2 ARTMENT CRETE IN ST ary , 2015 2 .2 Fin .1 .2 Co Mic Alk 2 .3 Coa .1 Li Co Mic Par Un Alk STAN of TRANS RUCTURES e Aggregate Fine aggreg approved co The amoun independent CSA A23.1 , Limits for De Deleterious Physic al and Lignite cro Deval kali Aggregate NOTES : 1 ) 2 ) 3 ) arse Aggrega The amount samples com limits prescr imits for Dele Deleterio al and Lignite cro Deval rticle Shape confined Free kali Aggregate NOTES : 1 ) 2 ) 3 ) NDARD SP PORTATIO gate shall co ombination .
nts of delete t samples shall not exce eleterious Su s Substances cal Properties e e Reaction 2 The sample sh A23.2-4A .
The dried and the p examination .
Test runs for a Following the within 3 years Testing period 430 kg/m3 cem ate t of deleteriou mplying with ibed in Table eterious Sub us Substanc e eze Thaw e Reaction 2 The sample sh CSA A23.2-4A shall be dried petrographic e Test runs for a Following the required within Testing period 430 kg/m3 cem PECIFICAT ON and INF STRUCTURES onsist of unc erious substa complying eed the limits Tab ubstances an s and s hall first be test e material retai portion which is a period of two year of no test of previous res d shall be 2 yea ment content .
us substances the grading r 302-2 .
Ta stances and ces hall first be test A .
The material and the portion examination .
a period of two year of no test n 3 years of pre d shall be 2 yea ment content .
TIONS FRASTRUC S coated natur ances in fin with the g specified in T ble 302-1 nd Physical P Test Proc Note CSA A23 CSA A23 Modifie ted for low den ned on the liqu s coal or lignite years .
There ing the cycle s sults .
ars .
Job mix ag s in coarse ag requirements able 302-2 Physical Pro Test Proce Note CSA A23 .
CSA A23 .
CSA A23 .
CSA A23 .
Modifie ted for low den l retained on th n which is coal years .
There ing the cycle s evious results .
ars .
Job mix ag CTURE ral sand , ma ne aggregate grading requ Table 302-1 .
Properties of cedures e 1 .2-23A .2-14A ed 3 nsity material in uid with a speci e shall be deter shall be no tes hall begin agai ggregate comb ggregate , det in CSA A23 operties of C edures 1 2-29A 2-13A 2-24A 2-14A ed 3 nsity material in he liquid with a or lignite shall shall be no tes hall begin agai ggregate combi anufactured s e , each dete uirements in f Fine Aggreg Test L ( % 0.2 16 0.035 @ n accordance w ific gravity of 2 rmined by petr sting on the thir in .
New results bination shall co termined on in 3.1 , shall not Coarse Aggre Test Lim ( % ) 0.5 14.0 15 6 0.035 @ 2 y n accordance w specific gravity be determined sting on the thir in .
New results ination shall co ITEM : 302 Page 302-5 sand or an ermined on ndicated in gate Limits % ) 25 .0 2 years with CSA .0 shall be ographic rd year .
s required ontain ndependent exceed the egates its years with y of 2.0 d by rd year .
s ontain CO Pag 302 302 302 302 302 302 ONCRETE IN ge 302-6 2.2.2 .4 2.2.2 .5 2.2.2 .6 2.2.2 .7 2.2 .3 Com 2.2.3 .1 STRUCTURE Water .1 The sour .2 Water-to- materials Admixtures .1 A written purposef .2 Any adm shall be a Curing Mater .1 Burlap , a surfaces .
.2 Curing m or other s .3 Burlap sh shall hav .4 Curing w Cement And .1 Fly ash , s .1 On fl shall exce .2 On propo shall .3 High mposition of C General .1 It shall b submitted concrete .2 Concrete .3 A calcium the eleva asphalt c Superstru DEPARTM ES rce of supply s -cementing m s that is equal n statement fully added ca mixtures which accounted for rials absorptive m . materials shall substance wh hall be of a q ve a mass of n water shall be f Supplementa slag , and silic latwork concre be limited t ed 35 % .
formwork co ortions shall not exceed 5 er replaceme Concrete Mix be the respon d to the Engi conforms to t e types A , B , C m nitrite corros ation of the B concrete ( excl ucture .
STA MENT of TR STRUCTU shall be the re materials ratio to the total w from the ma lcium chloride h increase the in the mix des at , or non-w , at any time hich would hav uality which w not less than 2 free of chlorid ary Cementing a fume may b ete exposed t to 20 % , 35 % oncrete expo be limited to 50 % .
nt proportions nsibility of th neer are prop the Specificat C , and D shall sion inhibitor Bridge seat , b luding approa ANDARD S RANSPORT URES esponsibility o o shall be co weight of ceme anufacturer s e shall be prov e water-to-cem sign to meet t woven geotext of use , be in ve a deleteriou will absorb wa 237 g/m2 whe es , oils , dirt a g Materials be used : to chlorides a % , and 8 % re osed to chlo 30 % , 50 % , s may be perm e Contractor perly batched ion .
l be exposure shall be adde bearing block ach slabs bur SPECIFICA TATION an of the Contract omputed usin ent plus fly ash stating that t vided to the E menting mater the specified w tile shall be good conditio us effect upon ater readily w n clean and d and other dele and freezing a espectively .
T orides and f and 8 % resp mitted at the d to ensure th d , mixed , plac e Class C-XL a ed to all concr ks , approach ried below gra ATIONS nd INFRAS tor .
ng the weight h , silica fume , the admixture Engineer .
rials ratio by 0 water-to-ceme used for cu on free from h n concrete .
when dipped o dry .
eterious mater and thawing , t Total replacem freezing and pectively .
Tota discretion of th hat the mixtu ced and cured and type E sh rete in the ab slabs overla ade ) , and to c TRUCTUR ITEM : 30 January , 20 t of cementin , and slag .
e contains n 0.01 or greate enting ratios .
uring horizont holes , dirt , cla or sprayed an rials .
the proportion ment shall no thawing , th al replaceme he Engineer .
ure proportion d such that th hall be F-1 .
butments abov id directly wit concrete in th RE 02 15 ng no er tal ay nd ns ot he nt ns he ve th he DEPA CONC Janua 302.2.3 302.2 302.3 ARTMENT CRETE IN ST ary , 2015 3.1.3 .4 Associa .1 The the .2 Saf .3 Ma SUBMITTA .1 The Co 14 Day but not .1 Ce Ass .1 .2 .2 Pro writ per not .3 The sta sha .1 .2 Other s specific .3 Submitt STAN of TRANS RUCTURES .1 The dos .2 The cor calcium .3 The calc be provi of concr .1 Acc from disp .2 Veri ated Materials e Contractor s Contract Doc fety anchor as aterials shall b ALS ontractor shal ys in advance be limited to : rtification tha sociation ( AC The concret production o Only concre plant certific oposed sourc ting , a minimu riod shall be i t been previou e proposed d mped and si all include : Specified ha submittals are c phase of the tals are requir NDARD SP PORTATIO sage rate shall rosion inhibiti nitrite by weig cium nitrite sh ded to the En rete .
eptable verific m computeriz pensing units .
ification shall b s shall supply a cuments .
ssemblies sha e stored at lea ll submit the of the supply : at the concre CA ) , Plant Ce te supplier sh of the concret ete supplied fr cation shall be ces of aggreg um of 14 Day ncreased to a usly approved design mix p igned by the ardened prope e required for e Work being u red in accorda PECIFICAT ON and INF STRUCTURES l be 15 L/m3 .
ng calcium ni ght of solution all be added a ngineer for the cation shall in zed batch pl be provided o ny associated all be available ast 100 mm o source of sup y of the concr ete supplier i rtification Pro hall submit p te in accordan rom such cer e maintained f gates and tes ys prior to the a minimum of d for use in the proportions , c Professiona erties and ag this Item and undertaken .
ance with any TIONS FRASTRUC S itrite admixtur .
at the concret e quantity of t nclude , but is lants or prin on the delivery d materials ne e from the Ow off the ground pply of Portla rete to the Wo s certified in ogram or the e proof of confo nce with CSA rtified plants s for the duratio st results sha e proposed u f 35 Days if th e Owner ’ s pro certified by th l Engineer , w e of testing fo are containe y cross-referen CTURE re shall conta te ready mix p he calcium ni s not necess ntouts from y slip .
ecessary for c wner. . and cement c ork , and this s n accordance equivalent as ormance to t A A23.1 .
shall be acce on of the Wor all be submit se of such m he aggregate ojects .
he Contracto who reviewed or strength , a ed within the s nced Item form ain between 3 plant and verif trite added to sarily limited t computerized onstruction , a concrete to th submittal sha e with Atlanti follows : he requireme ptable to the rk .
tted to the E materials .
This s proposed fo or or his/her d the concret ir , and perme sections applic ming part of th ITEM : 302 Page 302-7 30 % to 36 % fication shall each batch to , printouts d admixture as shown on he Engineer all consist of c Concrete ents for the Owner and Engineer , in s notification or use have agent , and te mix , and eability .
cable to the his Item .
CO Pag 302 302 302 302 302 302 302 302 ONCRETE IN ge 302-8 2.4 CONST 2.4 .1 Gen .1 .2 .3 .4 2.4 .2 Equ 2.4.2 .1 2.4.2 .2 2.4.2 .3 2.4.2.3 2.4 .3 Fals .1 STRUCTURE RUCTION neral The Contract specifically di Concrete ma shall conform The Contract of each concr When detaile described in 3 ipment and P Batching .1 The Con being ac propertie .1 The m to the Mixing .1 Mixers a Site and longer tim .1 Unde a tim Delivery .1 The batc batch of c .1 The b .2 Addition o .1 Wate Engin .1 S sework and Fo The Contract with Item 957 DEPARTM ES tor shall carry irected by the aterials and m m to CSA A23 .
tor shall notify rete placemen ed in the Cont 302.2.4 in acc Production ntractor has t ccurately and s. moisture cont e batching of nd agitators u discharge sha me is specifica er conditions c me of less than ch delivery tick concrete deliv batch ticket sh of Water er shall not be neer .
Slump adjustm ormwork tor shall be re 7 .
STA MENT of TR STRUCTU y out the Wo Engineer .
methods of co .1 and CSA A y the Enginee nt .
ract Documen cordance with he responsib consistently tent for aggreg concrete .
used for tran all be complet ally authorized contributing to n 1½ hours .
ket meeting th vered to site .
hall include qu e added after ment of super esponsible fo ANDARD S RANSPORT URES rk as indicate oncrete constr A23.2 , if not ot er at least two nts the Contra h the Contract bility to ensure batched to p gates shall be sporting conc ted within 1½ d in writing by o rapid stiffen he requireme uantities of ma r batching for plasticized co r all falsework SPECIFICA TATION an ed in the Con ruction and m therwise spec o Days in adva actor shall ins Documents .
e that the co produce the s e determined crete shall de ½ hours of com y the Engineer ing of concret nts of CSA A aterials batch any purpose oncrete shall b k design and ATIONS nd INFRAS ntract Docum methods of te cified herein .
ance of the c stall the assoc oncrete mix p specified mix and adjustme eliver their loa mpletion of bat r. te the Engine A23.1 shall ac hed .
e without the a be with admixt construction TRUCTUR ITEM : 30 January , 20 ents and/or a est for concret ommenceme ciated materia proportions ar x and concret ents made prio ad to the Wo tching unless eer may speci ccompany eac approval of th ture only .
in accordanc RE 02 15 as te nt als re te or rk a fy ch he ce DEPA CONC Janua 302.4.3 302.4 302.4.4 302.4.4 ARTMENT CRETE IN ST ary , 2015 3 .2 The with .3 All .4 Placem 4 .1 Ge .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 4 .2 Foo .1 STAN of TRANS RUCTURES e Contractor h Item 958. submissions w ment neral All concrete in the Contra New concre compressive .1 All load Enginee Bonding of n .1 Before d tightene laitance .2 Hardene ponding .3 Methods shall be The Contrac selected con the time of unless other Concrete sh .1 Concret joints wi .2 Re-temp permitte Concrete pl Contract Do If the concre sequence of least 100 mm otings and Wo Where Over placed in ac NDARD SP PORTATIO shall be resp with respect t shall be plac act Document ete shall be d e strength .
s to be appl er .
new concrete depositing ne d and the sur removed .
ed concrete , in advance o s of obtaining subject to the ctor shall dete nstruction me batching unti rwise authoriz all be placed e at the adva thin a concret pering any p ed .
lacement adv cuments and/ ete details are f placing , a bu m. orking Slabs rexcavation oc cordance with PECIFICAT ON and INF STRUCTURES onsible for al o falsework a ced in a space ts .
efined as con ied on new on hardened ew concrete rface of the h surfaces sha of placing con g an adequate e approval of t ermine requir ethod and tem il final placing zed in writing .
while still plas ancing face of te placing ope artially harde vancement s /or authorized e such that a f ulkhead shall ccurs in the s h Standard Dr TIONS FRASTRUC S ll formwork de and formwork e free of stand ncrete that ha concrete sha concrete sha on concrete hardened conc all be thorou ncrete .
e bond betwe the Engineer .
red delivery te mperature con g shall be ma stic and worka f the concrete eration shall n ened concrete hall be up-g d by the Engin feather edge o be introduce solid rock exc rawing 302-3 CTURE esign and co shall be in ac ding water , un as not attaine all be subject all be carried o that has set crete shall ha ughly saturat een the harde .
emperature o ntrol , but con aintained betw able .
e placement m not be permitte e with additio rade unless neer .
or thin section ed to maintain cavation for fo and as follow nstruction in ccordance with nless otherwis ed its minimu t to the appr out as follows : , the forms s ave all foreign ted with wat ened and fres of concrete to ncrete temper ween 10 C must be plast ed .
onal water s otherwise no n might be cre n an edge thic ootings , concr ws : ITEM : 302 Page 302-9 accordance h Item 956. se specified m specified roval of the : shall be re- matter and ter , without sh concrete o satisfy the ratures from and 25 C , tic and cold hall not be oted in the eated by the ckness of at rete shall be CO Pag 302 302 302 302 ONCRETE IN ge 302-10 2.4.4.2.1 2.4.4 .3 2.4.4 .4 2.4.4 .5 STRUCTURE .1 Dow footin .2 If the botto botto .1 T M .2 Prior to compress .3 For step placed in upper po shall perm .1 The free w Columns .1 Concrete in the Co .2 Prior to t attained protection .3 Concrete compress .4 Falsewor attained 6 .5 Unless s the Supe character T-Beam Span .1 Concrete .2 Concrete Box Girders .1 Concrete .1 The b and t DEPARTM ES n to an eleva ng , the Contra e Overexcava om of the foo om of the exca The working MPa at 28 Da the placemen sive strength ped footings n two or more ortion shall be mit .
concrete in th water or laitan e in columns s ontract Docum the placemen a minimum n requirement e in columns s sive strength rk supported 60 % of its min pecifically pe erstructure un r of concrete i ns e in girder web e in a T-Beam e in box girder bottom slab s the webs .
STA MENT of TR STRUCTU ation of 150 m actor shall pla ation is in exc oting , the Co avation up to t slab shall ha ys .
nt of footings of 5 MPa .
and similar s stages and w e placed as s he lower porti nce shall be re shall be place ments and/or a nt of walls or compressive ts must be sa shall be allow of 20 MPa be by brackets nimum specifi rmitted by the ntil column fo in the column bs shall be de span shall be rs shall be pla hall be placed ANDARD S RANSPORT URES mm below the ce the concre cess of 150 m ontractor shal the bottom of ave a minimu s , the workin stepped form where the mo soon as stiffen on shall be d emoved befor ed in one cont as directed by column form e strength of atisfied in acco wed to cure a efore adjacent on columns ed compress e Engineer , in rms have be s. posited unifor e placed in on ced in two or d first with a c SPECIFICA TATION an e specified ele ete specified fo mm below th l place work the specified m specified c ng slab concr mwork details , onolithic natur ning of the co designed so a re the next lay tinuous opera y the Engineer mwork all conc f 20 MPa a ordance with 3 minimum of 3 t formwork is p shall not be ive strength .
n writing , con een stripped s rmly in horizo ne continuous three separat construction jo ATIONS nd INFRAS evation of the for the footing e specified e ing slab con footing eleva compressive rete shall hav where conc re has to be m oncrete in the as to minimize yer of concret ation unless o r. crete in footin nd the footin 302.4.8 .
36 hours and placed .
e placed until ncrete shall no sufficiently to ntal layers .
operation .
te operations .
oint between t TRUCTUR ITEM : 30 January , 20 e bottom of th .
elevation of th crete from th ation .
strength of 2 ve a minimu rete has to b maintained , th e lower portio e bleeding ; an e is placed .
otherwise note ngs must hav ng curing an d to a minimu l concrete ha ot be placed determine th .
the bottom sla RE 02 15 he he he 20 m be he on ny ed ve nd m as in he ab DEPA CONC Janua 302.4.4 302.4.4 302.4.4 ARTMENT CRETE IN ST ary , 2015 4 .6 Dec .1 .2 .3 .4 4 .7 Sup .1 4 .8 Pro .1 .2 STAN of TRANS RUCTURES cks and Diaph All diaphragm prestressed diaphragms , prior to placi .1 Pier diap live load as show Deck concre Structure .
The deck sl strength prio superimpose .1 Bulkhea until the following .1 No com The deck sl minimum sp deck slab .
perstructure R The load of abutments u specified com ofile of Bridge Longitudinal Engineer .
.1 The Con system a or other .2 When th transver .1 The adva the Where exce carry out gra NDARD SP PORTATIO hragms m concrete , w girders that , must have ng the concre phragms in pr d shall be plac wn on the conc ete shall be pla ab concrete m or to the plac ed dead load ads for the dec e deck slab c g the initial se disturbance mpressive stre ab concrete a pecified comp Reactions on B f the Superstr until concrete mpressive str Superstructu girders , tra ntractor shall a minimum of additional loa he Contractor rse floor beam e Contractor s ance of the pl Superstructur essive cambe ade adjustmen PECIFICAT ON and INF STRUCTURES with the excep t are made attained 60 % ete for the dec restressed co ced concurren crete placeme aced uniforml must have at cement of cur on the deck s ck slab placem concrete reac t of the deck s of the emb ngth of 20 MP and continuou pressive stren Bents , Piers , ructure shall e in the bent rength .
re Componen nsverse floor notify the En f 7 Days in ad ads on the Su r carries out t ms and stringe shall submit th lacement of a re .
er of precast nts , as directe TIONS FRASTRUC S ption of contin continuous f % of its minim ck slab or any oncrete girder ntly with the p ent diagram in ly and symme ttained 80 % o rb , barrierwal slab .
ment shall rem ches a minim slab concrete bedded reinfo Pa is achieved us pier diaph ngth prior to t or Abutments not be allowe ts piers or ab nts r beams and ngineer of the dvance of the perstructure t the surveying ers shall be pr he profiles to any falsework , pre-stressed ed by the Eng CTURE uous pier dia for live load mum specifie y other superim Bridges that portion of the d n the Contract etrically with re of its minimum lls or Sidewa main in place um compress e. orcing shall d. ragms must h the placemen s ed to come u butments has d stringers s e availability o placement of to allow for the g under Item 9 rofiled by the C the Engineer , formwork or beams occu ineer .
P phragms for B and integra d compressiv mposed dead are made co deck over the t Documents .
espect to the m specified c lk concrete o for at least 36 sive strength occur until a have attained nt of any vehi upon the ben s reached th shall be prof of his/her saf f any falsewor e profiling .
941 , longitud Contractor .
a minimum o other addition urs , the Cont ITEM : 302 Page 302-11 Bridges with al abutment ve strength , d loads .
ntinuous for e same pier , width of the compressive or any other 6 hours and of 20 MPa a minimum d 80 % of its icles on the nts , piers or e minimum iled by the fety support rk , formwork inal girders , of 7 Days in nal loads on tractor shall CO Pag 302 302 302 ONCRETE IN ge 302-12 2.4.4 .9 2.4.4 .10 2.4 .5 Trem .1 STRUCTURE Bridge Decks .1 The deck starting a the Contr .2 Concrete Contract .1 Placi .2 Vehic conti comp .3 Deck sla between .4 During th cost to th exposed water spr Multi-span St .1 Before d girders sh .2 The place not proce preceding mie Concrete The Contract concrete plac accordance w .1 Tremie p spacing o .1 A co place .2 During p particular and level Documen .1 Conc .3 Prior to a area sha .1 The l DEPARTM ES s k slab concre at one end of ract Documen e in continuou Documents .
ing of concret cles or any s nuous structu pressive stren b , safety curb November 1s he concreting he Owner , tha portions of a ray .
teel Girder Bri deck slab con hall be remov ement of dec eed until the m g concrete de tor , in conjunc cement includ with ACI 304 , ipes shall be of 3.0 m. All p ncrete pump ement plan .
lacing , the up r care must be l upper surfac nts .
crete in exces any placing o ll be securely lower templat STA MENT of TR STRUCTU ete for a simp a span and p nts .
us slab and sl te in deck slab superimposed ure until all c ngth .
b , parapet , ba st and May 1st , of the deck s t cement past steel superst idges ncrete is plac ved .
k concrete for minimum spe eck placement ction with the ding mix desig CSA A23.1 , a kept filled with pipes shall be may be used pper surface o e taken to ens ce +200 mm o ss of 300 mm of the tremie held in prope te shall be loc ANDARD S RANSPORT URES ple span shall proceeding to lab-on-girder bs shall be co d dead load s concrete has arrier wall an , unless autho lab and barrie te or other lea tructure empl ced on steel r any single p ecified compre t ( s ) as detaile concrete sup gn , contingen and the follow h concrete wh used in contin d to charge tre of the concret sure that the t or -100 mm of of the upper d concrete , ver er alignment b ated a maxim SPECIFICA TATION an l be placed in the other end Bridges shall ntinuous betw shall not be a attained 80 % d Sidewalk c orized by the E er walls the C akage from th oying an Eng spans , the fa placement on essive strengt ed in the Contr pplier , shall pla ncies , monitor wing minimum hile depositing nuous rotation emie pipes as te must be ke tremie concre f the elevation designated su rtical shaft re by steel templa mum of 1 m ab ATIONS nd INFRAS n one continu d , unless othe l be placed a ween construc allowed on an % of its mini concrete shall Engineer , in w ontractor sha e forms is rem gineer approv falsework sup a continuous th has been a ract Documen an all aspects ring and test requirements g and shall ha n to maintain c s part of an ap ept as level a ete has a reas n designated urface shall be einforcing bars ates .
bove the top o TRUCTUR ITEM : 30 January , 20 uous operatio erwise noted s shown in th ction joints .
ny portion of mum specifie not be place writing .
ll ensure , at n moved from th ved pressurize pporting Bridg Structure sha attained for th nts .
s of underwate placements , s : ave a maximu concrete leve pproved trem as possible an sonably smoot in the Contra e removed .
s in the trem of the tremie .
RE 02 15 n , in he a ed ed no he ed ge all he er in m l. ie nd th ct ie DEPA CONC Janua 302.4.5 302.4 302.4.6 ARTMENT CRETE IN ST ary , 2015 5.1.3 .4 .2 In t rem .1 .3 The of e .1 .2 .3 .6 Constru 6 .1 Lim .1 .2 STAN of TRANS RUCTURES .2 The upp During placi following con .1 The Con once the rate of n .1 For plac app .2 The con concrete .3 A maxim concrete of 1.5 m the area of p moved and the All laitance a be disposed e Owner shall each pier for t The Contrac assistance th The Contrac tremie coring Should such at his/her ow Engineer , to .1 The Co addition remedia uction Joints mitation in Use Construction or as approv Equipment , bulkheads p Vertical cons the Roadwa NDARD SP PORTATIO per template is ing of the str nditions : ntractor shall e Contractor w not less than 4 a plan area g ced at a rate roved in writin ncrete must co e at any time d mum centre t e placement a m from the insid pier shafts , at e top of the fo and concretin of outside the l arrange to h he purpose of ctor shall , as hat may be ne ctor shall susp g operation .
h cores identif wn expense , remedy the d ntractor shall al coring to ation plan satis e of Construct n joints shall n ved in writing or other unfo parallel to the p struction joint y. PECIFICAT ON and INF STRUCTURES s to be positio uctural tremie only begin t warrants the c 40 cubic metre greater than 1 of not less ng by the Eng ontain enough during the pla to centre spa and the outsid de face of the t the top of t oting shall be g residue sha e Work Area .
ave one or m f checking the s part of the ecessary to en pend all of he fy defects or f carry out co deficiencies id be responsi determine th sfactory to the ion Joints not be permitt g by the Engin oreseen reas principal lines ts in deck slab TIONS FRASTRUC S oned near the e , the Contra the tremie pla capability of s es per hour th 100 square m than 50 cubi gineer .
h retarder to e acement .
acing of trem de rows of trem e sheet piling c the structural e chipped dow all become th ore cores dril e quality and s Work , provi nable the drill er/his construc fail to meet th orrective meas dentified in the ible , at her/h he full exten e Engineer .
ted except tho neer , unless sons , in whic s of stress .
bs shall not b CTURE top of the cof actor must sat acement , for upplying and hroughout the metres , concre ic metres per ensure a minim ie pipes shal mie pipes sha cofferdam wa tremie footin wn to sound co e property of led from the s strength of the de access , p ling to be carr ction operatio he Specificati sures , subjec e structural tre is own expen nt of the def ose shown in occasioned b ch case the C be allowed pa P fferdam .
tisfy , as a mi the footings o placing the co entire placem ete shall be s r hour , unless mum depth of ll be 3 m in all be spaced alls .
ng , the laitan oncrete .
the Contracto structural trem e concrete pla platforms and ried out efficie ns on the pie ons , the Con ct to the appr emie concrete nse , for the c fects and to the Contract by the breakd Contractor sh arallel to the c ITEM : 302 Page 302-13 inimum , the of any pier , oncrete at a ment .
upplied and s otherwise f 1 m of fluid any footing a maximum ce shall be or and shall mie concrete acement .
d any other ently .
er during the tractor shall roval of the e. cost of any develop a Documents down of the hall provide centreline of CO Pag 302 302 302 302 ONCRETE IN ge 302-14 2.4.6 .2 2.4 .7 Plac 2.4.7 .1 Finis App asph App Con Foo Colu and Misp Colu and Foo Vari 2.4.7 .2 STRUCTURE Use of Keys .1 Suitable other leve .2 Keys or Documen cing and Finis Tolerances .1 Unless ot grade an shed Bridge D proach Slab di halt concrete proach Slab bu ncrete Bridge B ting Grades umns , Walls , C exposed Win placement or umns , Piers , W exposed Win tings ation in sizes Upper Horizo .1 The conc upper ho directed b .1 Use .2 Stee DEPARTM ES keys shall be els where Wo construction nts , unless oth hing Plastic C therwise requ d dimension s Pla Position Deck rectly overlaid uried below gr Bearing Block Surface var Cap Beams a gwalls eccentricity in Walls , Beams ngwalls and location ontal Surfaces crete shall be orizontal surfa by the Engine of mortar topp l floats shall n STA MENT of TR STRUCTU e formed at th ork is interrupt joints shall b herwise perm Concrete uired in the Co shall be as sh T acing and Fin in Structure G Surfa d with Su rade Surfa k or Seat riation from le and High Qual Surface v n Pier , Cap Be and High Qu Cross Plan dim Misplac of Slab and W s e placed in th aces shall be eer .
ping shall not not be permitte ANDARD S RANSPORT URES he top of the ted .
be of the typ itted by the E ontract Docum hown in Table Table 302-3 nishing Tole Grades ace variation Grades urface variatio Grades ace variation Grades vel or specifie lity Surface Ar variation from eam & Bridge ality Surface A sectional dim mensions widt cement or ecc Wall openings he forms in su e as indicated be permitted .
ed .
SPECIFICA TATION an e upper layer pe and detail ngineer .
ments , the ma 302-3. rance Limits on ed slope reas true line Seat Areas mensions th/length centricity ± dir uch a way th d in the Con .
ATIONS nd INFRAS of each day' as shown in ximum deviat s Tolera  8 m 8 mm ov  8 m 8 mm ov  8 m 12 mm o +1 to -5 ± 0 .
-10 mm/+  5 m ± 10 - 5 mm/+ - 10 m 1 % of footing rection of mis < 50 ± 10 hat the final e ntract Docume TRUCTUR ITEM : 30 January , 20 's Work and n the Contra tions from line ance mm ver 3 m mm ver 3 m mm ver 3 m 5 mm .1 +50 mm mm mm + 10 mm mm g dimension in placement bu mm mm elevation of th ents and/or a RE 02 15 at ct e , n ut he as DEPA CONC Janua 302.4.7 302.4.7 302.4.7 ARTMENT CRETE IN ST ary , 2015 7 .3 Bea .1 7 .4 Brid .1 .2 .3 .4 7 .5 Brid .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 STAN of TRANS RUCTURES aring Surface Where bear surfaces on plane .
.1 If bearin artificiall sandpap dge Curbs an Sidewalks a elevations sh The concrete Floating sha Before this centre line o dge Decks Concrete Br following sec Continuous provided by .1 Access .2 The acc Placing of c that : .1 The rate operatio .2 The nec use .
The finishing .1 Bull floa Falsework a concrete , an .1 Care sh weight o .2 Suitable measure NDARD SP PORTATIO s ring pads ( oth which pads a ng block sur y roughened per .
d Sidewalks and curbs sh hown in the C e shall be wor all be kept to a finish has se of the Roadwa ridge decks s ctions .
access to th the Contracto shall be provi cess Bridges s oncrete in Br e of producin ons within the cessary tools g operations fo ts or magnes and wedges nd the Contrac hall be exercis of the Bridge d e means sh ement by the PECIFICAT ON and INF STRUCTURES her than steel are to be plac rfaces are gr d as required hall be cons Contract Docu rked with a m a minimum co et , the surface ay , with a fine shall be finish he Bridge de or .
ded by means shall be positio ridge decks sh g and placing scheduled tim and Equipme or silica fume ium trowels s shall be che ctor shall mak sed to ensure deck concrete hall be prov Engineer of s TIONS FRASTRUC S l ) are shown ced shall be w round to me d to produce structed by p ments .
agnesium floa nsistent with t e shall be lig dry broom .
hed by power eck surface s of suitable t oned as requi hall not be pe g concrete sh me .
ent are at the modified con hall be used t ecked immed ke necessary e that settlem e is minimal .
vided by the settlement and CTURE in the Contra wood or mag eet tolerances a surface te placing concr at to give a un the desired fin ghtly roughen r machine me during finish transverse Bri ired by the En ermitted until hall be sufficie e site and in ncrete shall be to remove def diately prior adjustments .
ment and defl e Contractor d deflection .
P act Document nesium floate s , the surfac exture similar rete continuo niform surface nish .
ed , perpendic ethod as spec ing operation idges .
ngineer .
the Engineer ent to comple satisfactory c e limited to scr fects .
to placing B ection due to r to permit ITEM : 302 Page 302-15 ts , concrete ed to a level ce shall be r to coarse usly to the e. cular to the cified in the ns shall be r is satisfied ete finishing condition for reeding .
Bridge deck o the added immediate CO Pag 302 302 302 ONCRETE IN ge 302-16 2.4.7.5 2.4.7 .6 2.4.7 .7 STRUCTURE .6 Screed b deck to t required , .1 Scre defle .2 Scre .3 Supp .1 I t s . .4 The C to su .1 F o E d E Deck Surface .1 Areas ou Engineer .1 It sha conc Screed Mach .1 Screedin machines .2 Prior to b over the f .1 This .2 While for d the c .3 Nece DEPARTM ES bars or pipes s the line and for any antici ed bars and ect appreciably ed pipes or ba ports for scree f the supports type which ca so that no par 1 The supp deck conc hardened approval o Contractor sh upport the add For steel girde or the Contrac Engineer acc deformations Engineer .
e Repairs to M utside of tolera r. all not be acce crete that has hines g of Bridge de s , approved b beginning con full length of t test run shall e operating th eflection and controlling dim essary correct STA MENT of TR STRUCTU shall be set to grade as sho ipated settlem pipes shall be y under the ap ars for deck p ed pipes or ba s for the rails an be removed rt remains less ports shall be crete before th , the holes of the Enginee hall be respon ditional loads i er Bridges , sc ctor shall subm eptable to th or permanen Meet Toleranc ances identifie eptable to ach hardened .
ecks shall be by the Enginee ncrete placing the Bridge seg be made with he screeding proper adjust mensions of sla tions shall be ANDARD S RANSPORT URES the correct e own in the C ment and/or ca e of such typ pplied loads .
pours shall be ars shall not be are located i d without dist s than 70 mm e removed an he deck conc shall be ent er .
sible for the d mposed by th creed rails sha mit an analysi he Owner , de nt loads impa ces ed in Table 3 hieve this repa accomplished er .
operations , t gment to be p h the screed in machine in th tment , the co ab reinforcem made before SPECIFICA TATION an elevation , to fo ontract Docu ambered defle pe and be ins firmly secure e carried upo n the concret turbing the co m below the fin nd the resulti crete has hard irely filled an design of deck he power-drive all be support is , stamped a emonstrating arted to the g 302-3 shall be air by placing d by power-d the screeding placed .
n its finishing his test , the sc over on slab re ment and forms starting the p ATIONS nd INFRAS orm the surfac ments , with a ection of the S stalled so that ed prior to plac n reinforcing s te , the suppor oncrete , or pa nished concret ng holes ent dened , or onc nd finished , k hangers and en screeding ted on the top and signed by there will be girders , for a e repaired as d grout or conc riven Bridge d g machine sha position .
creed rails sh einforcement s checked .
placement of c TRUCTUR ITEM : 30 January , 20 ce of the Bridg allowances , a Structure .
t they shall no cing concrete .
steel .
rts shall be th artially remove te surface .
tirely filled wit ce concrete ha subject to th d form bracke machine .
p girder flang a Profession e no excessiv pproval by th directed by th crete over dec deck screedin all be operate hall be checke measured an concrete .
RE 02 15 ge as ot .
he ed th as he ts e ; al ve he he ck ng ed ed nd DEPA CONC Janua 302.4.7 302.4 ARTMENT CRETE IN ST ary , 2015 7.7 .3 .8 Curing .1 The pla and .2 Co AC .3 All .1 .2 .3 .4 .4 Equ the STAN of TRANS RUCTURES After the co dense slab , machine .
.1 The scre porous p .2 The Con the deck 2 m inte .1 If th scre .3 The scr uniforml .4 The fina and Protectio e Contractor cement , the p d protection of ncrete shall b CI 302 and AC exposed conc The curing p concrete pla attained ( 90 % .1 Wet cu absorpti The curing p grout placem A burlap , ab after finishin A fog mist screeding un way as to m concrete sur .1 Water s misting , concrete uipment and m Worksite and NDARD SP PORTATIO oncrete has b the surface s eeding machi places .
ntractor shall k slab across rvals .
he top cover eeding operati reeding opera y consolidate al deck finish s on shall submit proposed me f the concrete e protected a CI 308. crete surfaces period for con acement and % for concrete ring shall be ive mat , or fa period for mo ment or as rec bsorptive mat g of the concr system shal ntil concrete i maintain high rface .
hall not be al when placin e has achieve materials nece d ready for us PECIFICAT ON and INF STRUCTURES been placed , shall be struc ne shall carry verify the top the deck with or the thickn ion shall be re ation shall be d , dense , and shall be obtain t to the Engi thod and seq e. gainst plastic s , mortar and ncrete shall be until 70 % o e placed betw e carried ou bric kept cont ortar or grout commended b t , or non-wov rete surface .
ll be applied is covered wit relative humi lowed to drip , ng the burlap ed final set .
essary for cur e before place TIONS FRASTRUC S spread , and ck off immedia y sufficient co cover on the hin 3 m of the ness of deck epeated .
e repeated a d smooth surfa ned by metho ineer for app quence to be or dry shrinka grout shall be e for a minim of the minimu ween Novemb ut by means tinuously wet shall be 3 D by the manufa ven geotextile continuously th burlap or n idity above th , flow or pudd p or non-wov ring and prote ement of conc CTURE consolidated ately by the p oncrete in fron e reinforcing s screeding op k slab does n as may be n ace true to the ds approved proval , 3 Day employed in age cracking e continuously mum of 7 Day um specified ber 1st and Ma of ponding t. Days from the acturer .
e fabric shall y to bridge d non-woven ge he concrete a dle on the con ven fabric or ection of conc crete commen P d to provide passage of the nt of the scree steel and the t peration at a m not meet tole necessary to e lines and gr by the Engine ys prior to th the Work fo by strict adhe y wet cured .
ys from the co compressive ay 1st ) .
, continuous completion o be applied i decks from t eotextile fabric and prevent d ncrete surface at any time rete shall be a nces .
ITEM : 302 Page 302-17 a uniformly e screeding ed to fill low thickness of maximum of erances the produce a rade .
eer .
he concrete r the curing erence to ompletion of strength is sprinkling , of mortar or immediately the time of c , in such a rying of the e during fog before the available on CO Pag 302 302 302 302 ONCRETE IN ge 302-18 2.4.8 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9 2.4 .9 Cold 2.4.9 .1 2.4.9 .2 STRUCTURE Freshly finish construction o .1 The Con concrete It shall be th protection is p Material or E placed on eit continuous S Bridge decks Formwork sh .1 When for surfaces .2 For verti vertical s plastic .
d Weather Re General .1 For the p between .1 Cold ambi below .2 The Cont meet the Acts and .3 Curing a compress .4 During p cessation .5 Contracto Days is a Materials .1 The temp the mixed than 10  DEPARTM ES hed concrete operations .
ntractor shall damaged by he responsib properly cons Equipment , ot ther the conc tructures , with shall be barr all not be rem rmwork is rem shall be kept cal surfaces , urface , supply equirements purpose of thi November 1s weather cur ient temperatu w 5 C within tractor shall e e inspection r Regulations .
nd protection sive strength eriods of free n of moist curi or shall plan h allowed prior t perature of ma d concrete , at C. STA MENT of TR STRUCTU shall be prote repair or rep the elements bility of the C tructed and m ther than tha crete deck be hout the appro icaded from tr moved before 7 moved prior to wet until the c curing shall ying a continu s specification st and May 1st .
ing and prote ure is at or be the next 24 ho ensure that all requirements shall continu is obtained on ezing tempera ing and then b his/her Work o being subje aterial charge t the time of p ANDARD S RANSPORT URES ected from th place , subjec or defaceme Contractor to maintained for at required fo eing cured or oval of the En raffic until com 7 Days withou o the completio curing period be carried o uous source o n cold weathe .
ection shall b elow 5 C , or our period .
boilers used and operatin ue for 7 days n field cured c atures the pro be gradually w such that afte ected to applic ed in the mixer lacement doe SPECIFICA TATION an e elements a ct to the app ent .
ensure that r the period of or actual curin portions of d ngineer .
mpletely cured ut the approva on of curing , t is completed out by secur of moisture to er curing and be required o r in the Engin for heating , m ng conditions and until 90 % cylinders .
otection shall withdrawn in a er completion cation of de-ic r shall be such es not exceed ATIONS nd INFRAS and from defa proval of the the system f time required ng operations decks on adja d. al of the Engin the newly exp .
ring wet burla the burlap , a protection sh utside of thes eer ’ s opinion materials , and of all applica % of the mini continue for accordance w of curing , a m cing chemicals h that the tem 25 C nor sh TRUCTUR ITEM : 30 January , 20 acement due t Engineer , an of curing an d. s , shall not b acent spans neer .
posed concret ap against th nd sealing wit hall be in effe se dates if th , is likely to fa d housing , sha able Provinci imum specifie 12 hours afte with 302.4.9.7. minimum of 2 s. mperature of all it be less RE 02 15 to ny nd be of te he th ct he all all al ed er 28 DEPA CONC Janua 302.4.9 302.4 .
302.4 .
302.4 .
ARTMENT CRETE IN ST ary , 2015 9.2.1 .2 .3 9 .3 Pla .1 .2 9 .4 Enc .1 .2 9 .5 He .1 .2 .3 .4 STAN of TRANS RUCTURES .1 The Co tempera Frozen lump Water over 3 acing Concrete sh Formwork , e ice and snow 5 oC for a m closed Protec Protective ho substantial f .1 Housing proceed Use of `` roll permitted on .1 their use .2 the conc .3 the resu ating Within A Housing sha 300 mm at a .1 This mi columns by insula The heating of not less th These cond the minimum Unvented he concrete .
.1 All conc phenolp combus NDARD SP PORTATIO ontractor may ature limits sha ps of aggregat 35 C shall no all not be plac existing concr w and shall be inimum period ctive Housing ousing shall b framework .
g shall be of d unhampered back '' sheetin n horizontal su e does not pre crete is covere ulting housing A Housing all be construc all points .
nimum shall s and walls un ated formwork system shall han 10 C nor itions shall be m specified co eaters shall b crete surface phthalein ( carb tion products .
PECIFICAT ON and INF STRUCTURES y heat water , all be met .
te shall be exc ot be brought ced against fr rete at a cons e preheated t d of 24 hours be wind and w adequate siz d. ng or tarpaulin urfaces , provid eclude the atta ed progressiv satisfies all th cted so that it include the nless the Eng k. provide at al r more than 32 e maintained ompressive str be removed f es shall be c bonation indic .
TIONS FRASTRUC S , or water a cluded from th in direct conta rozen surfaces struction joint , to and mainta prior to place weather tight , ze so proper ns supported ded : aining of the r vely as placed he specified p is clear of co underside of gineer has au ll times , an ai 2 C .
for a minimum rength is obta from the place checked prior cator ) to ensu CTURE nd aggregate he mix .
act with the ce s. , and reinforc ained at a tem ement .
constructed o placing and f from screed required surfa ; and provisions of th oncrete and fo f Bridge bea thorized the p ir temperature m of seven co ained .
ement area p r to acceptan ure that surfac P e , to ensure ement .
cing steel sha mperature of n of suitable ma finishing proc rails , or othe ace finish ; his Item .
ormwork by a ams , slabs , c protection of t e throughout t ontinuous Da prior to the pl nce into the ces are not d ITEM : 302 Page 302-19 that these ll be free of ot less than aterials on a cedures can er means , is minimum of cap beams , these areas the housing ays and until lacement of Work with damaged by CO Pag 302 302 302 302 ONCRETE IN ge 302-20 2.4.9.5 2.4.9 .6 2.4.9 .7 2.4 .10 Hot .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 STRUCTURE .5 At the tim or an imp heaters .
.1 Whe and c .6 The hou sufficient establish the speci Insulation .1 Insulation procedur minimum the minim .2 When th providing weather surface o a period obtained .3 The prop least two .4 Insulating Withdrawal o .1 After com gradually The temp exceed 2 Weather Req For the purpo temperature i within the nex Hot weather p The Contract agree to prov When the dry defined by C Engineer .
The tempera is to be place DEPARTM ES me of placing a permeable me n dry heat is concrete surfa sing shall be t period prior and maintain ified curing pe n may be used res are such th m of 10 °C and mum specified e ambient tem g an R value conditions a of the concrete of 7 continuo .
posed method weeks in adv g materials sh of Protection mpletion of th y reduced , at perature differ 20 °C .
quirements ose of this Sp is at or above xt 24 hours .
placing of con tor must dem vide this prote ying condition CAN/CSA - A ture of the for ed , shall not ex STA MENT of TR STRUCTU and during cu embrane from used the prod aces shall be e completed to placing c n the specifie eriod .
d to protect co hat the tempe d a maximum d compressive mperatures a of not less nd insulation e is maintaine ous Days and d of insulation vance of use .
hall be kept dr e specified c a rate not to rential betwee pecification ho e 25 °C , or in t ncrete shall no onstrate that ction before a ns meet mode A23.1 , the dr rmwork , reinfo xceed 30 °C .
ANDARD S RANSPORT URES uring , concrete m direct expos ducts of comb kept continuo and the heat oncrete to pr d curing cond oncrete provid erature of the s of 50 °C for a e strength is o are anticipated than 20 may n procedures ed at a minim d until the min n shall be su ry .
uring period t exceed 5 °C en ambient ai ot weather sha the opinion of ot proceed wit he can provi any approval c erate drying c rying protectio orcing steel , a SPECIFICA TATION an e surfaces sha sure to comb bustion shall ously wet .
ting system rove the ade ditions during ding weather surface of the a period of 7 c obtained .
d to be -15 ° y be used to are such th um of 10 °C a nimum specif ubmitted to th the temperatu C per hour , to ir temperature all be conside f the Engineer thout the appr ide adequate can be given t conditions or on must mee and material ATIONS nd INFRAS all be protecte bustion gases be vented to shall be in o quacy of the the placing a conditions an e concrete is m continuous Da °C , or lower , protect conc hat the temp and a maximu fied compress he Engineer f ure of the con o that of the s e and the con ered to be whe r is likely to ris roval of the En hot weather to start placin severe drying et with the a against which TRUCTUR ITEM : 30 January , 20 ed by formwo or drying fro the outside a operation for e Equipment t and througho nd insulation maintained at ays and until then insulatio crete , providin perature of th um of 50 C fo sive strength for approval a ncrete shall b surrounding a ncrete shall no en the ambie se above 25 ° ngineer .
protection an g concrete .
g conditions a approval of th h new concret RE 02 15 rk m air a to ut a on ng he or is at be ir .
ot nt °C nd as he te DEPA CONC Janua 302.4 .
302.4 302.4 .
ARTMENT CRETE IN ST ary , 2015 10 .6 The 25 .7 Exp from .11 Finishin 11 .1 Ge .1 .2 .3 .4 STAN of TRANS RUCTURES e mixing wate °C .
posed surface m direct wind .
ng Hardened C neral The following .1 Abutmen .2 Columns .3 Vertical .4 Safety c All other con directed by t The Contrac .1 The refe .1 With on t this Con .2 The pan reinforci .3 The pan and prot .1 The .4 Once th compari .5 The Con panel , o For compon select an ar area is acce .1 The sel complian NDARD SP PORTATIO er and/or aggre es of concrete .
Concrete g concrete su nt endposts , b s and cap bea faces and bot curbs and side ncrete surfac the Engineer .
ctor shall cast , erence panel s h the approva the Structure .
reference pa ntractor 's own nel shall be ca ng that shall b nel shall be ca tection that sh e surface finish he reference son in assess ntractor shall utside of the W nents other th rea of the com ptable to the ected finishe nce with the f PECIFICAT ON and INF STRUCTURES egates shall b e shall be sha urfaces shall re barrierwalls , a ams ; ttom side of ri ewalks with ex es shall rece , for a barrierw shall be cast s al of the Engin No further ba anel is not a expense .
ast in the sam be incorporate ast with the sa hall be applied h shall be revi panel is acc sing complian be responsibl Work Site .
han barrierwa mponent and Engineer .
ed area shall finish required TIONS FRASTRUC S be cooled whe aded from the eceive a `` Hig and outside ed igid frame gra xposed concre eive an “ Ordin wall , a site ref separate from neer this 3 m arrier walls sh ccepted it sh me orientation , ed into the Wo ame concrete d for the barrie iewed for app cepted , it sha ce of the high le for the remo alls , the Cont the Contract be used for d for the comp CTURE en the temper e direct rays h Quality Surf dges of the de ade separation ete surfaces .
nary Surface ference panel m the Structure reference pa hall be placed hall be remov , with the sam ork .
e mix and met erwalls .
proval by the E all remain on h quality finish oval and disp tractor and th tor shall finish r comparison ponent .
P rature of the m of the sun an face Finish '' : eck ; n Structures ; a Finish ” unles 3 m in length e. anel may be c d until this is ved and repla me formwork m thod of placem Engineer .
n-site for the h for the barrie posal of the sit he Engineer h the area su n purposes in ITEM : 302 Page 302-21 mix exceeds nd sheltered and s otherwise h. cast in place accepted .
If aced at the material and ment , curing purpose of erwalls .
te reference shall jointly uch that the n assessing CO Pag 302 302 302 302 ONCRETE IN ge 302-22 2.4.11 .2 2.4.11 .
.3 2.4.11 .4 2.4.11 .5 STRUCTURE Defects Form .1 Immediat be clearly of the def .1 The C .1 C .2 A a Defects Bridg .1 Isolated l area , pro .1 If rem main .2 Isolated follows : .1 If the cut , c .2 If the remo .3 Isolated l with an E Ordinary Surf .1 All surfac removal grout mix incorpora .2 All object totally rem .3 If the con Finish , t designate High Quality .1 Prior to fi surface to .2 The surfa DEPARTM ES med Surfaces tely after the y marked and fect for her/his Contractor sh Cement wash All defects sha adjacent surfa ge Deck ocal depressi vided the spe moval of the ntaining specif local depress e depression h chipped , and p e depression h oved and repla ocal defects l Engineer appro face Finish ce voids large of the formw x of cement a ate a latex bon tionable fins , moved to the ncrete surface he Contracto ed portions , o Surface Finish nishing , and w o identify all a ace shall first STA MENT of TR STRUCTU removal of fo d the Contrac s review .
hall submit a re es of any kind all be finished ace .
ons less than ecified cover is e depression fied cover then sions more th has an area l patched with a has an area g aced per Item ess than 25 m oved product er than 12 m work , shall be and fine sand nding agent .
projections , o Engineer 's sa e does not ad or shall , as or all of the con h without defaci air voids .
be given an O ANDARD S RANSPORT URES orms any part tor shall notify epair procedu d shall not be d smooth , uni 5 mm deep s s maintained .
by means o n the affected han 5 mm d less than 0.03 an Engineer a reater than 0 .
372.4.2 as di mm in diamete compatible wi mm in diamete filled to their d from the sa offsets , streak atisfaction .
dequately fulf directed by ncrete , and re ing the surfac Ordinary Surfa SPECIFICA TATION an of the Work fy the Enginee ure for approv used .
iformly colour shall be remov of grinding ca area shall be eep shall be 3 m2 then the approved repa .03 m2 then th irected by Eng er and less th ith the waterp er and cavitie r entire depth ame source a ks or other su fill the require the Enginee eplace with ne ce , the Contra ace Finish as ATIONS nd INFRAS which display er of the locat val .
r matched and ved by grindin annot be car e repaired per removed an e affected are air material .
he affected co gineer .
han 5 mm dee proofing system es or holes vi h , with an app as used in the urface imperfe ements for Or er , entirely re ew concrete .
actor shall pres specified in 3 TRUCTUR ITEM : 30 January , 20 ys defects sha tion and exte d flush with th ng the adjacen rried out whi 302.4.11.3.2. nd replaced a ea shall be sa oncrete shall b ep may be fille m. isible upon th proved ceme e concrete an ections shall b rdinary Surfac emove certa ssure wash th 02.4.11.4 .
RE 02 15 all nt he nt le as aw be ed he nt nd be ce in he DEPA CONC Janua 302.4 .
302.4 .
302.4 302.4 .
302.4 .
ARTMENT CRETE IN ST ary , 2015 11.5 .3 .4 11 .6 Brid .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .12 Quality 12 .1 Ge .1 .2 .3 .4 12 .2 Qu .1 STAN of TRANS RUCTURES Small surfac filled , to thei from the sam The entire s without pits o dge Deck Sur The entire d profile which any sharp pr The final co by the Intern .1 Surface the conc .1 Con that Areas where shall be cur manufacture The entire s compressed Deck surfac and in acco applying me Testing neral The Contra proper curin Facilities sh and process Samples sh Engineer .
The Contrac final dischar ality Control T The Contra placement , i .1 Results Enginee NDARD SP PORTATIO ce voids due t ir entire depth me source as urface shall b or irregularitie rface Preparat eck shall be s h is clean of a rotrusions and ncrete surface national Concr profile shall n crete deck .
ntractor shall s are noncomp e rapid setting red for minim er 's written spe surface shall d air , to the sa ce shall be all ordance with t mbrane .
ctor shall pr ng of concrete all be provide ses used in th all be obtaine ctor is respon rge , the chara Testing ctor shall ca including air , of Quality C er .
PECIFICAT ON and INF STRUCTURES to entrapped a h , with an app used in the co be finished to es .
tion shot blasted , all foreign ma d of laitance .
e profile shall rete Repair In not interfere w submit a repa pliant .
g patching ma um of 72 hou ecifications , p then be swe tisfaction of th owed to dry f the waterproo ovide and m e test specime ed by the Con he manufactur ed at final po nsible for sup acteristics spe arry out Qual temperature , Control tests TIONS FRASTRUC S air shall be cl proved ceme oncrete and in produce a sm and/or using aterials , such l range betwe nstitute ( ICRI ) with the adhes air procedure aterials have b urs , or longer prior to applyin ept and clean he Engineer .
for a minimum ofing manufac maintain adeq ens on the pro ntractor , for th re and delive oint of dischar pplying concr ecified in the C lity Control s and slump te s shall be re CTURE eaned to rem nt grout mix ncorporating a mooth dense s equivalent m as asphalt , o een a CSP 1 Technical Gu sion of the wa to the Engine been approved r when recom ng primer or in ned by pressu m of 7 Days cturer 's writte quate facilitie oject site for t he Engineer t ry of concrete rge unless ot rete which sh Contract Doc sampling/testi esting .
ecorded and P move surface l of cement an a latex bondin surface of un eans , achieve oil , grease , an and a CSP 5 uideline No .
03 aterproofing m eer for approv d for use by th mmended by nstalling mem ure washing after cessatio en specificatio es for safe s the initial curi to inspect all e. herwise spec hall have , at t cuments .
ing during th made availa ITEM : 302 Page 302-23 aitance and nd fine sand ng agent .
iform colour e an anchor nd is free of 5 as defined 3732. membrane to val of areas he Engineer the product mbrane .
and oil-free on of curing ons , prior to storage and ng period .
ingredients cified by the the point of he concrete able to the CO Pag 302 302 302 302 ONCRETE IN ge 302-24 2.4.12.2.1 2.4.12 .3 2.4.12 .4 2.4.12 .5 STRUCTURE .2 Tests Tech .2 Test spe .3 The air c acceptab at the d frequenc content c Quality Assu .1 The Own .1 If the shall .1 T f .2 Density requirem Age of Comp .1 The Con concrete .1 In th CSA .2 Stren .1 T r Frequency of .1 Frequenc Table 30 .2 For each 302.4.12 .1 A tes the m DEPARTM ES s shall be co hnician Grade cimens shall content of eac ble air conten iscretion of t cy of testing consistency is rance Testing ner shall carry e measured s be made imm This concrete failed to meet and Yield te ents of CSA A pressive Stren tractor shall d mix design .
e absence of A A23.1 for the ngth tests sha The 56 day or request is less f Compressiv cy of compre 02-4 and per 3 h age of comp .4.1 , shall be st , as defined mix design .
STA MENT of TR STRUCTU onducted by p e 1 , or CSA A2 be sampled i ch load , or b t is establishe the Engineer shall return s re-establishe g y out Quality A slump or air c mediately on e load , in the e t the requirem ests shall be A23.2-6C .
ngth Testing determine the f a Contractor e specified ex all be perform r 91 day stren s. ve Strength Te essive strengt 302.4.12.4. pressive stren required , unl d in 302.4.12 .
ANDARD S RANSPORT URES personnel cer 283. n accordance atch , of conc ed , at which p r. Should a t to one test p ed .
Assurance tes content falls o another portio event of a sec ments of this s made , as r e age of test r initiated req xposure class med at 7 days , ngth test may esting th testing sha ngth test ( 7 , 2 less indicated .8.1 to be bro SPECIFICA TATION an rtified under A e with CSA A2 crete shall be point testing f test fail to m per load , or sting .
outside the li on of the sam cond failure , s specification , required by t and shall be quest , the age s shall apply .
, 28 days , 56 y be removed all conform to 8 , 56 & 91 Da d on submitta oken at the sp ATIONS nd INFRAS ACI Concrete 23.2-1C .
tested until c frequency ma meet the requ batch , until imits specifie me sample .
shall be cons and shall be the Engineer indicated on e requirement days , and 91 d if the submit o the schedu ays ) two tests l. pecified age TRUCTUR ITEM : 30 January , 20 e Field Testin consistent an ay be reduced uirements , th acceptable a d a check te sidered to hav rejected .
r , to meet th n the submitte ts stipulated 1 days .
tted age of te ule indicated s , as defined submitted wit RE 02 15 ng nd d , he air st ve he ed in st in in th DEPA CONC Janua 302.4 .
302.4 .
ARTMENT CRETE IN ST ary , 2015 Nu i NOTE 12 .6 Ha .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 12 .7 Per .1 .2 STAN of TRANS RUCTURES Fr umber of Cub in Placing O up to 5 51 - 10 101 - 2 over 20 E : An addition rdened Air Vo A minimum placement a The hardene All tests mu material rati .1 The ave no singl In the eve production o met on a co .1 Subseq out by th Concrete ca Engineer an expense .
rmeability Tes A minimum and shall be .1 The cyli .1 Whe con .1 The permea .1 Results complet .2 The ave single re NDARD SP PORTATIO requency of bic Metres peration 50 00 00 00 nal test shall b oid Testing Fr of two cylin and cured for ed air void tes ust be perfor os , the harde erage of all te e test greater nt the harde of concrete sh nsistent basis uent testing to he Contractor ast with a non nd may be s sting Frequen of two cylinde e cured for 56 nders shall be ere sample ducted at an The age of c ability testing s are to be pro ted .
erage must fa esult greater t PECIFICAT ON and INF STRUCTURES Tab Compressiv be taken for e requency nders shall be a minimum o sting shall be rmed as per ened air void s ests shall hav r than 0.260 m ened air voi hall cease un s. o achieve a sa at his own ex ncompliant ha subject to re ncy ers shall be ta Days per CS e prepared fo preparation o age not to ex ure and the a shall be carrie ovided to the C ll within the p than 200 Cou TIONS FRASTRUC S ble 302-4 ve Strength T Minimum each additiona e taken for h of 7 Days .
carried out b ASTM C457 system shall m ve a spacing mm .
id system d til it can be s atisfactory har xpense .
ardened air v moval and r aken for perm SA A23.1 .
or testing imm or testing fa xceed 60 Day age at test dat ed out by the Contractor wi pay range esta ulombs above CTURE Testing ( Con No .
of Truck 2 3 4 See Note al 100 cubic m hardened air by the Owner .
7 .
Regardless meet the follo factor not ex oes not me hown that the rdened air voi void system s replacement a meability testi mediately after alls on a wee ys .
te shall be re Owner .
ithin 3 Days o ablished in Ta e the pay rang P crete ) ks to be Test 1 metres of con void testing .
s of water to owing : xceeding 0.23 eet these req ese requireme id system sha hall be evalu at the Contra ng from each r the 56 days ekend , testin ported .
of the test bei able 302-6 , w ge .
ITEM : 302 Page 302-25 ed ncrete placed .
from each cementing 30 mm , with quirements , ents can be all be carried ated by the actor ’ s own h placement of curing .
ng shall be ng with no .
CO Pag 302 302 ONCRETE IN ge 302-26 2.4.12.7.2.2 2.4.12 .8 STRUCTURE .1 A p .3 For conc shall esta without th the resul payment .4 In the ev requeste .1 A mi teste .2 If ref refer Compressive .1 Strength or three batch an .2 Test spe unless o A23.2-9C .3 To meet specified .1 Whe any t and n .2 Conc Adju .4 If tests in concrete .1 Depe comp .1 T t .2 A t . .3 I c a DEPARTM ES A single resul payment bein crete mix desi ablish the rela he corrosion ts will be sub adjustments ent that testin ed and conduc nimum of two ed within 7 Da eree testing i ree testing wil e Strength Te tests shall m companion 1 d tested at th ecimens shall therwise app C. the strength d strength .
n three or mo three consecu no individual crete that do stment per 30 ndicate that c in that placem ending upon t plete removal The Contracto the Engineer f Any additiona the Engineer .
1 Additional f the remedi concrete is a according to T STA MENT of TR STRUCTU t greater than g reduced to gns containin ationship betw inhibitor using tracted from t . ng results in a cted by the C o cores shall b ays of the orig ndicates the o ll prevail .
sting mean the aver 00 mm by 20 e same age .
be tested at proved by the requirements ore tests of th utive tests sh test shall be l oes not mee 02.5.7. concrete in a ment shall be the severity of , or : or may submi for considerat l testing reque l testing shall al measures allowed to re Table 302-5 .
ANDARD S RANSPORT URES n 200 Coulom the next lowe ng a calcium n ween concrete g an approved tests containi a reduction in ontractor .
be taken from ginal test date original test re rage strength 00 mm test c t the age of te e Engineer , a s of this Item , e same type hall be equal t less than 90 % et specified placement do deemed nonc f the noncomp t a proposal f tion .
ested by the C be conducted are accepte main , the co SPECIFICA TATION an mbs above the er level .
nitrite corrosio e , of similar m d testing plan ng corrosion payment , ref m the compon e. esults are not h of two-comp cylinder speci est submitted nd shall mee the average of concrete a to or greater % of the spec strength sha oes not meet compliant .
pliant concret for repair of th Contractor sh d at the Contra ed by the Ow oncrete in the ATIONS nd INFRAS e pay range w on inhibitor th mix proportion n. The differe inhibitor for c feree testing m ent in questio t representati panion 150 m mens taken f d with concre et the require of all tests sh are available , than the spec ified strength all be subjec t the specifie te , the Engine he noncomplia hall be subject actors own ex wner and the e placement TRUCTUR ITEM : 30 January , 20 will result in th he Contractor ns , with and ence between calculation of may be on and shall b ive then the mm by 300 m from the sam ete mix desig ements of CS hall exceed th the average o cified strengt .
ct to Payme d strength , th eer may requir ant concrete t t to approval o xpense .
e noncomplia shall be pa RE 02 15 he n be m me n , SA he of h , nt he re to of nt id DEPA CONC Janua 302.4 .
302.5 ARTMENT CRETE IN ST ary , 2015 12.8.4 .5 MEASURE .1 The Qu metres , .1 The des pla .2 For bea include .3 On par actual q .4 For foo be hand .1 For bot des of t .2 For foo Dra bot .1 .5 The sp contain Contrac accorda .6 Measur Docum STAN of TRANS RUCTURES .2 If the no the plac Additional te check the ad .1 Test cyli test cylin moisture .2 At the e weather .3 All test c 23  2C condition MENT FOR P uantity to be , of concrete s e volume sha sign dimensio ced .
am supported the concrete rtial depth co quantity of con oting and work dled as follow r Overexcava ttom of the fo sign plan foot the footing .
r Overexcava oting , the widt awing 302-3 , ttom of the ex Concrete re Contractor 's ecified volum ed within cof ct Documents ance with 302 rement of co ents , shall no NDARD SP PORTATIO oncompliant co ement shall b ests of cylind dequacy of cu inders shall b nders represe e environment nd of the curi r in the same m cylinders sha C for 24  8h ns from cylind PAYMENT measured fo supplied , plac all be the less ons presented concrete dec calculated ba ncrete remov ncrete placed king slab con ws : ation down to oting the com ing dimension tion in excess th and length and the ave cavation up to equired to pr invoice price me of tremie c fferdams ass s and the bas 2.4.5.1.2. ncrete in Str t be affected PECIFICAT ON and INF STRUCTURES oncrete is rem be paid accord ders , cured e uring or cold w e stored as n ent , and shall t as the Struc ng period the manner as the ll be removed h immediately der to cylinder or payment s ced and finishe ser of the com d in the Cont ck slabs the c ased on the ac val and repla .
crete where O o a maximum mputed volum ns presented s of 150 mm h of the work erage depth o o the specified rovide a wo from the sup concrete for w suming the th se and upper ructures , calc by the formwo TIONS FRASTRUC S moved and re ding to 302.6.5 ntirely under weather protec ear as possib be afforded cture .
e test cylinders e Structure .
d from the fie y before time r. shall be the s ed in accorda mputed volum tract Docume computed volu ctual beam ca cement unde Overexcavatio m of 150 mm e of the footi in the Contra below the sp king slab con of the workin d elevation of rking slab u plier .
which paymen heoretical hor surface eleva culated on the ork tolerances CTURE eplaced , the co 5. field conditio ction .
ble to the poin the same tem s shall be left ld storage an of testing to specified volu ance with this e of concrete ents or the ac ume of concre amber profile .
er Item 372 , t on in solid ro below the s ng concrete s act Document pecified eleva ncrete will be g slab shall f the bottom of under footings nt shall be m rizontal dimen ations as mea e dimensions s listed in Item P oncrete incorp ons , may be nt in the Struct mperature pro t in place , exp nd stored in lim ensure unifor ume , measur Item .
e as determin ctual volume ete in Structur the volume s ock occurs pa pecified eleva shall be deter ts and the ave ation of the bo as shown o be determine f the footing .
s shall be p ade shall be nsions as sh asured in the s shown in th m 958 .
ITEM : 302 Page 302-27 porated into required to ture that the otection and posed to the me water at rm moisture red in cubic ed from the of concrete res `` D '' shall shall be the ayment shall ation of the rmined from erage depth ottom of the on Standard ed from the paid at the the volume hown in the field and in he Contract CO Pag 302 302 302 ONCRETE IN ge 302-28 2.5 .7 The Paym met 2.5 .8 The Tab Coulom cor Payment p 2.6 BASIS O .1 Pay as id .2 The iden .3 In th 302 .1 .2 .4 The not c that .1 .5 Whe conc .6 Whe to re STRUCTURE Price Adjustm Strength ment per cub re componen price adjustm le 302- 6 .
Pr mbs after corr rrection ( AST per cubic met ( $ /m3 ) OF PAYMENT ment for Wor dentified unde Owner sha ntified in 302.2 he case that .4.12.5 to dete If the test res incurred by th If the test res incurred by th .1 The cos Contracto Contractor sh carried out .
F wet curing of This shall app ere noncompl crete incorpor ere concrete d emain in place DEPARTM ES ment for Cont Price For Co 50 M bic nt 100 ment for Resis ice Adjustme For Exp rosion inhibit TM C1202 ) tre for compo ) T rk under this er the Contra ll make part 2.4.1. the Enginee ermine if the s sults indicate t he Owner sha ults verify tha he Owner sha t of any rete or .
hall be subjec For the purpos f concrete is n ply to each pla liant concrete rated into the does not mee e , there will be STA MENT of TR STRUCTU rol of Strength Tab e adjustment oncrete in St MPa+ 45-4 0 % - $ stance to Chlo Tab ent for Resis posure Class tor 0-500 onent $ 25 Item shall inc ct. ial payment er initiates fur specified stren that the speci all be borne by t the specified all be charged esting to res cted to a pena ses of this Ite not being carri acement whic e is removed component sh et the requirem e no positive p ANDARD S RANSPORT URES h shall be paid ble 302-5 for Control o tructures A , B 9 MPa 40- $ 50 - oride Ion Pen ble 302-6 tance to Chlo s C-XL in CSA 0 500-1000 $ 0 clude a separ in accordanc rther testing ngth has been ified strength y the Owner .
d strength has to the Contra solve the spe alty of $ 1,000 .
em , an occurre ed out in acco ch is still being and replaced hall be paid in ments for stren payment adjus SPECIFICA TATION an d in accordan of Strength B , C and D -44 MPa To - $ 100 netration shall oride Ion Pen A A23.1 1000-1500 - $ 25 rate Unit Price ce with 908. in accordanc n attained , the has been atta s not been att actor .
ecified streng .00 per occurr ence shall be ordance with 3 g cured .
d in accordan n accordance ngth or harde stments for an ATIONS nd INFRAS ce with Table Less than o be reviewed Removal o ( per 302.4 l be paid in ac netration 0 1500-2000 - $ 50 e for each typ 7 for associ ce with the re e following sh ained , then th tained , then th gth shall be rence , if prope when an insp 302.4.8.3.1.1 nce with 302. with Table 30 ened air voids ny of the prop TRUCTUR ITEM : 30 January , 20 e 302-5 .
40MPa- d by Engineer or - $ 200 4.12.7.4 ) ccordance wit 0 > 2000 - $ 200 pe of concrete ated materia equirements all apply : he testing cos he testing cos borne by th er wet curing pection revea .
.4.12.8.4.2 , th 02-5. , but is allowe perties .
RE 02 15 th e , als in ts ts he is als he ed DEPA REINF Janua 304.1 304.2 304.3 ARTMENT FORCING ST ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite MATERIAL .1 All mate .2 Reinfor .3 All rein Steel B .1 Re Co .4 Reinfor reinforc Standa .1 Hea Eng .2 Re .3 No .5 Welding be perm .6 Bars ar in CAN/ .7 All Stru supply .8 Bar spli .9 Tie wire reinforc SUBMITTA .1 The Co specifie .2 The Co comme .1 All cer .3 Submitt STAN of TRANS TEEL TION em consists of S erial shall be s rcing steel sha forcing steel ars for Concre inforcing stee ntract Docum rcing steel sh cing steel as r rd Practice , u ating shall no gineer .
inforcing stee field bending g or splicing s mitted .
re subject to r /CSA G30.18 uctures are de accordingly .
ice couplers s e used to tie cing bars shal ALS ontractor shal ed requiremen ontractor shal encing the Wo welders sha rtification leve tals are requir NDARD SP PORTATIO f supplying an supplied by th all be designa shall be new ete Reinforce el shall be in t ents .
hall be bent to ecommended nless otherwi ot be used as l shall be free of reinforcing shorter bars as rejection if the 8 , Grade 400W esigned using shall be suppli stainless stee l be Type 316 l submit the m nts , at least 14 ll submit proo ork .
all be certifie el of Qualified red in accorda PECIFICAT ON and INF STRUCTURES nd placing of re he Contractor .
ated as Reinfo w billet steel c ement '' , Grade the form of d o proper sha d in The Reinf se noted in C s an aid in be e of physical d g will be allow s a substitute eir actual weig W , by more tha g Metric ( SI ) r ied in accorda el , Fiber Rein 6LN or Type 3 manufacturer ’ 4 Days in adv of of certificat d by the CW Welder as is ance with any TIONS FRASTRUC S reinforcing ste .
orcing Steel “ A conforming to e 400W , with t eformed roun pe in a plant forcing Steel I Contract Docum ending steel , defects .
wed unless aut for supplying ght varies from an 5 % .
reinforcing ste ance with the nforced Polym 316L stainless ’ s certification vance of the co tion for the w WB in accord ssued by the P y cross-referen CTURE eel .
A ” for non-coa o current CAN the following a nd bars unles t having suita Institute of Ca ments .
unless spec thorized by th g bars of the s m their theore eel bar sizes Contract Plan mer ( FRP ) or s steel wire , 1. n that the mat ommencemen welders condu dance with C Province of N nced Item form ated reinforcin N/CSA G30.1 additional req ss otherwise n able devices anada , ( RSIC ) ifically author e Engineer .
specified lengt etical weight , a and the Cont ns .
other corrosio .2 or 1.6 mm terials supplie nt of the Work ucting the Wo CSA W186 , a New Brunswic ming part of th ITEM : 304 Page 304-1 g steel .
18 , `` Carbon uirements : noted in the for bending ) , Manual of rized by the ths shall not as specified tractor shall on resistant in diameter .
ed meet the k. ork , prior to and/or to a k. his Item .
RE Pag 304 304 304 INFORCING ge 304-2 4.4 CONST 4.4 .1 Gen .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 4.4 .2 Plac .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 STEEL RUCTION neral The Contract specifically d The Work sh ( RSIC ) , Manu The Contract damaged or Prior to deliv fashion .
.1 Tags sha Reinforcing s cing and Fast Immediately excessive rus .1 Reinforci and reinf concrete .2 Bar supp Reinforceme and side for tolerances be Bars shall be 300 mm in ea other bars sh this shall hold In deck slabs prestressed c .1 Spacing beams .
The Contract shall not occu Work on part concrete has Prior to the d be inspected DEPARTM tor shall carry irected by the all be in acco ual of Standa tor shall hand contaminated very of reinfo all indicate de steel shall be tening before placin st or other co ng steel shal forcing steel a . ports shall be m nt shall be a rm spacers , efore and dur e fastened to ach direction hall be permit d all the bars s , the top bar concrete beam of the ties s tor shall ensu ur until the co tially embedd s attained a m deposition of c and approve STA MENT of TR STRUCTU y out the Wo e Engineer .
ordance with C ard Practice .
dle and store d with dirt or o orcing steel , b esignation lett stored on ski ng , reinforcin atings that wo l be maintain about to be e made of plast accurately pos to ensure pr ring placemen gether at all in which cas tted provided securely in p on the top m m or the conn shall not exc ure flexing of oncrete has a ed reinforcing minimum comp concrete the ed by the Eng ANDARD S RANSPORT URES rk as indicate CSA A23.1 , a the reinforcin other material bars or group ers and numb ds at least 15 g steel shall ould reduce b ed in this cle mbedded in c tic or stainless sitioned , secu roper concre nt of concrete intersections e fastening a the Contract osition .
mat shall be tie nectors on the ceed 900 mm the reinforcin ttained a min g steel shall c pressive stren positioning a ineer .
SPECIFICA TATION an ed in the Con and Reinforcin ng steel in a m ls .
ps of bars sh ber assigned 50 mm above be free of o bond to concr ean condition concrete shal s steel .
ured and sup ete cover and e. s , except whe at alternate int tor can demo ed securely to e steel beam .
m centre alon ng steel parti imum compre continue only ngth of 20 MP and securing o ATIONS nd INFRAS ntract Docum ng Steel Instit manner that e hall be tagge to bars on th e ground .
oil , dirt , mill s rete .
until embedd ll be free of lo pported , using d spacing w ere the spacin tersections of nstrate to the o the stirrups .
ng the entire ally embedde essive streng when the pre Pa. of the reinforc TRUCTUR ITEM : 30 January , 20 ents and/or a tute of Canad nsures it is no d in a durab e Plans .
scale , loose o ded in concret oose hardene g bar suppor ithin allowab ng is less tha f each bar wit e Engineer tha s of the preca e length of th ed in the Wo th of 20 MPa eviously place cing steel sha RE 04 15 as da ot le or te ed rts le an th at st he rk .
ed all DEPA REINF Janua 304.4 304.4.3 304.4.3 304.4.3 304.4 ARTMENT FORCING ST ary , 2015 .3 Suppor 3 .1 Bar .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 3 .2 Sid .1 .2 3 .3 Inte .1 Spa from .1 .4 Welding .1 Co ele .2 The ind STAN of TRANS TEEL rt of Reinforce r Supports Bar support reinforcemen significant de Bar supports the specified Bar supports .1 Comme equivale .1 Prec equ .1 .2 Bar supports deter the mo Bar supports de Form Spac Side form s reinforcemen Side form sp ernal Spacers acers for main m reinforcing Spacers sha shall not pro g lumn spirals ctrodes and i e welding of icated in the NDARD SP PORTATIO ement ts shall have nt , constructio eformation .
s shall be spa d concrete cov s shall be mad rcially availa ent , shall be u cast concrete al to that spec Geometry of fastened .
Stacking of b s shall be non ovement of mo s in contact w ers spacers shall nt .
pacers shall m s ntaining the s bars or steel r all be position otrude in the c shall be lap n accordance f reinforceme Contract Doc PECIFICAT ON and INF STRUCTURES sufficient st on crew and c aced such tha ver .
de of plastic .
able precast sed for bar su e bar supports cified for the m f bar support bar supports s nconductive a oisture from th with the soil sh have provis meet the requi pecified dista rods .
ned and secu over concrete welded , whe e with the req ent , including cuments .
TIONS FRASTRUC S trength and s concrete pres at any saggin concrete ba upports that a s shall be ma member into w or embedde shall not be pe and have a ge he surface to all have a bas ions to enab rements of 30 nce between rely fixed betw e. en so specifi uirements of g tack weld CTURE stiffness to c ssures withou ng between s ar supports , re in contact w ade of concre which the bar d tie wires s ermitted .
eometry and the reinforcem se area of les ble them to b 04.4.3.1 , Bar S layers of rein tween the laye ied , using E4 CSA W186 .
ing , is prohi carry the load t failure , displ supports shall or Engineer with soil .
ete with a qua supports are hall keep reb bond charact ment .
s than 10,000 be firmly sec Supports .
forcement sh ers of reinforc 49 Series low ibited unless ITEM : 304 Page 304-3 ds from the lacement or not reduce r approved ality at least integrated .
bar securely teristics that 0 mm² .
ured to the all be made cement and w hydrogen s otherwise RE Pag 304 304 Fa Pl Sp Ba INFORCING ge 304-4 4.4 .5 Test .1 4.4 .6 Tole .1 .2 abrication Tol acing Toleran pacing Tolera ar Cover Tole STEEL ting Additional re the Owner un be in non-co by the Contra erances Unless othe constructed w The toleranc not cumulativ C lerances S t C s t W s 2 nces 2 e R t F nces C D T rances DEPARTM inforcing stee nder the term nformance w actor .
erwise specif within toleran es listed in T ve .
Cutting to len Hooked bars Spirals or circ ties Column ties o stirrups Reinforcing s tolerances un Where the de smallest dime 200 mm or les 200 mm to 75 more than 75 Longitudinal l ends of bars * Note : Cov Reinforcing st tolerances un Footings Columns eck bars and Tee beams STA MENT of TR STRUCTU el , required to ms of this Item with the Speci fied in the ces listed in T Table 304-1 a Tab Reinforcing gth out-to of hoo cular out-to dimen or out-to dimen steel shall be nless otherwis epth ( d ) of a fl ension of a co ss 50 mm 0 mm ocations of be ver may not b more tha teel shall be less otherwise notwit toleran be in c colum with st stirrup walls notwit toleran contac corner ANDARD S RANSPORT URES o replace that m , unless the fications , the Contract D Table 304-1. and those pre ble 304-1 g Steel Tolera -out oks -out nsion -out nsion e placed in s e noted in the exural memb lumn is : ends and be reduced by an 20 mm at t spaced at the e noted in the hstanding the nce , all colum contact with s ns , and must tirrups and in ps for rectangu hstanding the nce , all bars m ct with stirrups rs and hooks SPECIFICA TATION an t altered by te reinforcing st n the reinforc Documents , r esented in Ta ances ( + ) 10 mm , for 25M bar for bars 25M specified pos e Contract Do er , the thickne y more than the end of a m e specified sp e Contract Doc e stated mn bars must spirals in round be in contact corners of ular columns e stated must be in s and in the ATIONS nd INFRAS esting , shall b teel is shown cing steel sha reinforcing s able 958-1 for ( - ) 25 mm rs or smaller larger than ± 5 mm ± 5 mm itions within ocuments : ess of a wall ± 3 mm ± 6 mm ± 10 mm ± 25 mm * 10 mm or inc member .
pacing within cuments ± 1 d t ± 1 ± 1 ± 1 ± 1 TRUCTUR ITEM : 30 January , 20 be provided b n , by testing , t all be provide steel shall b r formwork ar ± 10 mm +10 mm/ - 40 mm the following or slab or the creased by the following 10 mm 10 mm 10 mm 10 mm 10 mm RE 04 15 by to ed be re g e g DEPA REINF Janua 304.5 304.6 ARTMENT FORCING ST ary , 2015 MEASURE .1 The Qu supplie BASIS OF P .1 Paymen steel , a .2 The Ow .3 The cos disagre results the cos .1 The by STAN of TRANS TEEL MENT FOR P uantity to be m d and placed PAYMENT nt for Work u s identified un wner shall ma st of the provi eement betwe show that the t of the test .
e cost of any the Contracto NDARD SP PORTATIO PAYMENT measured for in accordance nder this Item nder the Contr ake partial pay sion of mater een the Owne e material do retesting to re or .
PECIFICAT ON and INF STRUCTURES r payment sha e with this Item m shall include ract .
yment for rein rials , labour an r and the Con es not meet t esolve the sup TIONS FRASTRUC S all be the num m. e a separate nforcing steel nd Equipment ntractor shall the Specificat pply of the sp CTURE mber of kilog Unit Price for in accordanc t to test the re be borne by tions , otherwi pecified reinfor rams of reinf r each type of ce with 908.7. einforcing stee the Contracto ise the Owne rcing steel sha ITEM : 304 Page 304-5 forcing steel f reinforcing .
el to resolve or if the test er shall bear all be borne DEPA TENSI Janua 305.1 305.2 305.3 305.4 305.5 305.6 ARTMENT ION SPLICES ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite MATERIAL .1 All mate .2 Tension of the b .3 Materia SUBMITTA .1 The Co data inf .2 The Co installa CONSTRU .1 The Co specific .2 The pre instruct .1 The to ma .3 The En MEASURE .1 The Qu accorda BASIS OF .1 Paymen .2 The Ow .3 The cos disagre results cost of .1 The Co STAN of TRANS S TION m consists of S erials shall be n reinforcing b bars being spli als shall be sto ALS ontractor shal formation , incl ontractor shal tion .
CTION ontractor sha cally directed b eparation and ions .
e Contractor , ensure that anufacturer .
gineer reserve MENT FOR P uantity to be m ance with this PAYMENT nt for Work un wner shall ma st of the prov eement betwe show that the the test .
e cost of any ntractor .
NDARD SP PORTATIO f the splicing o supplied by t bar connection ced .
ored in a weat l submit the uding yield st ll submit the all carry out t by the Engine d installation upon request preparations es the right to PAYMENT measured for Item .
nder this Item ake partial pay ision of mater een the Owne e splice does retesting to r PECIFICAT ON and INF STRUCTURES of reinforcing s he Contractor ns shall be ab therproof enclo name of the ress , at least manufacture the Work as er .
of the splice , shall make a s and installa o test any or al payment sha shall be at the yment for tens rials , labour a r and the Con not meet the resolve the ad TIONS FRASTRUC S steel bars 25M r. ble to develop osure .
supplier and 14 Days in ad r ’ s instruction indicated in e shall be in available , at th ation proced ll splices .
all be the num e Unit Price .
sion splices in and Equipmen ntractor shall Specification dequacy of th CTURE M and larger .
a minimum of the manufac dvance of the ns and recom the Contrac accordance he site , a repr ures are as mber of tensio n accordance nt to test the t be borne by ns , otherwise t e tension spli f 125 % of the cturer/supplier Work .
mmended pro ct Documents with the ma resentative of s recommend on splices co e with 908.7. tension splice the Contracto the Owner sh ice shall be b ITEM : 305 Page 305-1 yield stress r ’ s technical cedures for s and/or as anufacturer ’ s the supplier ded by the nstructed in s to resolve or if the test hall bear the borne by the DEPA STEEL Janua Artic 311 .
311 .
311 .
311 .
311 .
311 .
311.1 311.2 ARTMENT L H PILES ary , 2015 cle .1 DESCRIPT .2 MATERIAL .3 SUBMITTA .4 CONSTRU .1 Gener .2 Pile In .3 Pile In .4 H pile .5 Proce .1 Ge .2 De .6 Inspec .1 Ins .2 Fr .3 Qu .7 Dynam .5 MEASURE .6 BASIS OF DESCRIPT .1 This Ite and pile MATERIAL .1 The ste Currie A .1 Ste Gra at t .2 All othe .3 Steel Grade 3 STAN of TRANS TION ……… .
LS .................. ALS … ........... UCTION ........ ral ................. stallation ...... nstallation Tole Splices , Cap dures for Shie eneral ........... etails ............. ction of Welds spection and requency of In uality of Weld mic Pile Testin EMENT FOR PAYMENT .. TION em consists o e points .
S eel H piles sh Avenue in Fre eel H piles s ade 350W and the time of the er materials sh used for p 300W .
NDARD SP PORTATIO CONTENT ...................... ...................... ...................... ..................... ...................... ..................... erances .........
Plate and Pil elded Metal A ...................... ...................... s ....................
Testing of We nspection and s ................... ng ................. PAYMENT ... ...................... f the installati hall be made edericton , NB , hall be in ac d the stock len e Contract .
hall be supplie pile cap pla PECIFICAT ON and INF STRUCTURES TS ...................... ..................... ..................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ..................... e Connection Arc Welding an ...................... ..................... ...................... elds ...............
Testing ....... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ion of steel H available by , FOB during n ccordance wit ngths may var ed by the Con ates shall m TIONS FRASTRUC S ..................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ns , and Welds nd Flux Cored ...................... ...................... ..................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ..................... ...................... H piles and the the Owner f normal workin th the require ry from 6 to 18 ntractor .
meet the re CTURE ..................... ..................... ...................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ...................... .................... d Arc Welding ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ..................... ...................... ...................... ...................... e supply and from stock at ng hours .
ements of CA 8 metres depe equirements Page 311-1 311-1 311-2 311-3 311-3 311-3 .
311-4 311-4 g 311-6 311-6 .
311-7 .
311-8 311-8 311-8 311-9 311-9 .
311-10 311-11 installation of the DTI Brid AN/CSA G40 ending on ava of CAN/CS ITEM : 311 Page 311-1 f cap plates ge Yard on 0.20/G40.21 , ailable stock A G40.21 , STE Pag 311 311 EEL H PILES ge 311-2 1.2 .4 Cap as s .1 .5 Piles Cap .6 Elec Wel weld .7 Elec Wel E49 C .
.1 1.3 SUBMIT .1 The man .2 The com .1 .3 The proc .4 The deta spec .1 .2 .5 Sub S p plates and p shown on Sta Where there supply the p details presen s shall be stor ps and points s ctrodes for the ding Bureau ding ” , and be ctrodes for the ding Bureau C-XX with a Electrodes sh TTALS Contractor s nufacturer ’ s ce Contractor s mmencing the All welders sh Qualified Wel Contractor s cess .
Contractor s ailed descripti cifications for The submiss performance , energy per bl mass of the materials .
The submissi .1 The leads .2 Impact of .3 Leads sh accommo mittals are req DEPARTM pile points for ndard Drawin is another p ile points and nted in the Co red in an orga shall be accep e Shielded Me ( CWB ) , confo classified as E e Flux Cored ( CWB ) , confo specified min hall have a dif hall submit , a ertification tha shall submit p Work .
hall be certifie lder as issued shall submit , fo shall submit , f on and drawi r the hammer sion shall pr , including bu low at the nor driving cap a ion shall also s employed sh f the pile drivin hall be immob odate changin quired in acco STA MENT of TR STRUCTU HP 310x79 , ng 311-1 and pile size indic d the respect ontract Docum anized , straigh ptably stored etal Arc Weldi orm to CSA W E4918 or E49 d Arc Welding orm to CSA W nimum Charpy ffusible hydrog at least 7 Day at the material proof of certif ed by the CW d by the Provin or approval by for approval , ng of the pro and driving s rovide the fu ut not limited rmal working nd the type a include , but n hall be suppo ng hammer sh bile during ham ng the centre ordance with a ANDARD S RANSPORT URES HP 310x132 311-2. cated in the C ive pile cap p ments .
ht and horizon on pallets or b ng ( SMAW ) p W48 , “ Filler M 918-1. g ( FCAW ) pro W48 , and be y V-Notch Im gen designato ys in advance s supplied me fication for the WB to CAN/CS nce of New Br y the Enginee at least 14 D posed driving system includ ull details of to : the manu rate , the mas and elastic pro ot be limited t rted independ hall be axial a mmer operati of gravity of th any cross-refe SPECIFICA TATION an and HP 360x Contract Docu plates fabrica ntal fashion to blocked at lea process shall Metals and a ocess shall b classified as mpact Property or of -H16 or l e of the comm eet the specif e welders co SA W47.1 , and runswick .
er , the propos ays in advan g system ( s ) in ing the leads f characterist ufacturer ’ s na ss of the striki operties of th to , the followin dent of the pile and square wi ion but shall b he driving sys erenced Item f ATIONS nd INFRAS x132 piles sh ument , the C ated in accord o avoid perma ast 150 mm of be certified by llied materials e certified by gas shielded y equal to 27 ess .
mencement of fied requireme onducting the d/or to a certi sed electrodes ce of any pile ncluding , the m proposed .
tics necessar ame , type of ng parts of th he hammer an ng minimum re e ; th respect to be capable of stem during dr forming part o TRUCTUR ITEM : 3 January , 20 all be supplie Contractor sha dance with th anent distortio ff the ground .
y the Canadia s for metal a y the Canadia , E49XT-XX o 7 Joules at 3 f the Work , th ents .
Work , prior t fication level o s for the FCAW e installation , manufacturer ry to evaluat hammer , rate he hammer , th nd pile cushio equirements : pile axis ; and f adjustment t riving .
f this Item .
RE 11 15 ed all he n. an rc an or 30 he to of W a r ’ s te ed he on to DEPA STEEL Janua 311.4 311.4 311.4 ARTMENT L H PILES ary , 2015 CONSTRU .1 Genera .1 The spe .2 The cap Eng .3 The pre .4 The Dra req .2 Pile Ins .1 The the dep .2 The crit sys .1 .3 Fol .4 The com .1 .5 Any reta STAN of TRANS CTION al e Contractor ecifically direct e Contractor s pacity as ind gineer .
e Contractor esented on St e Contracto awings 311-3 quirements in stallation e installation e sole judge o pth of penetra e Contractor teria , provide stem ( s ) .
During drivi which indica to finalizing , .1 When th the pile .2 If , in the of Own capacity imprope driving e lowers shall o e first pile d mmencing the This pile sh waste .
y piles which apped to re-e NDARD SP PORTATIO shall carry ou ted by the Eng shall carry out icated in the shall install tandard Draw r shall spli 3 , 311-4 and accordance w of each pile of the accept ation or other shall ensure ed by the E ng , pile head ate that the pi and immedia he pile dama head shall be e opinion of th er supplied y ; and is a re er pile driving equipment or only be used driven at any e driving of ot hall be used h become dis establish the f PECIFICAT ON and INF STRUCTURES ut the Work a gineer .
t the Work wit e Contract D all cap plates wings 311-1 an ice the pile d 311-5 and with this Item shall be subj tability of eac criteria used e that the pile Engineer and ds showing le stiffness is ately prior to e age is evident e trimmed and he Engineer , material , or sult of misali g technique ; t methods so t with the expr y pile group ther pile ( s ) wit to determine splaced as th inalization cri TIONS FRASTRUC S as indicated i th a pile drivin Documents an s and pile po nd 311-2. e sections d at the app .
ject to the ap ch pile with re to determine es are install d based on evidence of s compromise each retappin t only after re d the pile red the pile head causes exce gned , worn , o the Contracto that further da ressed written location sha thin the same e pile length he result of t teria and the CTURE in the Contra ng system ( s ) c nd/or as spe oints , in acco in accorda proved locatio pproval of the espect to the the capacity led in accord the Contrac damage suc ed , shall be tri ng sequence .
emoval of the riven to the s d damage res essive uncert or poorly fittin or shall adjus amage does n consent of t all be driven e group .
h and minimiz he driving of specified cap act Documents capable of dev ecifically direc ordance with nce with th ons to meet e Engineer w final driving of the pile .
dance with th ctor ’ s approv ch as curled immed immed e hammer fro pecified capa sults in unnec tainty in esti ng driving eq st , modify or not occur .
he Engineer .
to finalizatio ze splices an f adjacent pil pacity .
ITEM : 311 Page 311-3 s and/or as veloping the cted by the the details e Standard t the Work who shall be resistance , he specified ved driving flange tips diately prior om the pile , acity .
cessary loss mating pile uipment , or replace the on , prior to nd material es shall be STE Pag 311 311 311 EEL H PILES ge 311-4 1.4.2 .6 .7 1.4 .3 Pile .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 1.4 .4 H P .1 .2 .3 S Piles which demonstrated .1 All retap blows on .2 Retaps s pile or an .3 Retaps s blows wh .4 Retaps s upon reta .5 The Con above pr The Contrac specified cut specified gra the Engineer Installation T The Contract the entire len All piles shal batter specifi In no case sh Pile tolerance cases shall p For piles ou approval of t findings and , .1 The Con ile Splices , C Welding of fie be by the SM The Enginee procedures o Basic electro ovens shall b before being DEPARTM are subject d that the per s shall be co n a pile other t shall not be ca ny adjacent p hall , as a min hichever occur shall continue ap this value tractor shall rovisions have tor shall ensu t-off elevation ade in a horizo r. Tolerances tor shall ensu ngth of the driv l be driven w ed in the Con hall the total v es shall be m piles be loade tside the spe the Engineer if required , a tractor shall c ap Plate and eld and shop MAW or FCAW er may requ outlined in the odes of E480 be dried for a used .
STA MENT of TR STRUCTU to relaxation rmanent pile c onducted with than the pile t arried out wit ile ( s ) within a nimum , advan rs first .
e until 120 % o does not fall keep detailed e been met , p ure that a mi n after finaliz ontal plane o ure that the pi ven pile .
with a variation ntract Docume variation exce measured at t d horizontally ecified tolera r , stamped an any corrective carry out all re Pile Point Co splices for st W process .
uest to have e Specification classification at least one ANDARD S RANSPORT URES n shall be r capacity meet h a hammer to be tested o hin 24 hours a clear distanc ce the pile a d of the specifie below 100 % o d field notes o prior to cutting inimum of 50 zation and th nly after final ile remains w n of not more ents .
eed 100 mm f the ground lin y to move the ances , the Co nd signed by e measure ( s ) t emedial Work onnections , an teel H piles , c e the welder ns .
n that are not hour at a tem SPECIFICA TATION an retapped and ts or exceeds warmed by or any adjace of the end of ce of 3 m and distance of 15 ed pile capac of the specifie on all retappi g the piles to f 00 mm of pile he Contracto ization of the within the spec e than 10 mm from the spec ne and at the pile within th ontractor sha y a Professio to remedy the k. nd Welds cap plate and r tested or t used within mperature be ATIONS nd INFRAS d/or driven u s the specified applying a m nt piles .
f the previous d forming part 50 mm or rea city has been ed pile capac ing tests to co final grade .
e length rema or shall cut a pile has bee cified toleranc m/m from verti cified location e cut-off eleva he specified to all submit a onal Engineer e Work .
pile point con approved on 4 hours after etween 370 ° TRUCTUR ITEM : 3 January , 20 until it can b d capacity .
minimum of 2 s driving of tha t of the group ch a total of 5 n achieved an city .
onfirm that th ains above th all piles at th en approved b ces througho cal or from th .
ation and in n olerances .
report , for th r , detailing th nnections sha n the weldin r removal fro °C and 430 ° RE 11 15 be 20 at .
50 nd he he he by ut he no he he all ng m C DEPA STEEL Janua 311.4 .
ARTMENT L H PILES ary , 2015 4 .4 Ro Sur .1 .2 .3 .5 Def app dee .1 .6 Joi .7 The .8 We sha .1 .9 Ste .10 No .11 The .12 Pro pre .1 .13 No Eng .14 Wh not the STAN of TRANS ughness of o rfaces Rough Roughness 5 mm deep grinding .
Oxygen cut Corrections exceeding 1 fects of oxyg proval of the ep .
These weld welding with SMAW requ adjacent sur nt Profiles sh e workmansh elding of stee all not require When base least 10°C a eel over 20 m welding shal e preheating z otection shall ecipitation .
All methods welding bein pile shall be gineer .
hen piles have t be removed e bare hand .
NDARD SP PORTATIO oxygen cut s hness Value o exceeding th p on otherwis surfaces and of defects s in 10. gen cut surfac Engineer for d repairs sha h basic elect uirements of 3 rface to produ all be as deta hip of the asse l made of CA e preheating w metal tempe and maintaine m shall be pr l be done wh zone shall be be provided s of protection ng carried out e driven unti e been welde d from this en PECIFICAT ON and INF STRUCTURES surfaces shal of 1000. his value and se satisfacto d edges shall shall be flare ces shall not correction of all be made rodes not ex 311.4.5 and g uce a satisfac ailed on Stand embly shall m AN/CSA G40 when base me rature is 0°C ed at a minim eheated to 10 en the ambie e a minimum o for welding u n shall be su t. l the welded ed within a he nclosure until TIONS FRASTRUC S ll not be gre d occasional ory surfaces , be left free of ed to the ox t be repaired f occasional by suitably xceeding 4 m grinding the c ctory finish .
dard Drawing meet the stand .21 , Grade 3 etal temperat or lower , the um temperatu 0°C before an ent temperatu of 75 mm on under advers bject to the a d joint has be eated enclosu the welded j CTURE eater than tha notches or shall be rem f adhering sla xygen cut su by welding e notches or g preparing no mm in diamete ompleted we gs 311-3 , 311- dards of CAN/ 00W of 20 m ture is above e base metal ure of 10°C d ny welding is re is lower tha each side of t se weather co approval of th een inspecte ure during col joint has coo at defined by gouges , not moved by ma ag .
urface with a except with t ouges less th on-conforming er , observing ld smooth an -4 and 311-5 .
/CSA W59 .
mm thickness 0°C .
shall be preh during welding done .
an -18°C .
the joint .
onditions of w he Engineer p d and appro ld weather , th led so that it ITEM : 311 Page 311-5 y the ANSI more than achining or a Slope not the express han 10 mm g surfaces , g applicable d flush with .
and under , heated to at g. wind and/or prior to any oved by the he pile shall is warm to STE Pag 311 311 EEL H PILES ge 311-6 1.4 .5 Proc 1.4.5 .1 S cedures for Sh General .1 The det CAN/CSA .1 The 12 of .2 The Wor .3 When we .4 Before w adjacent .1 This bead .5 Classifica for thickn pertainin .1 Weld manu .6 For SMA maximum Maxim siz of Electr Maxim Thickne Laye Maxim One-p Fille DEPARTM hielded Metal ails of weld A W59 .
design and c f CAN/CSA W rk shall be pos elding in vertic welding over p base metal s requirement ds and to the c ation and size ness of mate g to the Work ding current ufacturer .
AW , the maxi m size of one- Criteria fo 4 mm 5 mm mum ze f rode 6 mm 8 mm mum ess of 6 m ers 5 m mum 10 m pass 8 m et 12 m STA MENT of TR STRUCTU Arc Welding ing procedur construction p W59 shall app sitioned for fla cal positions previously de shall be brush shall apply n crater area wh e of electrode erial , type of k. shall be w mum size of -pass fillets s or Prequalifie m  All pas All pas All pas m  Root p openin Root p All pas m  Root p Root p openin m  All pas welds m mm For roo being s mm For sub mm In the f mm In the h mm In the v ANDARD S RANSPORT URES And Flux Cor re , workman provisions for ply .
at position we progression f posited meta hed clean .
not only to su hen welding is es , arc length , groove , weld within the ra electrode , th hall be as ind Table 311-1 ed Joints usi sses in vertica sses in overhe sses in horizon asses in groo ng is less than asses in groo sses for horizo asses for fillet asses in groo ng is greater th sses subseque made in the fl ot passes of g such as to pre bsequent laye flat position horizontal or o vertical positio SPECIFICA TATION an red Arc Weldi nship and te r Cyclically Lo elding whenev for all passes l , slag shall b uccessive lay s resumed aft , voltage and ding positions ange recomm e maximum t dicated in Tab 1 ing the SMAW al fillet and gro ead fillet and g ntal groove we oves with back n 6 mm in flat oves without b ontal fillet weld ts in flat posit oves with back han 6 mm in f ent to root pas lat position groove welds w event cracking ers of welds m overhead pos on ATIONS nd INFRAS ng echnique sha oaded Structu ver practical .
shall be upw be removed , a yers but also ter interruption amperage sh s and other mended by thickness of ble 311-1 .
W Process oove welds groove welds elds king where the position backing in flat ds ion king where the flat position sses for fillet a with the minim g made in any p sitions TRUCTUR ITEM : 3 January , 20 all conform t ures of Claus ward .
and welds an to successiv n. hall be suitab circumstance the electrod layers and th e root position e root and groove mum size osition RE 11 15 to se nd ve le es de he DEPA STEEL Janua 311.4 .
311.4.5 ARTMENT L H PILES ary , 2015 5.1 .7 5 .2 Det .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 STAN of TRANS For FCAW maximum si Maximum size of Electrode Maximum Thickness Layers Maximum One-pass Fillet weld tails Butt joint gro of the initial w is started fro .1 Particula the rema .2 Defectiv base me Groove weld with the bac Steel H pile ensure soun .1 Extensio of the w When tack w preparing sto Flux , pin ho before depo Stringer bea NDARD SP PORTATIO the maximum ize of one-pas Criteria for P m 4 mm 2.4 mm e 2.0 mm m of 6 mm m 12 mm s 10 mm d 8 mm oove welds , ex weld air carbo om the second ar care shall aining weld m ve portions of etal .
ds made with king .
e splice groov nd welds by us ons shall be r eld made smo welds are use ops and starts oles , craters , siting the nex ads shall be us PECIFICAT ON and INF STRUCTURES m size of elec ss fillets shall Ta Prequalified  All pass m  For the m  For the m All weld A multip making layer ex m In the fl m In the h m In the o xcept those p on-arc gouged d side .
be taken in th metal or base m f the weld sh the use of b ve welds shal se of extensio removed upon ooth and flush ed for alignme s to make con visual surface xt layer of weld sed for horizo TIONS FRASTRUC S ctrode , the m l be as indica able 311-2 Joints using ses in flat and vertical posit overhead po d layers excep ple pass , split g all multiple p xceeds 22 mm lat and vertica horizontal pos overhead posi produced with d , chipped or he gouging , c metal is not ni all be remove backing shall h ll be terminat on bars or run n completion a h with the edg ent , care shal ntinuous weld e defects and d. ontal welds .
CTURE maximum thic ated in Table 3 g the FCAW P d horizontal po tion osition pt for root and t-layer techniq pass welds wh m al positions sition ition the aid of ba ground to sou chipping or g icked or unde ed without su have the weld ted at ends o off tabs .
and cooling o ges of the abu ll be exercise ing satisfacto d excessive c ckness of laye 311-2 .
Process ositions d surface laye que shall be u hen the width cking , shall ha und metal bef rinding opera ercut .
ubstantial rem d metal thoro of a joint in a of the weld , an utting parts .
d by properly ry .
crown shall b ITEM : 311 Page 311-7 ers and the rs used in of the ave the root fore welding ation so that moval of the ughly fused a manner to nd the ends y grinding or be removed STE Pag 311 311 311 EEL H PILES ge 311-8 1.4 .6 Insp 1.4.6 .1 1.4.6 .2 S pection of Wel Inspection an .1 The pro accordan .2 Inspectio they prop requirem .1 The Brun .2 The of W .3 Guided b Section 8 .1 Runo as th .2 Guid coup .3 If the he/sh assu .4 The splice .5 The C .6 The l Frequency of .1 All welds .2 Testing s .1 A mi teste meth requi .2 A mi ( mag quali DEPARTM ds nd Testing of W cedure and nce with CAN/ on and Testing pose to use fo ents : methods for n swick .
Welding Insp elding Inspec bend tests sha 8.5 and shall b off tabs requir he H pile .
ed bend test pon from a ste e Engineer de he may then rance that the preparation o e is driven be Contractor sh length of the w f Inspection an shall be insp shall be carrie nimum of 25 % ed by non-de hods and supp ired ) to assure nimum of 25 % gnetic particle ty level of the STA MENT of TR STRUCTU Welds technique fo /CSA W59 , C g Organization or non-destruc non-destructiv pection Organ ction Organiza all be carried be tested by th red for bend te coupons may eel H pile splic termines that test sufficien e balance of th f these test co low the groun hall restore the weld on 75 m nd Testing ected visually d out by the E % of full pene estructive tes plemented by e the soundne % of fillet wel and/or liquid welds .
ANDARD S RANSPORT URES or visual an lauses 7 and ns shall demo ctive testing a ve testing sha ization shall b ations .
out on coupo he Engineer .
ests shall be m y be taken fro ce .
a guided ben nt coupons as he welding is oupons shall nd .
e pile to its ori m long runoff y .
Engineer as fo etration groov sting method y magnetic pa ess and qualit ds shall be te penetrant tes SPECIFICA TATION an nd non-destru 8. onstrate to the re suitable , an ll be as appro be certified to ons in accord made of the s om the actual nd test coupo s she/he feel satisfactory .
be done by th ginal conditio f tabs shall be ollows : ve welds and ds ( radiograp article or liquid ty level of the ested by non- st methods ) to ATIONS nd INFRAS uctive testing e Engineer th nd meet one o oved by the P o CSA W178 .
dance with CA same materia l pile splice by n fails to mee s are necess he Contractor n , if the weld a minimum o steel H pile s phic and/or d penetrant te welds .
-destructive te o assure the s TRUCTUR ITEM : 3 January , 20 g shall be at the method of the followin rovince of Ne .1 , Certificatio AN/CSA W47 l and thicknes y removing th et the standar sary to provid before the pi is acceptable of 65 mm .
splices shall b ultrasonic te est methods a esting method soundness an RE 11 15 in ds ng ew on .1 ss he d , de le e. be st as ds nd DEPA STEEL Janua 311.4.6 311.4.6 311.4 ARTMENT L H PILES ary , 2015 6.2.2 6 .3 Qu .1 .2 .3 .7 Dynam .1 Pile Eng mo end .2 The acc .3 The ope .4 The .5 The .6 The atta .1 .2 STAN of TRANS .3 Welds in made fro .1 The flam .2 All g .3 Non tests .4 If defec Enginee to ensur .5 All corre ality of Welds The quality Section 12 , c The accepta 12.5.4 and s The quality o W47.1 , claus ic Pile Testin es , as identi gineer , shall obilized resista d of initial driv e Engineer , b ceptance crite e Contractor erations .
e Contractor s e testing proc e Contractor aching instrum The Contrac of being rais The Engine instruments NDARD SP PORTATIO n steel H pile om a portion o ese specimens me cutting to w guided bend te n-destructive t s. cts are identi er shall determ re the soundn ected welds ar s of welds in s clause 12.5.4 ance criteria f shall meet the of weld requir ses 8.5 and 8 g ified in the be dynamica ance , hamme ving and durin based on the r eria .
shall notify shall assist th cedure shall b shall provide ments , with th ctor shall prov sed to the top eer shall requ .
PECIFICAT ON and INF STRUCTURES splices may of field spliced s shall have within 3 mm of est coupons s testing may b ified that are mine the addit ess and quali re to be retest teel H pile sp .
for defects sh limits describ red for guided 8.6 .
Contract Do ally tested du er performanc ng all retaps .
results of dyn the Engineer he Engineer in be carried out the Enginee he pile in the l vide a work p of the pile .
uire approxim TIONS FRASTRUC S also be teste d material rem the backing r f its thickness shall be stamp be performed e outside the tional percent ity level of all ted .
plices shall be hall be in acc bed in this clau d bend tests s cuments and uring driving ce , pile stres namic testing r at least 7 n carrying out in accordanc er with reason leads .
platform , minim mately one h CTURE d by guided b moved from th removed by m followed by g ped by the we d on coupons e criteria spe tage of testing the welds .
e in accordan cordance with use for tensio shall be in ac d/or as spec for measure ss and soil dy and analysis Days in adva t the testing .
ce with AASH nable means mum size of our per pile , bend tests on he H pile .
mechanical m grinding or ma elder .
instead of g ecified in 311 g that shall be nce with CAN h CAN/CSA W on welds .
ccordance with cifically direc ement and es ynamic prope , shall determ ance of the HTO T298-99 .
of access to 1.2 m by 1.2 per test , to ITEM : 311 Page 311-9 n specimens means or by achining .
guided bend 1.4.6.3 , the e carried out N/CSA W59 , W59 clause h CAN/CSA cted by the stimation of erties at the mine the pile pile driving .
the pile for m , capable attach the STE Pag 311 311 EEL H PILES ge 311-10 1.4.7 .7 .8 .9 .10 1.5 MEASU .1 The acco .2 All p othe .3 The and .4 The fabr .1 S The Contrac 60 Hz , AC , fo .1 Field gen shall only The Contract of the pile tes .1 The shel of 2 m , a With the dyna initial driving Engineer .
Stresses in t exceed 90 % .1 If directe the pile b of the ha .2 If non-ax realign th REMENT FO Quantity to b ordance with t piles shall be m er pile have be length to be m the actual fiel Quantity of icated in acco The Owner re materials as w DEPARTM ctor shall su or use by the nerators shall y supply elect tor shall prov st or a shelter ter shall have nd the interio amic testing e and retap th the pile shall of the pile ste ed by the Eng by means of c ammer .
xial driving is he driving sys OR PAYMENT be measured f this Item .
measured for een finalized a measured for ld toe elevatio splices to be ordance with th eserves the rig well as to limit STA MENT of TR STRUCTU upply an ele Engineer dur l be equipped trical power fo ide the Engin r within the sa e a minimum or temperature equipment att he pile with be monitore eel yield stres gineer , the Co cushion or he indicated by stem .
T for payment s payment only and no further payment shal on measured a e measured fo his Item .
ght to specify t the amount o ANDARD S RANSPORT URES ectrical powe ring the tests .
d with functio or the pile tes neer with acce ame distance floor size of e shall be ma tached to the a hammer of ed during driv ss .
ontractor sha elmet modifica the measure hall be the nu y after all piles driving in the ll be the differ along the cent or payment s the number o of waste in pile SPECIFICA TATION an er supply of ning voltage sting .
ess for a moto .
2.5 m by 2 m aintained abov e pile , the Con f the specifie ving to ensur ll reduce the ations , or by ements , the C umber of linea s in any group pile group sh rence between treline axis of shall be the n of splices to e e cut-offs .
ATIONS nd INFRAS f 20 Amper and frequenc or vehicle ( va m , a minimum ve 10°C .
ntractor shall ed size , as d re that the st driving energ reducing the Contractor sha ar metres of pi p or in close p hall be required n the design c the pile .
number of ap nsure the eco TRUCTUR ITEM : 3 January , 20 re , 115 Volt cy meters , an an ) within 15 m ceiling heig drive to end o directed by th tresses do no gy delivered t energy outp all immediate iles , installed proximity to an d. cut-off elevatio pproved splice onomical use RE 11 15 ts , nd m ht of he ot to ut ely in ny on es of DEPA STEEL Janua 311.6 ARTMENT L H PILES ary , 2015 BASIS OF .1 Paymen as iden .2 The Ow Work S .3 Splices .4 The cos the Con otherwi .1 The .5 Retapp STAN of TRANS PAYMENT nt for Work un tified under th wner shall ma Site .
, approved by st of the prov ntractor if the se the Owner e cost of any t ping in excess NDARD SP PORTATIO nder this Item he Contract .
ake partial pa y the Enginee vision of mate test results s r shall bear th testing to reso of four opera PECIFICAT ON and INF STRUCTURES m shall include ayment in acc r , shall be pai erials , labour a how that the e cost of the t olve the qualit ations , if requir TIONS FRASTRUC S e a separate U cordance with id in accordan and Equipme material does test .
ty of welds sh red , shall be p CTURE Unit Price for h 908.7 for s nce with Item nt to test the s not meet the hall be borne b paid for in acc P each size of s teel H pile st 810. welds shall b e specified re by the Contrac cordance with ITEM : 311 Page 311-11 steel H pile , tored at the be borne by quirements , ctor .
Item 812 .
DEPA STEEL Janua Artic 312 .
312 .
312 .
312 .
312 .
312 .
312.1 312.2 ARTMENT L PIPE PILES ary , 2015 cle .1 DESCRIPT .2 MATERIAL .3 SUBMITTA .4 CONSTRU .1 Gener .2 Protec .1 Ge .2 Su .3 Ino .4 Co .5 Ins .3 Pile In .4 Pile In .5 Pipe P .6 Proce Weld .1 Ge .2 De .7 Inspec .1 Ins .2 Fr .3 Qu .8 Dynam .5 MEASURE .6 BASIS OF DESCRIPT .1 This Ite and the MATERIAL .1 All mate .2 Steel p A252 , G STAN of TRANS S TION ............. LS ................. ALS .............. UCTION ........ ral ................. ctive Coating S eneral ........... urface Prepar organic Zinc C oal Tar Epoxy spection of Co nstallation ...... nstallation Tole Pile Splices , P edures for S ing ................ eneral ........... etails ............. ction of Welds spection and requency of In uality of Weld mic Pile Testin EMENT FOR PAYMENT .. TION em consists of e supply and in S erials shall be pipe piles sha Grade 3 or as NDARD SP PORTATIO CONTENT ...................... ...................... ...................... ..................... ...................... System ........ ...................... ration .............
Coating ......... y Coating ...... oatings ......... ...................... erances ......... Pile Point Con hielded Meta ...................... ...................... ...................... s .....................
Testing of We nspection and s ................... ng ................. PAYMENT ... ...................... f the supply a nstallation of p e supplied by t ll be nominal otherwise ind PECIFICAT ON and INF STRUCTURES TS ...................... ..................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ..................... ..................... ..................... nections , and al Arc Weldi ..................... ...................... ..................... ...................... elds ...............
Testing ....... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... and installatio pile points .
the Contracto 500 mm OD dicated in the TIONS FRASTRUC S ..................... ...................... ..................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ..................... ..................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... d Welds .......... ing and Flux ...................... ...................... ...................... ..................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ..................... ...................... on of steel pip or .
D with 13 mm Contract Doc CTURE ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ..................... ..................... ...................... ...................... ..................... ...................... ..................... ...................... ...................... ...................... x Cored Arc .................... ..................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ..................... ...................... ...................... ...................... pe piles , includ m wall thickne cuments .
Page .
312-1 312-1 .
312-2 312-3 312-3 312-4 312-4 .
312-4 312-4 312-5 312-5 312-6 .
312-7 312-7 c 312-8 312-8 .
312-10 .
312-10 312-10 312-11 312-11 312-11 .
312-12 312-13 ding splicing a ess conformin ITEM : 312 Page 312-1 as required , ng to ASTM STE Pag 312 312 EEL PIPE PIL ge 312-2 2.2 .3 Pile poin .4 Piles bloc acce be u .5 Elec Wel weld .6 Elec Wel E49 C .
.1 .7 The coat .8 The 2.3 SUBMIT .1 The man .2 The com .1 .3 The proc .4 The cert met .5 The app .1 LES points shall nts shall meet s shall be sto cked at least eptably stored used to handle ctrodes for Sh ding Bureau ding ” , and be ctrodes for the ding Bureau C-XX with a Electrodes sh protective c tings and CAN coal tar epox TTALS Contractor s nufacturer ’ s ce Contractor s mmencing the All welders s of Qualified W Contractor s cess .
Contractor s ification from hod , Equipme Contractor lication , the a The method repair .
DEPARTM be supplied a the requireme ored in an org 150 mm off t d on pallets or e the pipe pile hielded Metal ( CWB ) , confo classified as E e Flux Cored ( CWB ) , confo specified min hall have a dif coating shall N/CGSB-1.18 xy coating sha hall submit , a ertification tha shall submit p Work .
shall be certifi Welder as iss shall submit , fo shall submit , m the manufa ent , and mate shall submit applicator 's na of repair of a STA MENT of TR STRUCTU as shown on ents of CAN/C ganized , strai the ground a r stored at lea es .
Arc Welding orm to CSA W E4918 or E49 d Arc Welding orm to CSA W nimum Charpy ffusible hydrog meet the re 84 for coal tar all be compat at least 7 Day at the material proof of certif ied by the CW ued by the Pr or approval by prior to the acturer of the erials used in t , for approv ame and sche a coating shal ANDARD S RANSPORT URES Standard Dr CSA G40.21 G ight and horiz nd stickers p ast 150 mm of g ( SMAW ) pro W48 , “ Filler M 918-1. g ( FCAW ) pro W48 , and be y V-Notch Im gen designato equirements o epoxy coating tible with the ys in advance s supplied me fication for the WB to CAN/C rovince of Ne y the Enginee commencem e inorganic z the blast clea val , at least edule of Work ll be submitte SPECIFICA TATION an rawing 312-1 Grade 300W .
zontal fashion placed betwee ff the ground .
ocess shall b Metals and a ocess shall b classified as mpact Property or of H16 or le of CAN/CGS gs .
inorganic zinc e of the comm eet the specif e welders co CSA W47.1 a ew Brunswick .
er , the propos ent of the in zinc coating aning are acc 14 Days in k. ed for approva ATIONS nd INFRAS and the stee n with the bo en the tiers .
P Nylon or canv be certified by llied materials e certified by gas shielded y equal to 27 ess .
SB-1.171 for c coating .
mencement of fied requireme onducting the and/or to a ce .
sed electrodes organic zinc stating that ceptable .
n advance o al 7 Days in a TRUCTUR ITEM : 3 January , 20 el used for pi ottom tier bein Points shall b vas slings sha y the Canadia s for metal a y the Canadia , E49XT-XX o 7 Joules at 3 inorganic zin f the Work , th ents .
Work , prior t ertification lev s for the FCAW coating Wor the propose of any coatin advance of th RE 12 15 le ng be all an rc an or 30 nc he to vel W rk , ed ng he DEPA STEEL Janua 312.3 312.4 312.4 ARTMENT L PIPE PILES ary , 2015 .6 The Co detailed specific .1 The per ene ma ma .2 The .1 .2 .3 .7 Submitt CONSTRU .1 Genera .1 The spe .2 The cap Eng .3 The pre .4 The 312 Item .5 The dam .1 STAN of TRANS S ontractor shal d description cations for the e submission rformance , inc ergy per blow ass of the driv aterials .
e submission The leads em Impact of the Leads shall accommoda tals are requir CTION al e Contractor ecifically direct e Contractor s pacity as ind gineer .
e Contractor esented on St e Contractor 2-2 and at the m. e Contractor mage to the p Any damag satisfaction NDARD SP PORTATIO l submit , for a and drawing e hammer and n shall provid cluding but n at the norma ving cap and shall also incl mployed shall e pile driving h be immobile ate changing t red in accorda shall carry ou ted by the Eng shall carry out icated in the shall fabrica tandard Draw r shall splice e approved lo must take sp pile protective e done to th of the Engine PECIFICAT ON and INF STRUCTURES approval , at le of the propos d driving syst de the full d not limited to al working rate the type and ude , but not b be supported hammer shall during hamm he centre of g ance with any ut the Work a gineer .
t the Work wit e Contract D ate and insta wing 312-1. e the pile s ocations to me pecial care du e coatings .
he coatings o eer prior to dri TIONS FRASTRUC S east 14 Days sed driving sy tem including details of ch the manufac e , the mass o elastic prope be limited to , t d independent l be axial and mer operation gravity of the d cross-referen as indicated i th a pile drivin Documents an all all pile po sections in a eet the Work uring handlin of the pipe p iving the pile .
CTURE s in advance ystem ( s ) inclu the leads pro haracteristics cturer ’ s name of the striking erties of the h he following m t of the pile .
square with r but shall be c driving system nced Item form in the Contra ng system ( s ) c nd/or as spe oints , in acco accordance w requirements g and driving pile casings s . of any pile in uding , the man oposed .
necessary t , type of ham parts of the h hammer and p minimum requ respect to pile capable of ad m during drivin ming part of th act Documents capable of dev ecifically direc ordance with with Standar s in accordan g operations t shall be repa ITEM : 312 Page 312-3 stallation , a nufacturer ’ s to evaluate mmer , rated hammer , the pile cushion uirements : e axis .
djustment to ng .
is Item .
s and/or as veloping the cted by the the details rd Drawing nce with this to minimize aired to the STE Pag 312 312 312 312 EEL PIPE PIL ge 312-4 2.4 .2 Prot 2.4.2 .1 2.4.2 .2 2.4.2 .3 LES tective Coatin General .1 Steel pip applicatio .1 All W .2 Each recom Surface Prep .1 The exte 5 , White .2 The blas surface p .1 No c damp .2 The occu .3 Unde .4 If the meta .3 All surfac a coating Inorganic Zin .1 The inorg airless s period , in .2 The inorg coat ) with .3 Before a tape 75 m .1 The acco DEPARTM g System pe piles shall on of inorgan Work shall be h coating mmendations paration erior of all stee Metal Blast C sting medium profile accepta cleaning shall p. blasted surfa rs .
er no circums e blast cleane al after drying ces shall be f g. nc Coating ganic zinc co pray equipme n accordance ganic zinc co h tolerance of applying the in mm on each e inorganic zinc ordance with t STA MENT of TR STRUCTU l be supplied ic zinc coating performed in shall be c s prior to trans el pipe piles s Cleaning .
( silica sand , able to the m be carried ou ces must be stances are bl ed areas beco .
ree of dust , d oating shall b ent and cured with the man ating shall be f ± 5 µm .
norganic zinc end of the ste c coating sha this Item .
ANDARD S RANSPORT URES d with a prote g , and coal ta a heated wea cured in a sport .
shall be blast grit or shot ) anufacturer o ut when the s coated with i ast cleaned s ome damp , th dirt , moisture , e mixed and d at the prop nufacturer ’ s re e applied to o c coating , the eel piles to fac ll be applied t SPECIFICA TATION an ective coating ar epoxy coat atherproof en accordance cleaned to co used shall be of the inorgan surface of the norganic zinc surfaces to be ese surfaces oil and greas applied to th per temperatu ecommendati obtain a dry fi e coating app cilitate pile sp to the splice a ATIONS nd INFRAS g system , co ting .
nclosure .
with the m onform to SSP e of a size th nic zinc coatin e steel pipe p c coating befo e left uncoate shall be re-b se prior to the he white meta ure for the m ions .
lm thickness plicator shall plicing in the f and the taped TRUCTUR ITEM : 3 January , 20 onsisting of a manufacturer PC - SP5 - No hat produces ng being used ile casings ar ore any rustin ed overnight .
blasted to whit e application o al surface wit minimum curin of 60 µm ( on be required t field .
d area in RE 12 15 an r 's o. a d. re ng te of th ng ne to DEPA STEEL Janua 312.4 .
312.4 .
ARTMENT L PIPE PILES ary , 2015 2 .4 Co .1 .2 .3 .4 2 .5 Ins .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 STAN of TRANS S al Tar Epoxy A coal tar e pipe piles .
The coal ta cured in acc Before appl tape 150 mm .1 The coa accorda If a post-cur inorganic zin with the reco pection of Co Each Day ’ s application o Blast cleane of the inorga Inspection o detector rea .1 Inadequ the Eng .2 If such a zone .
.3 The re- Enginee Where rejec quality of the of all previou At the discre chisel ( or ot coating thick .1 Where s NDARD SP PORTATIO Coating epoxy coating r epoxy shall cordance with ying the coal m on each en al tar epoxy co ance with this red inorganic nc coated pip ommendation oatings Work shall b of the coating ed surfaces a anic zinc coat of the comple adings .
uately coated ineer .
areas are clo -coated zone er .
ction of a coa e Work or ma usly applied m etion of the E her means ) to kness as a `` p such tests are PECIFICAT ON and INF STRUCTURES g shall be app l have dry film h the coal tar e l tar epoxy co nd of the steel oating shall b Item .
zinc coating pe pile until al ns of the man be inspected gs .
are to be appr ting applicatio ted coatings sections and ose together , e shall be re ating is due aterials , the C material prior Engineer , an o remove a s proof test '' .
e made , the a TIONS FRASTRUC S plied over the m thickness epoxy manufa oating , the co l piles to facili be applied to t is used , no c l curing solut ufacturer of th by the Engin roved by the on .
shall be base d areas requ the Engineer e-inspected a to poor work Contractor sha to re-applicat occasional s small section o areas shall be CTURE e inorganic z of 400 µm a acturer ’ s reco oating applica itate pile splic the splice and coal tar epox tion has been he coatings .
neer not later Engineer bef ed upon Elco iring re-coatin r may require and shall me kmanship or all remove the tion .
pot test may of the coating e recoated .
zinc coating o nd shall be a ommendation ator shall be cing in the fiel d the taped ar xy shall be ap n removed in a r than the Da fore the comm ometer or othe ng shall be id e re-coating o eet the appro similar deficie e entire defec be made us g to physically ITEM : 312 Page 312-5 on the steel applied and ns .
required to ld .
rea in pplied to the accordance ay following mencement er magnetic dentified by of the entire oval of the ency in the ctive section ing a sharp y gauge the STE Pag 312 EEL PIPE PIL ge 312-6 2.4 .3 Pile .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 LES Installation The installati the sole judg depth of pene The Contrac criteria , prov system ( s ) .
.1 During d as curled trimmed sequence .1 Whe the p .2 If in unce fitting adjus does .2 Immedia 2.5 times .1 The ratio .2 Drivi .1 A b Followers sh The first pile commencing Any piles wh retapped to r Piles which demonstrated .1 All retap blows on .2 Retaps s pile or an .3 Retaps s 50 blows DEPARTM ion of each p ge of the acc etration or oth ctor shall ens vided by the riving with an d pipe wall w immediately e. n the pile da pile head shal the opinion ertainty in esti g driving equ st , modify or s not occur .
tely prior to in s the pile diam ratio of ceme of 0.25. ng shall be di After 90 minu be added .
all only be us e driven at a the driving o hich become re-establish th are subject d that the per s shall be co n a pile other t shall not be ca ny adjacent p shall , as a min s whichever o STA MENT of TR STRUCTU pile shall be s ceptability of e her criteria us sure that the e Engineer n external ham which indicat y prior to fin amage is evid ll be trimmed n of the En imating pile c uipment , or im replace the d nternal driving meter shall be ent : stone : sand iscontinued o tes a smaller sed with the e any pile gro f other pile ( s ) displaced as he finalization to relaxation rmanent pile c onducted with than the pile t arried out wit ile ( s ) within a nimum , adva ccurs first .
ANDARD S RANSPORT URES subject to the each pile with sed to determ piles are ins and based mmer , pile he te that the p nalizing , and dent only afte and the pile r gineer , the capacity ; and mproper pile driving equipm g a plug of dry e deposited in d shall be 1:2 on a plug after charge ( 50 % xpress conse up location s ) within the sa s the result o n criteria and t n shall be r capacity meet h a hammer to be tested o hin 24 hours a clear distanc nce the pile a SPECIFICA TATION an e approval of h respect to mine the capac stalled in acc on the Con eads showing pile stiffness immediately er removal of redriven to th pile head d is a result of driving techn ment or meth y concrete ha n the base of t 2:4 , with a wa r 90 minutes f % of initial volu ent of the Eng shall be driv ame group .
of the driving the specified retapped and ts or exceeds warmed by or any adjace of the end of ce of 3 m and a distance of ATIONS nd INFRAS the Enginee the final driv city of the pile cordance with ntractor ’ s app g evidence of is comprom y prior to e f the hammer e specified ca damage caus misaligned , w nique ; the C ods so that fu aving a compa the pile .
ater-to-cemen from the time ume ) of fresh gineer .
ven to finaliz g of adjacent capacity .
d/or driven u s the specified applying a m nt piles .
f the previous d forming part 150 mm or r TRUCTUR ITEM : 3 January , 20 r who shall b ing resistance e. h the specifie proved drivin f damage suc mised , shall b ach retappin r from the pile apacity .
ses excessiv worn , or poor ontractor sha urther damag acted height o nting materia e of mixing .
concrete sha zation , prior t piles shall b until it can b d capacity .
minimum of 2 s driving of tha t of the group reach a total o RE 12 15 be e , ed ng ch be ng e , ve rly all ge of als all to be be 20 at .
of DEPA STEEL Janua 312.4 .
312.4 312.4 ARTMENT L PIPE PILES ary , 2015 3.6 .4 .5 .7 The spe spe the .4 Pile Ins .1 The the .2 The the .3 All bat .4 In n .5 Pile cas .6 For app find .1 .5 Pipe Pi .1 We the .2 The out .3 Bas ove bef .4 Ro Sur .1 .2 .3 STAN of TRANS S Retaps shal upon retap t The Contrac above provis e Contractor ecified cut-off ecified grade e Engineer .
stallation Tole e Contractor e entire length e Contractor e entire length piles shall be tter specified no case shall e tolerances s ses shall piles r piles outsid proval of the dings and , if r The Contrac le Splices , Pi elding of field e SMAW or FC e Engineer m tlined in the S sic electrodes ens shall be fore being use ughness of o rfaces Rough Roughness mm deep o grinding .
Oxygen cut Corrections exceeding 1 NDARD SP PORTATIO ll continue un this value doe ctor shall kee sions have be shall ensure f elevation a in a horizonta erances shall ensure t h of the driven shall be resp h of the pile .
e driven with in the Contra the total varia shall be mea s be loaded h de the specif Engineer , st required , any ctor shall carr le Point Conn and shop sp CAW process may request to Specifications s of E480 cla dried for at ed .
oxygen cut s hness Value o exceeding th on otherwise surfaces and of defects s in 10 .
PECIFICAT ON and INF STRUCTURES ntil 120 % of th es not fall belo ep detailed fie een met , prior that a minim after finalizatio al plane only that the pile r n pile .
ponsible to re a variation of ct Documents ation exceed sured at the orizontally to fied tolerance tamped and corrective me ry out all reme nections , and plices for stee s. o test or other .
assification th least one ho surfaces shal of 1000. his value and e satisfactory d edges shall shall be flare TIONS FRASTRUC S he specified ow 100 % of t eld notes on a r to cutting th mum of 500 m on and the after finalizat remains withi emove all fore f not more tha s. 100 mm from ground line a move the pile es , the Contr signed by a easures to re edial Work .
Welds el pipe piles a rwise have the at are not us our at a temp ll not be gre d occasional y surfaces , s be left free of ed to the ox CTURE pile capacity he specified p all retapping e piles to fina mm of pile le Contractor s tion of the pile n the specifie eign material an 10 mm/m m the specifie and at the cu e within the s ractor shall s Professional medy the Wo and pile point e welder app sed within 4 h perature betw eater than tha notches or g shall be rem f adhering sla xygen cut su has been ac pile capacity .
tests to conf al grade .
ngth remains hall cut all p e has been a ed tolerances ls and water from vertical d location .
ut-off elevation specified toler submit a rep l Engineer , d ork .
connections roved on the hours after re ween 370°C at defined by ouges , not m moved by ma ag .
urface with a ITEM : 312 Page 312-7 chieved and firm that the s above the piles at the approved by throughout from within or from the n and in no rances .
port , for the detailing the shall be by procedures emoval from and 430°C y the ANSI more than 5 achining or a Slope not STE Pag 312 312 312 EEL PIPE PIL ge 312-8 2.4.5 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9 .10 .11 .12 .13 2.4 .6 Proc 2.4.6 .1 LES Defects of ox approval of t deep .
.1 These w welding w SMAW re adjacent The joint det be that show The workman Welding of s above 0°C .
.1 When ba least 10° No welding s The preheati No welding s protection is .1 All metho welding b No pile shal Engineer .
When piles h not be remov the bare han cedure for Sh General .1 The det CAN/CSA .1 The 12 of .2 The W .3 Whe .4 Befo and a .1 T b DEPARTM xygen cut su the Engineer weld repairs with basic el equirements surface to pr ail of the com wn on Standar nship of the a steel pipe pile ase metal tem C and mainta shall be done ng zone shall shall be don provided .
ods of protec being carried l be driven u have been we ved from this d. ielded Metal A ails of weld A W59 .
design and c f CAN/CSA W Work shall be n welding in v re welding ov adjacent base This requirem beads and to t STA MENT of TR STRUCTU urfaces shall for correction shall be ma ectrodes not of 312.4.6 an roduce a satis mplete penetr rd Drawing 31 assembly sha es shall not mperature is 0 ained at this m when the am l be a minimu e when there ction shall be out .
until the weld elded within a s enclosure u Arc Welding a ing procedur construction p W59 shall app e positioned fo vertical positio ver previously e metal shall ment shall app the crater are ANDARD S RANSPORT URES not be repair n of occasion de by suitab exceeding 4 nd grinding th sfactory finish ration groove 12-2. ll meet the sta require prehe 0°C or lower , minimum tem mbient tempera um of 75 mm e is a wind a subject to th ded joint has a heated encl ntil the welde and Flux Core re , workman provisions for ply .
or flat position ons progress y deposited m be brushed c ly not only to ea when weldi SPECIFICA TATION an red by weldin nal notches o bly preparing 4 mm in diam e completed h. weld for the andards of CA eating when the base me perature duri ature is lower on each side and/or when he approval o s been inspe osure during ed joint has c ed Arc Welding nship and te r Cyclically Lo n welding wh ion for all pas metal , slag sh clean .
successive la ng is resumed ATIONS nd INFRAS ng except wit or gouges les g non-conform meter , observ weld smooth butt joint in p AN/CSA W59 base metal t etal shall be p ng welding .
r than -18°C .
of the joint .
it is raining of the Engine ected and ap cold weather cooled so tha g echnique sha oaded Structu enever practi sses shall be hall be remov ayers but also d after interru TRUCTUR ITEM : 3 January , 20 th the expres ss than 10 m ming surface ving applicab and flush wit pipe piles sha 9. temperature preheated to a unless prope er prior to an proved by th r , the pile sha at it is warm t all conform t ures of Claus ical .
upward .
ved and weld o to successiv ption .
RE 12 15 ss m s , le th all is at er ny he all to to se ds ve DEPA STEEL Janua 312.4 .
ARTMENT L PIPE PILES ary , 2015 6.1.1 STAN of TRANS S .5 Classific suitable circums .1 Wel man .6 For SMA the max .7 For FCA the max Maximum size of Electrode Maximum Thickness Layers Maximum One-pass Fillet Maximum size of Electrode Maximum Thickness Layers Maximum One-pass Fillet weld NDARD SP PORTATIO cation and si for thicknes tances pertai lding current nufacturer .
AW , the max ximum size of AW the maxi ximum size of Criteria for P m e 4 mm  5 mm  6 mm  8 mm  m of 6 mm 5 mm m 10 mm s 8 mm 12 mm Criteria for P m 4 mm 2.4 mm e 2.0 mm m of 6 mm m 12 mm s 10 mm d 8 mm PECIFICAT ON and INF STRUCTURES ze of electro ss of materia ning to the W shall be wi ximum size of f one-pass fille mum size of f one-pass fille Ta Prequalified J All passes All passes All passes Root pass opening is Root pass All passes Root pass Root pass opening is All passes welds mad For root pa being such For subse In the flat In the hori In the vert Ta Prequalified  All pass m  For the m  For the m All weld A multip making layer ex m In the fl m In the h m In the o TIONS FRASTRUC S odes , arc len al , type of g Work .
ithin the ran f electrode , th ets shall be a electrode , th ets shall be a able 312-1 Joints using s in vertical fill s in overhead s in horizontal ses in grooves s less than 6 m ses in grooves s for horizonta ses for fillets in ses in grooves s greater than s subsequent de in the flat p asses of groo h as to preven equent layers position izontal or ove tical position able 312-2 Joints using ses in flat and vertical posit overhead po d layers excep ple pass , split g all multiple p xceeds 22 mm lat and vertica horizontal pos overhead posi CTURE gth , voltage groove , weldi nge recomme he maximum as indicated in he maximum as indicated in the SMAW P let and groove fillet and groo groove welds s with backing mm in flat pos s without back al fillet welds n flat position s with backing n 6 mm in flat p to root passe position ove welds with nt cracking of welds mad rhead position g the FCAW P d horizontal po tion osition pt for root and t-layer techniq pass welds wh m al positions sition ition and amperag ing positions ended by the thickness of n Table 312-1 thickness of n Table 312-2 Process e welds ove welds s g where the ro sition king in flat pos g where the ro position es for fillet and h the minimum de in any posit ns Process ositions d surface laye que shall be u hen the width ITEM : 312 Page 312-9 ge shall be and other e electrode f layers and .
f layers and 2. oot sition oot d groove m size tion rs used in of the STE Pag 312 312 312 EEL PIPE PIL ge 312-10 2.4.6 .2 2.4 .7 Insp 2.4.7 .1 LES Details .1 Butt joint of the init is started .1 Parti the re .2 Defe base .2 Groove w with the b .3 When tac preparing .4 Flux , pin before de .5 Stringer b pection of Wel Inspection an .1 The pro accordan .2 Inspectio they prop requirem .1 The Brun .2 The of W .3 Guided CAN/CSA .1 Guid coup .2 If the he/sh assu .3 The splice .4 The C DEPARTM groove welds tial weld air ca d from the sec cular care sh emaining weld ctive portions e metal .
welds made w backing .
ck welds are g stops and st holes , crate epositing the n beads shall be ds nd Testing of W cedure and nce with CAN/ on and Testing pose to use fo ents : methods for n swick .
Welding Insp elding Inspec bend tests A W47.1 Sect ed bend test pon from a ste e Engineer de he may then rance that the preparation o e is driven be Contractor sh STA MENT of TR STRUCTU s except thos arbon-arc gou cond side .
all be taken d metal or bas s of the weld with the use o used for align tarts to make rs , visual sur next layer of w e used for hor Welds technique fo /CSA W59 , C g Organization or non-destruc non-destructiv pection Organ ction Organiza shall be tion 8.5 and s coupons may eel pipe pile sp termines that test sufficien e balance of th f these test co low the groun hall restore the ANDARD S RANSPORT URES se produced w uged , chipped in the gougin se metal is no shall be rem of backing sha nment , care s continuous w rface defects weld .
rizontal welds or visual an lauses 7 and ns shall demo ctive testing a ve testing sha ization shall b ations .
carried out hall be tested y be taken fro plice .
a guided ben nt coupons as he welding is oupons shall nd .
e pile to its ori SPECIFICA TATION an with the aid of d or ground to ng , chipping o ot nicked or un moved without all have the w shall be exerc welding satisfa and excessiv s. nd non-destru 8. onstrate to the re suitable , an ll be as appro be certified to t on coupo d by the Engin om the actual nd test coupo s she/he feel satisfactory .
be done by th ginal conditio ATIONS nd INFRAS f backing sha sound metal or grinding op ndercut .
t substantial weld metal tho cised by prope actory .
ve crown sha uctive testing e Engineer th nd meet one o oved by the P o CSA W178 .
ons in acc neer .
l pile splice by n fails to mee s are necess he Contractor n , if the weld TRUCTUR ITEM : 3 January , 20 ll have the roo before weldin peration so tha removal of th oroughly fuse erly grinding o all be remove g shall be at the method of the followin rovince of Ne .1 , Certificatio cordance wit y removing th et the standar sary to provid before the pi is acceptable RE 12 15 ot ng at he ed or ed in ds ng ew on th he d , de le e. DEPA STEEL Janua 312.4.7 312.4.7 312.4 ARTMENT L PIPE PILES ary , 2015 7 .2 Fre .1 .2 7 .3 Qu .1 .2 .3 .8 Dynam .1 Pile Eng mo end .1 .2 The acc STAN of TRANS S equency of Ins All welds sha Testing shal .1 A minim tested methods required .2 A minim ( magnet quality le .3 Welds i specime .1 The flam .2 All g .3 Non tests .4 If defec Enginee to ensur .5 All corre ality of Welds The quality o Section 12 , c The accepta 12.5.4 and s The quality o W47.1 , claus ic Pile Testin es , as identi gineer , shall obilized resista d of initial driv Piles to be t e Engineer , b ceptance crite NDARD SP PORTATIO spection and T all be inspecte l be carried o mum of 25 % of by non-destr s and supplem d ) to assure th mum of 25 % tic particle and evel of the we in steel pipe ens made from ese specimens me cutting to w guided bend te n-destructive t s. cts are identi er shall determ re the soundn ected welds ar s of welds in ste clause 12.5.4 ance criteria f shall meet the of weld requir ses 8.5 and 8 g ified in the be dynamica ance , hamme ving and durin ested shall be based on the r eria .
PECIFICAT ON and INF STRUCTURES Testing ed visually .
ut by the Eng f full penetrati ructive testin mented by ma he soundness fillet welds m d/or liquid pen elds .
e pile splices m a portion of s shall have within 3 mm of est coupons s testing may b ified that are mine the addit ess and quali re to be retest eel pipe pile s . for defects sh limits describ red for guided 8.6 .
Contract Do ally tested du er performanc ng all retaps .
e driven with results of dyn TIONS FRASTRUC S ineer as follow on groove we g methods agnetic partic and quality le may be tested netrant test m s may also b field spliced m the backing r f its thickness shall be stamp be performed e outside the tional percent ity level of all ted .
splices shall b hall be in acc bed in this clau d bend tests s cuments and uring driving ce , pile stres an external h namic testing CTURE ws : elds and steel ( radiographic cle or liquid pe evel of the we d by non-des methods ) to as be tested by material remo removed by m followed by g ped by the we d on coupons e criteria spe tage of testing the welds .
be in accordan cordance with use for tensio shall be in ac d/or as spec for measure ss and soil dy hammer .
and analysis P pipe pile splic c and/or ultr enetrant test elds .
structive testin ssure the sou y guided ben oved from the mechanical m grinding or ma elder .
s in lieu of g ecified in 312 g that shall be nce with CAN h CAN/CSA W on welds .
ccordance with cifically direc ement and es ynamic prope , shall determ ITEM : 312 Page 312-11 ces shall be asonic test methods as ng methods ndness and nd tests on pipe pile .
means or by achining .
uided bend 2.4.7.3 , the e carried out N/CSA W59 , W59 clause h CAN/CSA cted by the stimation of erties at the mine the pile STE Pag 312 312 EEL PIPE PIL ge 312-12 2.4.8 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9 .10 2.5 MEASU .1 The and .2 All p othe .3 The and LES The Contrac operations .
The Contract The testing p The Contract attaching ins .1 The Con of being .2 The Eng instrume The Contrac 60 Hz , AC , fo .1 Field gen shall only The Contract of the pile tes .1 The shel of 2 m , a With the dyna initial driving Engineer .
Stresses in t exceed 90 % .1 If directe the pile b of the ha .2 If non-ax realign th REMENT FO Quantity to b installed in ac piles shall be m er pile have be length to be m the actual fiel DEPARTM ctor shall not tor shall assis procedure sha tor shall prov truments , with tractor shall p raised to the gineer shall r nts .
ctor shall su or use by the nerators shall y supply elect tor shall prov st or a shelter ter shall have nd the interio amic testing e and retap th the pile shall of the pile ste ed by the Eng by means of c ammer .
xial driving is he driving sys OR PAYMENT be measured ccordance wit measured for een finalized a measured for ld toe elevatio STA MENT of TR STRUCTU ify the Engin st the Enginee all be carried vide the Engin h the pile in th provide a wor top of the pile require appro upply an ele Engineer dur l be equipped trical power fo ide the Engin r within the sa e a minimum or temperature equipment att he pile with be monitore eel yield stres gineer , the Co cushion or he indicated by stem .
T for payment h this Item .
payment only and no further payment shal on measured a ANDARD S RANSPORT URES neer at least er in carrying out in accord neer with rea he leads .
rk platform , m e. oximately one ectrical powe ring the tests .
d with functio or the pile tes neer with acce ame distance floor size of e shall be ma tached to the a hammer of ed during driv ss .
ontractor sha elmet modifica the measure shall be the n y after all piles driving in the ll be the differ along the cent SPECIFICA TATION an 7 Days in a out the testin ance with AA asonable mea minimum size e hour per p er supply of ning voltage sting .
ess for a moto .
2.5 m by 2 m aintained abov e pile , the Con f the specifie ving to ensur ll reduce the ations , or by ements , the C number of line s in any group pile group sh rence between treline axis of ATIONS nd INFRAS advance of th ng .
ASHTO T298- ans of access of 1.2 m by 1 pile , per test , f 20 Amper and frequenc or vehicle ( va m , a minimum ve 10C .
ntractor shall ed size , as d re that the st driving energ reducing the Contractor sha ear metres of p or in close p hall be required n the design c the pile .
TRUCTUR ITEM : 3 January , 20 he pile drivin -99. s to the pile fo 1.2 m , capab to attach th re , 115 Volt cy meters , an an ) within 15 m ceiling heig drive to end o directed by th tresses do no gy delivered t energy outp all immediate f piles supplie proximity to an d. cut-off elevatio RE 12 15 ng or le he ts , nd m ht of he ot to ut ely ed ny on DEPA STEEL Janua 312.6 ARTMENT L PIPE PILES ary , 2015 BASIS OF .1 Paymen pile , as .2 The Ow Work S .3 The cos the Con otherwi .1 The .4 Retapp Item 81 STAN of TRANS S PAYMENT nt for Work u identified und wner shall ma Site .
st of the prov ntractor if the se the Owner e cost of any t ping in exces 2 .
NDARD SP PORTATIO under this Item der the Contra ake partial pay vision of mate test results s r shall bear th testing to reso ss of four op PECIFICAT ON and INF STRUCTURES m shall includ act .
yment in acco erials , labour a how that the e cost of the t olve the qualit perations , if TIONS FRASTRUC S e a separate ordance with and Equipme material does test .
ty of welds sh required , sh CTURE Unit Price fo 908.7 for ste nt to test the s not meet the hall be borne b hall be paid P or each size o eel pipe pile s welds shall b e specified re by the Contrac for in accor ITEM : 312 Page 312-13 of steel pipe tored at the be borne by quirements , ctor .
rdance with DEPA STEEL Janua 321.1 321.2 321.3 ARTMENT L SHEET PIL ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite required MATERIAL .1 All mate .2 All stee Grade 3 .3 The Co Contrac flooding .4 The Co .1 We .2 We .3 Upo she .4 The CA .1 .2 .5 The Co supplie .6 Materia deforma SUBMITTA .1 The Co shall su .1 The larg .1 .2 Submitt STAN of TRANS LE COFFERD TION em consists o d in the Contr S erials shall be el sheet pile s 300W steel .
ontractor shal ct Documents g elevation wit ontractor may elded splices i elded steel she on the reques eet pile splices e acceptance AN/CSA W59 f If unaccepta shall reject t Subject to th defects corre ontractor shal d. als shall be s ation .
ALS ontractor shall ubmit the desi e Contractor ge as that sho The sheet p commercially to determine tals are requir NDARD SP PORTATIO DAMS of the design ract .
e supplied by t shall conform l supply the s s is achieved a th due consid use welded s n steel sheet eet pile splice st of the Engin s by radiograp e for welded for tension we able weld defe he pile section he approval o ected and the l supply the c stored in an o l be responsib gn , in accorda shall ensure own in the Con piling sections y available pr e the specified red in accorda PECIFICAT ON and INF STRUCTURES n , supply and the Contracto to CAN/CSA sheet pile in l and an undam eration given steel sheet pile pile shall con es shall be pre neer , the Con phic inspectio steel sheet p elds in dynam ects are foun n , or of the Enginee e splices retes corners for th organized , st ble for the de ance with Item that the dime ntract Docum s and corner roduct selecte d volume of th ance with any TIONS FRASTRUC S d construction or .
A G40.20 and engths such maged pile is p to driving .
e section ( s ) p form to the re equalified full p tractor shall te on .
pile splices s mically loaded nd in welded er , the Contra sted .
he cofferdam , traight and ho esign of the c m 956. ensions of th ents .
details shown ed to determin he tremie conc cross-referen CTURE n of all steel G40.21 and , that the toe e provided up to rovided that : equirements o penetration gr est a minimum hall be as sp Structures .
steel sheet p actor may und , in lengths a orizontal fash cofferdam and he cofferdam n on the draw ne the minimu crete in accord nced Item form sheet pile c , as a minimu elevation spe o the specified of CAN/CSA W roove welds .
m of 25 % of w pecified in Cl pile splices , th dertake to ha as long as the hion to avoid d associated b shall remain wings are ba um size of the dance with 30 ming part of th ITEM : 321 Page 321-1 cofferdam ( s ) um , shall be cified in the d cofferdam W59 .
welded steel lause 12 of he Engineer ve the weld e sheet pile permanent bracing and at least as sed on one footing and 02.5.5. is Item .
STE Pag 321 EEL SHEET ge 321-2 1.4 CONST .1 The spec .2 The antic .3 Stee be p appr .4 Wor writi .5 Stee and .6 Coff enla .7 Coff spec .8 Cros desi .9 Exca struc writi .10 Stee rem .1 .11 Sup coffe havi PILE COFFE RUCTION Contractor s cifically directe Contractor sh cipated design el sheet piles pulled or cut roved in writin rk on cofferda ng .
el sheet piles as defined by Horizon Vertical Misplac ferdams tilted arged to provid ferdam walls cified cofferda ss struts or br ign and having avation shall cture shall no ng by the Eng el sheet piles oved at the op When the ste the Contracto Contract Doc perimposed lo erdam , unless ing been subm DEPARTM ERDAMS shall carry o ed by the Eng hall design an n loadings an in cofferdam off to final e ng .
ams may not shall be drive y 321.3.1 and C ntal alignment Alignment of cement or Ecc d or moved o de necessary shall be vente am high water racing may ex g been appro not be made ot be disturbe gineer .
s may remain ption of the C eel sheet pile or shall cut o cuments .
oads shall no s specifically mitted as part STA MENT of TR STRUCTU ut the Work gineer .
nd construct a d to be as wa s constructed elevation befo start until the en to conform are subject to Tab Cofferdam Sh of walls ± walls ± centricity ± ± out of positio clearance an ed to permit c r design eleva xtend through ved by the En outside of co ed , unless sp n in place as ontractor .
s are to rema off the steel ot be placed permitted in t of 321.3.1 .
ANDARD S RANSPORT URES as indicated all cofferdams atertight as pra d before or du ore March 1st e June 15th of m with the lim o the toleranc ble 321-1 heet Pile Tole 8 mm per me 10 mm per m 50 mm para Bridge 75 mm perpe Bridge n as per 32 nd proper loca cofferdam floo ation .
h foundation c ngineer .
offerdams , and pecifically per s a part of th ain in place a sheet piles e d on the su the Contract D SPECIFICA TATION an d in the Cont to be adequa actically possi uring the wint t of the follow each year un mits as shown ces indicated i erances etre of plan len metre of vertica rallel to build endicular to b 1.4.5 , during ation .
oding at an e concrete when d the existing rmitted in the he permanen and form part evenly at the rrounding so Documents , in ATIONS nd INFRAS tract Docume ately braced to ible .
ter months of wing year , un nless otherwis in the Contra in Table 321-1 ngth of wall al length of wa ding line , or uilding line or driving shall elevation not h n indicated on g stream bed e Contract Do t structure or of the perma e elevation in oil immediate n writing by th TRUCTUR ITEM : 32 January , 20 ents and/or a o withstand th any year sha nless otherwis se approved act Documen 1. all centreline of r centreline of be righted o higher than th n the cofferda adjacent to th ocuments or r they may b anent structure ndicated in th ly adjacent t he Engineer o RE 21 15 as he all se in ts f f or he m he in be e , he to or DEPA STEEL Janua 321.4 321.5 321.6 ARTMENT L SHEET PIL ary , 2015 .12 The Co underw approve .13 The Co on top o .14 The Co conditio others , .1 The dew req the .2 The pro of t .3 A c sub dew MEASURE .1 The de Item sh BASIS OF .1 Payme .2 The Ow .1 Par pur .3 The co Owner .4 In the e and rep .5 If the C which a be resp of the s STAN of TRANS LE COFFERD ontractor sha water ( tremie ) ed in writing b ontractor shall of the tremie c ontractor sha ons at the site influence the e Contractor s watering disch quired to verify period of the e Contractor ogram and this the Work .
copy of all re bmission of th watering disch MENT FOR P esign , supply hall be on a lum PAYMENT nt for Work u wner shall ma rtial payment rchase price f st of carrying and the Cont event that wel pair and retes Contractor ’ s c are larger tha ponsible , at h specified dime NDARD SP PORTATIO DAMS ll wait a min concrete be by the Enginee ensure that a concrete is pla all familiarize e prior to the c chosen style shall be solely harge and sh y and confirm Work .
shall submit s program sha ecords shall b is data does n harge .
PAYMENT and construc mp sum basis nder this Item ake partial pay t for used st for new steel out the radio tractor .
lded steel she sting of these offerdam des an the dimens her/his own ex ension , to com PECIFICAT ON and INF STRUCTURES nimum of 72 efore dewater er .
adequate dew aced in the dr himself with commenceme of operations y responsible hall maintain r m continuous a Work plan all be of a form be submitted not relieve the ction of all ste s. m shall be at t yment for stee teel sheet pi sheet pile .
ographic testi eet pile splice splices shall sign , submitte sions specifie xpense , to su mplete the Wo TIONS FRASTRUC S hours follow ring the coffe watering is pro ry .
h all permits ent of the dew s. for all compl records of all compliance w n outlining th m acceptable to the Engin e Contractor o eel sheet pile the Lump Sum el sheet pile i le shall be c ng under 321 es are deficien be at the Con ed under 321 d in the Cont upply and pla ork .
CTURE ing the comp erdam unless ovided so that s , Item 948 watering which iance and un l pertinent de with the perm he scope of t e to DELG prio neer on a we of any respons cofferdam ( s ) m Price .
n accordance calculated on 1.2.4.3 shall b nt under 321. ntractor ’ s own .3.1 , results i tract Docume ace the additio pletion of the s otherwise a all concrete t and any en h may , at the d dertakings re ewatering disc it parameters the proposed or to the com eekly basis h sibility with re ) in accordan e with 908.7. n 30 % of the be shared eq 2.4 , all additi n expense .
in cofferdam ents , the Cont onal concrete ITEM : 321 Page 321-3 e placing of altered and to be placed vironmental discretion of lating to the charge data s throughout monitoring mencement however the espect to the ce with this e estimated ually by the onal testing dimensions tractor shall e , in excess DEPA EXCAV Janua 322.1 322.2 322.3 322.4 322.5 322.6 ARTMENT VATION WIT ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite MATERIAL .1 None id SUBMITTA .1 None id CONSTRU .1 The Co specific .2 All mate .3 All exca and sha .4 Pre-exc requirem MEASURE .1 The Qu excava BASIS OF P .1 Payme STAN of TRANS THIN COFFER TION em consists of S dentified .
ALS dentified .
CTION ontractor sha cally directed b erial shall be e avated mater all be dispose cavation of th ment in the C MENT FOR P uantity to be ted within coff PAYMENT nt for Work un NDARD SP PORTATIO RDAMS f the excavatio all carry out t by the Engine excavated to t rials from insi ed of outside o he riverbed m ontract Docum PAYMENT measured f ferdams in ac nder this Item PECIFICAT ON and INF STRUCTURES on of all mate the Work as er .
the full dimen de the coffer of the Work Si material shall ments .
for payment s ccordance with shall be at th TIONS FRASTRUC S rials within co indicated in nsion of the co rdam , shall be ite .
not be perm shall be the h this Item .
he Unit Price .
CTURE offerdams .
the Contrac offerdam .
ecome the pr mitted unless volume in c ct Documents roperty of the specifically cubic metres ITEM : 322 Page 322-1 s and/or as e Contractor noted as a of material DEPA PRECA Janua Artic 331 .
331 .
331 .
331 .
331 .
331 .
331.1 331.2 331.2 331.2 .
ARTMENT AST PRESTR ary , 2015 cle 1 DESCRIPT 2 MATERIAL 3 SUBMITTA 4 CONSTRU .1 Gener .2 Curing .3 Finishi .4 Testin .5 Reinfo .6 Tensio .7 Identif .8 Tolera .9 Handli 5 MEASURE 6 BASIS FOR DESCRIPT .1 This Ite .2 Prestre hollow the pre .3 All prec MATERIAL .1 Genera .1 All .2 Ma .2 Materia 2 .1 Agg .1 STAN of TRANS RESSED CO TION .............. LS .................. ALS ................ CTION ......... ral .................. g of Concrete .
ing of Concret g and Inspect orcing Steel ... oning and Stre fication of Pref ances ............. ing , Storage a EMENT FOR P R PAYMENT .. TION em consists of essing Metho core slabs , s tensioning me cast prestress S al materials and aterial propert al Properties gregates Aggregates with 302.2 .
NDARD SP PORTATIO NCRETE BE C ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... te Surfaces ... ion ................ ...................... ess Transfer .. fabricated Bea ...................... and Shipping .. PAYMENT ..... ...................... f the supply an d - This spe single and do ethod and in sed concrete d procedures ies shall conf used in conc PECIFICAT ON and INF EAMS STRUCTURES ONTENTS ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ams ............... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... nd installation ecification ref ouble T-sectio accordance w Bridge eleme shall be supp form to CSA A crete shall me TIONS FRASTRUC S ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... n of the precas fers to Bulb- ons and simil with CAN/CSA ents under thi plied by the C A23.1 , if not o eet the materi CTURE ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... st prestressed -Tee ’ s , I-bea lar Bridge pro A S6 .
s Item shall b Contractor .
otherwise spe ial properties Page 331-1 .
331-1 331-3 .
331-4 331-4 331-5 331-7 331-8 .
331-8 331-8 331-9 331-10 331-11 .
331-12 331-12 d concrete be ms , box gird oducts manu be referred to ecified herein .
specified in a ITEM : 331 Page 331-1 ams .
ders , slabs , factured by as beams. . accordance PR Pag 331 331 331 331 ECAST PRE ge 331-2 1.2.2 .2 1.2.2 .3 1.2.2 .4 1.2.2 .5 STRESSED C Admixtures .1 A written the admi .2 The calc calcium n Water .1 Water us shall cau Composition .1 Concrete .2 Concrete .3 No mate compoun .4 A calcium L/m3 .
.1 The c be pr of co .1 A f d Stranded Wir .1 Prestres the requ unless o .1 Wire prest .2 All pr paint bond .3 In pr the s splice DEPARTM CONCRETE statement sh xture contain cium nitrite co nitrite by weigh sed in produc use discolorat of Mix e shall meet th e shall have a rials shall be nds in any qua m nitrite corros calcium nitrite rovided to the oncrete .
Acceptable ve from compute dispensing un re ssing strands uirements of A otherwise spe welds , break tressing cable restressing st t , mill scale , l d between ste etensioning s splice is not l es shall not be STA MENT of TR BEAMS STRUCTU hall be provid s no purpose orrosion inhib ht of solution .
ction and curi ion or harmfu he requireme a slump not gr e used in the antity .
sion inhibitor e shall be adde Engineer for erification sha erized batch its .
shall be of th ASTM A416M cified in the C ks , nicks , ben e. teel must be f oose rust , co el and concre strands one ap located within e permitted in ANDARD S RANSPORT URES ed to the Eng ely added calc biting admixtu ing shall be c ul effects to th ents of CSA A reater than 21 mix design t shall be adde ed at the conc the Quantity o all include , bu plants or p he 7 wire stres M and have a Contract Docu nds or any ot free of delete orrosion and a ete .
pproved splic n the concrete n any reel or c SPECIFICA TATION an gineer from th cium chloride .
ure shall con clean and fre he concrete .
A23.1 , exposu 10 mm .
that contain p ed to the conc crete ready m of the calcium ut is not nece printouts from ss-relieved st an ultimate te uments .
ther defect sh rious materia any foreign m ce per strand e member .
W coil of strand .
ATIONS nd INFRAS he manufactu .
ntain between e from any m ure class C-XL purposefully a crete at a dos mix plant and v m nitrite added essarily limite m computeriz tabilized type ensile strength hall not be pe als such as oil material , whic shall be perm Welded strand TRUCTUR ITEM : 33 January , 20 urer stating tha n 30 % to 36 % materials whic L. added chlorid sage rate of 1 verification sha d , to each batc ed to , printou zed admixtur and shall mee h of 1860 MP ermitted in an l , grease , fros ch may preve mitted , provide d joints or wir RE 31 15 at % ch de 15 all ch ts re et Pa ny st , nt ed re DEPA PRECA Janua 331.2 .
331.2.2 331.2 .
331.3 ARTMENT AST PRESTR ary , 2015 2.5 .2 .3 2 .6 Re .1 .2 2 .7 Ins .1 SUBMITTA .1 The Co 956 .
.1 The ma ord .2 All pre qualifie .3 The Co prior to .1 Sta spe .2 The .4 The pre but not submitt .1 Sam of inve STAN of TRANS RESSED CO All stranded .1 The man .2 The hea .3 The coil .4 Each co .1 the .2 ultim .3 the .4 the The shipping contains hig inforcing Stee Reinforcing Welding of permission o erts Inserts shall placed in the ALS ontractor shal e submission anufacture , siz der to provide stressing Wo ed in accordan ontractor shall commencing andard test da ecification req e manufacture estressing sys t limited to : p ted for approv mples submitt manufacture estigation .
NDARD SP PORTATIO NCRETE BE wire shall be nufacturer 's n at number ; number ; and oil shall be acc corresponding mate strength , date of manuf stress-strain c g package or h-strength pre el steel shall be reinforcing s of the Engine l be of sufficie e location ( s ) a l submit shop shall show th ze , type and u prestressing f ork shall be nce with Item l provide the f prestressing ata certifying t uirements ind er shall provid stem is subjec pre-stress stee val , when requ ted shall be a and technic PECIFICAT ON and INF EAMS STRUCTURES delivered in c ame ; companied by g information , facture , and curve from ze form shall be estressing ste e supplied in a steel , includin er .
ent capacity a as indicated b p drawings fo he proposed a ultimate stren forces and ec carried out 907. following info Work : that all compo dicated for the de quality cont ct to approval el , hold-down uested by the accompanied cal informatio TIONS FRASTRUC S coils with a me y a stress-stra of the metal t ero stress to u e clearly mark eel , and the ca accordance w ng tack weldi and of an app by location in r the prestres arrangement , gth of tendon ccentricities as by a qualifie rmational item onents of the s ese componen trol procedure l by the Engin n/hold-up dev Engineer .
by all necess on , to enable CTURE etal tag attach ain curve , show tag , ltimate .
ked with a sta are to be used with 304.2. ing , is prohib proved type a the Contract ssing system location and d ns , sequence s detailed in th ed Contractor ms , for review stressing syst nts .
es for review .
neer and sam vices , anchors ary certificate e the Engine hed to each co wing : atement that t d in handling .
bited without as specified a Documents .
in accordanc details , indica and rate of te he Contract D r or subcont w , a minimum tem conform mples of mater s and couplin es , source of s eer to carry ITEM : 331 Page 331-3 oil showing : he package the written and shall be ce with Item ating inserts ; ensioning in Documents .
ractor , pre- of 21 Days to minimum rial such as , ngs shall be supply , date out a full PR Pag 331 331 ECAST PRE ge 331-4 1.3.4 .2 .5 The in fo the b .6 The .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .7 Sub part 1.4 CONST .1 Gen .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 STRESSED C Sufficient tes Owner to det .1 With eac manufact number a beam manuf orce during the beams .
Contractor at Date of tensio Beam mark n Identification Required tota Initial tension Anticipated a Anticipated a Any problems mittals are re of this Item .
RUCTION neral The Contract specifically di The Contract specified in C The Contra Canadian Pre The Contract certification re The Contract report ( s ) of th Precast plan reinforcemen The prestress .1 Only stee members .2 Forms sh outlined u DEPARTM CONCRETE t specimens m ermine compl ch prestress turer 's minim and the date o facturer shall e period of be t the conclusio oning ; numbers and i of jacking Eq al load per stra ; nd actual gau nd actual elon s encountered equired in acc tor shall carry rected by the tor shall provid CSA A23.4 , an ctor shall estressed Con tor shall provid equirements t tor shall , upo he reinforcing ts shall keep nt , prestressing sing plant sha el side forms s. hall be clean , under this item STA MENT of TR BEAMS STRUCTU may be taken liance with the ing steel sa um guarante of manufactur provide the E eam manufact on of the pres identification a uipment ; and ; uge pressure f ngation ; and d. cordance with y out the Wo Engineer and de certified co nd ASTM A41 inspect pres ncrete Institut de records fro to the Enginee n request of steel supplied p complete re g steel and sh all conform to s and steel o , and of a co m and the Con ANDARD S RANSPORT URES n from each co e requirement ample a cert eed ultimate t re .
Engineer , in w ture , prior to t stressing shall and location in for each stran any cross-ref rk as indicate d in accordanc opies of qualit 16M .
stressed con e ( CPCI ) .
om in-house q er for inspecti the Engineer d , showing ph ecords of su hall provide th the following or concrete bo onfiguration to ntract Docum SPECIFICA TATION an oil of prestres ts of this spec tificate shall tensile streng writing , the saf he commence l provide a co n the Structur nd or strand gr ferenced Item ed in the Con ce with CSA A ty control test ncrete tendo quality control on and review r , provide cer hysical and ch upply source his information minimum req ottom forms o ensure com ents .
ATIONS nd INFRAS ssing steel and cification .
be submitte gth , the corre fety procedure ement of the opy of following re ; roup ; m and referred ntract Docum A23.4 .
ts related to th ons in acc programs ba w. rtified copies hemical analys of concrete n to the Engin uirements : shall be use mpliance with TRUCTUR ITEM : 33 January , 20 d tested by th ed stating th esponding re es that shall b manufacture o g records : d to as formin ents and/or a his Contract a cordance wit ased upon pla of the mill te ses .
material , ste eer .
ed for standar the tolerance RE 31 15 he he el be of ng as as th nt st el rd es DEPA PRECA Janua 331.4 .
331.4 ARTMENT AST PRESTR ary , 2015 1.7 .3 .4 .5 .6 .8 Co hav dra .9 The of p .1 .10 The pre .1 .2 .11 The or c .2 Curing .1 Wh ma pro .2 Acc as .3 Wh .1 .2 .3 .4 Wh STAN of TRANS RESSED CO Hydraulic jac only accurat All chucks approved typ Safety devic shield for the Cold weath provided bet ncrete shall n ve been chec awings submit e concrete pla partially harde For multiple plastic throu e Contractor estressing plan The office s furnished wit .1 The offic Convenient also be prov e Contractor s change in fab of Concrete hen the amb anufacturing fa otection may b celerated stre defined in CS hen heated co Heated conc The maximu The maximu hen accelerate NDARD SP PORTATIO NCRETE BE cks and pump tely calibrated used for stre pe of sufficien ces shall be i e protection o er facilities t tween Octobe not be placed cked and app tted under Item acement oper ened layers of beam set-ups ghout the ent shall provid nt to accomm pace so prov th a suitable s ce room temp telephone , fa vided .
shall provide rication sched bient tempera acilities are p be performed ength develop SA A23.4 .
oncrete metho crete shall hav um temperatur um cooling rat ed curing met PECIFICAT ON and INF EAMS STRUCTURES ps of sufficien gauges for re essing , depre nt capacity and installed near f workmen du to enable co er 31st to May d until all form proved for co m 956. ration shall be f concrete .
s , the mix des ire placement de regular a odate the Eng ided shall be standard office perature shall acsimile , phot 7 Days writte dule .
ature in the rotected from in accordanc ment may be od is used for a ve a maximum re of the hard te of the concr hod is used fo TIONS FRASTRUC S nt capacity sh egistering the essing or liftin d in good wor r the stressin uring stressing omplete fabric 1st .
ms , inserts , re ompliance wit e in one contin sign shall be t. and practica gineer or the O ventilated , he e desk and ch be maintained tocopy , mail a en notice prior plant does m the wind and ce with CSA A e attained by a accelerated s m plastic conc ened concret rete shall not or accelerated CTURE hall be used f stressing forc ng pretension rking order .
g bed to prov g operations .
cation out of einforcing stee th the Contra nuous operati adjusted so th lly located o Owner 's repre eated , lighted hair .
d at 20C .
and message r to commenc not fall belo d direct rays f A23.1 and A2 accelerated c strength devel crete tempera te shall not ex exceed 15°C d strength dev for tensioning ces shall be u ning cables s vide an adeq f the elemen el and prestre act Documen on , without th hat the concre office space esentative .
d and clean , a e handling se cement of any ow 5°C and from the sun , 23.4 and per 3 curing or heate opment : ature of 33°C .
xceed 60°C .
per hour .
velopment : ITEM : 331 Page 331-5 cables and used .
shall be an quate safety nts shall be essing steel nts and any he formation ete remains at his/her and shall be ervices shall y fabrication where the , curing and 302.4. ed concrete PR Pag 331 ECAST PRE ge 331-6 1.4.2.4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9 STRESSED C .1 The acce .2 The acce .3 In no ins concrete .4 The beam to ensure with a mi .5 During t temperat .6 For the n rate not 60°C .
.7 This tem prestress The exposed curing period .1 If water i concrete 60°C .
Stress transf .1 Maximum shall be 2 .2 Additiona insulated and stres After transfe hour until the .1 The bea undergon The Contrac the entire cu spaced one enclosure ( s ) .
.1 The max 5°C .
.2 Shop , gir a daily ba Forms shall n DEPARTM CONCRETE elerated curing elerated curing stance shall , forms or test ms shall be m e full circulat inimum loss o the initial curi ture within the next stage of to exceed mperature sha s is reached .
d surfaces of d. is applied for temperature fer shall take p m temperature 20°C .
al measures d tarps , with ssing cables .
r of stress th e beam is at th ams shall no ne two Days o tor/manufactu uring period per beam t . ximum permis rder and encl asis during pr not be remove STA MENT of TR BEAMS STRUCTU g shall not beg g shall provide the steam , r t cylinders .
maintained on tion of thorou of moisture an ing period ( ty e enclosure s curing , the t 15°C per h all be mainta the concrete this purpose e by more place when th e differential may be req or without an he temperatur he ambient ai ot be expose of drying in w urer shall pro by means o to record the ssible temper losure tempe roduction .
ed until the co ANDARD S RANSPORT URES gin before the e excess mois radiant heat n the casting b ughly saturate nd heat .
ypically 4 to 5 hall be mainta emperature w hour to a m ained until th e shall have a e , then this wa than 10°C he concrete te between the quired to pre n additional h re shall be lo ir temperature ed to temper warm tempera ovide a contin of approved e temperatur rature variatio rature record oncrete has o SPECIFICA TATION an e initial set .
sture for prop or forced air bed in an app ed air and/or 5 hours after ained at appr within the enc minimum of 4 he required s an excess of ater tempera nor shall emperature is girder and th event thermal heating sourc owered at a e. ratures below tures after the nuous record accurate au re throughout on within the ds shall be su obtained the s ATIONS nd INFRAS er hydration o r be directly proved enclos r steam arou r completion o roximately 20 closure shall 40°C and a strength for t f moisture du ture shall not this temper s above 30°C he surroundin l shock .
This ce , draped ov maximum rat w freezing u e transfer of s of curing tem tomatic reco t the length enclosure sh ubmitted to th specified relea TRUCTUR ITEM : 33 January , 20 of the cement applied to th sure , designe und the beam of casting ) th °C .
be raised at maximum o the transfer o uring the entir t vary from th rature excee C. ng environme s may includ ver the girde te of 15°C pe ntil they hav stress .
mperatures fo ording device of the curin hall not excee he Engineer o ase strength .
RE 31 15 . he ed ms he a of of re he ed nt de rs er ve or s , ng ed on DEPA PRECA Janua 331.4 ARTMENT AST PRESTR ary , 2015 .3 Finishin .1 The am .2 Imm bea .1 .2 .3 .3 The sta .4 The .5 Sm san age .1 .6 All line .7 The sur .1 .8 The be .9 Co tem app .10 Co the STAN of TRANS RESSED CO ng of Concret e top surface mplitude of app mediately afte ams require p Proposed pa for approval The Engine transfer of p Beams with the load carr .1 Repairs enginee .1 Inve .2 Esta .3 Rec e permanently in and laitanc e Contractor s mall surface v nd from the ent .
The beams period of 48 bearing surfa es and grades e prestressing rfaces of the b Holddown de e end surface coated with a ncrete repairs mperature env proved by the ncrete surfac e beam .
NDARD SP PORTATIO NCRETE BE te Surfaces e of precast proximately 6 er the strippin patching .
atching mate of the Engine eer shall dete prestressing fo structural def rying capacity of a structu er has carried estigated the ablished the c ceived approv y exposed su ce .
shall pressure oids shall be same source shall remain hours after c aces must be s. g steel shall b beam shall the evices in the b es of all beam an approved a s shall be car vironment as e Engineer .
ces not meeti PECIFICAT ON and INF EAMS STRUCTURES beams shall mm .
ng of forms , t rials and met eer .
ermine wheth orce .
fects including y or durability a ural nature s out and obta structural imp cause of the d val of the prop urfaces of all b e wash the su e filled with an e as used in n in a controll completion of constructed i be ground off en be finished bottom of the ms , except as asphalt or bitum rried out and recommende ng the appro TIONS FRASTRUC S be rough , cl the Engineer thods for non her patching g cracks and are reduced .
shall not be ained the follo plications of th defect or the d posed repair f beams shall b urface to iden n approved c the concrete led temperatu the repair .
in such a man with an inset d flush in an ap beam shall b specifically n minous coatin allowed to cu ed by the ma oval of the En CTURE lean , and fre shall be info n-structural re shall be do honeycomb undertaken u owing : he defect or t damage .
from the Own be smooth an ntify all air void cement grout e and incorp ure environm nner to give a t at the ends o pproved man be finished sim noted in the C ng .
ure for a minim anufacturer of ngineer may b ee of laitance rmed of all ca epairs shall be one before o are subject to until the man he damage .
ner .
nd free from h ds prior to fin mix of ceme porating a lat ment for a min a smooth surf of the beam a ner .
milarly .
Contract Docu mum time in a f the repair m be cause for ITEM : 331 Page 331-7 e with a full ases where e submitted or after the o rejection if nufacturer 's honeycomb , al finishing .
ent and fine tex bonding nimum time face , true to and the end uments shall a controlled material and rejection of PR Pag 331 331 331 ECAST PRE ge 331-8 1.4 .4 Test .1 1.4 .5 Rein .1 .2 .3 1.4 .6 Ten .1 STRESSED C ting and Inspe Concrete stre A23.1 and as .1 In the pr carry out beam co and two 2 .2 Each tran 28-day st conducte the same .3 Stress tra test has indicated .1 Stres cylind .4 The initia of the me .5 The aver shall be e .1 The 2 MP .2 The 1 MP nforcing Steel The Contrac tolerances in All reinforcing loose or forei Supporting ch subject to the sioning and S The tensionin CSA A23.4 a .1 When str prestress .1 The requi DEPARTM CONCRETE ection ength at trans s follows : resence of th t a minimum o ntaining less 28-day streng nsfer strength trength test s ed in pairs ; tha e portions of th ansfer shall n reached a str in the Contra ss transfer sh ders meets or al curing of the ean temperatu rage of all cyl equal to or gre allowable s Pa below the s average stre Pa below the s ctor shall be accordance w g steel protru gn material an hairs for reinfo e approval of t Stress Transfe ng and stress nd as follows ressing is do s force shall b theoretical ja ired prestress STA MENT of TR BEAMS STRUCTU sfer shall be d e Engineer , t of one transfe than 10 m3 c gth tests for ea h test shall co hall consist of at is , transfer he same batc ot take place rength not les act Document hall not take r exceeds the e stress relea ure of the enc linders , of an eater than the trength for specified mini ength for ea specified mini responsible t with 331.4.8 a uding from the nd excessive orcing steel an the Engineer .
er s transfer sha : ne by jacking e additionally cking force m s force at the f ANDARD S RANSPORT URES determined by the Contracto er strength te concrete , and ach beam con onsist of two c f two cylinder strength tests hes .
until at least ss than 1 MPa s. place until t specified rele ase cylinders s losure .
y one beam , e specified min each individ mum .
ach test of t mum .
to position th and 304.4. e precast me concrete .
nd prestressin ll be carried o g the strands measured on may be increa far end of the SPECIFICA TATION an y the Contrac or shall cast st and one 28 not less than ntaining more cylinders from rs from the sa s and 28-day one cylinder a below the s the average ease strength shall take plac tested to det nimum 28-day ual cylinder two cylinders he reinforcing ember shall be ng cable shall out by the Co from one en n at least two ased by a ma prestress bed ATIONS nd INFRAS ctor in accorda cylinders and 8-day strengt n two transfer than 10 m3 co m the same b ame batch and strength test from each tra specified relea strength of a . ce in an area termine the 2 y strength .
shall not b s shall not b g steel within e free from o l be heavy pla ontractor in ac nd of the stre strands at the aximum of 5 % d. TRUCTUR ITEM : 33 January , 20 ance with CS d subsequent th test for eac r strength tes oncrete .
batch and eac d tests shall b s shall be fro ansfer strengt ase strength a all release te representativ 28-day strengt be more tha be more tha n the specifie oil , grease , an astic tipped an ccordance wit essing bed , th e far end .
% to attain th RE 31 15 SA tly ch ts ch be m th as st ve th an an ed ny nd th he he DEPA PRECA Janua 331.4.6 331.4 ARTMENT AST PRESTR ary , 2015 6.1.1.1 .2 .2 The min .1 .2 .3 Ga dia .1 .2 .4 Bef lub .1 .5 Afte stre stre .6 Stre end .7 Identific .1 The dra .2 Du .3 Ide eac STAN of TRANS RESSED CO .1 If th from .2 If th spec to ov .1 Anchorage s jacking force e tensioning nimum shall b Each strand tensioning s If the differ determined f before contin uges shall be l reading can The hydrau piping , valve fluctuations .
Gauging de requested by fore each pr ricated and re Chucks and be used .
er the concre ess transfer , esses in the c ess transfer is ds and while a cation of Prefa e Contractor awing of the sh ring construct entification an ch beam .
NDARD SP PORTATIO NCRETE BE he required pr m the far end o e measured e cified prestres vercome fricti Such overstr 78 % of the sp set shall not re e. procedure a e in accordan d may be sea hall be measu rence betwee from elongatio nuing with the e calibrated to be converted lic pressure es and fitting evices shall b y the Enginee restressing o eassembled .
jaws with ham te in the beam the strands oncrete at no s to be perfor all beams are abricated Bea shall adopt hop drawings tion , the date nd fabrication PECIFICAT ON and INF EAMS STRUCTURES restress force of the bed to g elongation is n ss force is ap on .
ressing shall pecified tensil esult in prestr and sequence nce with the fo ated by applic ured by elong en the stres on exceeds 5 e stressing op o read directly to kN .
system activa gs to enable be calibrated er and , in all c operation , all mmer marks a m has reache shall be rele time exceed rmed simultan warm and mo ams and show a , whereby ide of fabrication numbers sh TIONS FRASTRUC S e is still not a give the requi not within 5 % pplied , the str not induce a le strength of ress losses ex e shall be a ollowing : cation of an i ation and ver ssing force m 5 % , the source eration .
y in kN or acc ating the gau the gauge p by an appr cases , at interv chucks and and/or nicks o ed the specifie eased in suc those provide neously at bot oist .
beam identi entical beams shall be indic all be painte CTURE achieved , the red prestress of the theore rand may be a stress befo the strand .
xceeding five pproved by initial tension rified by jack-p measured by e of error sha companied by uges shall ha pointer to mo roved author vals of not mo d jaws shall on their intern ed minimum c ch a manner ed for in the d th ends of the ification syste have identica cated on each d on the side strands shal .
tical elongatio temporarily o ore anchoring percent of the the Engineer of 5 kN , and pressure .
y the gauges ll be found an y a chart from ave appropria ove steadily a rity and re-ca ore than one y be inspected al working pa compressive and sequen esign .
e bed and betw em on the b al numbers .
beam .
e of the uppe ITEM : 331 Page 331-9 ll be jacked on when the overstressed g exceeding e theoretical r and as a d all further s and that nd corrected m which the ate by-pass and without alibrated as year .
d , cleaned , arts shall not strength for ce that the ween beam beam layout er flange of PR Pag 331 331 ECAST PRE ge 331-10 1.4.7 .4 1.4 .8 Tole B E D o S S B B B B S H C C S I P P S P D P B STRESSED C Each beam e erances Beam Dimens Exposed Beam Deviation ( from or designated Side Inserts Skew Angle V Bearing Plates Bearing Plates Bearing P Bearing Area Stirrup Bars Horizontal Alig Camber Centre of G Strand Gro ndividual Ten Position of Points for Strands Position of Device Position of T Bracing Insert DEPARTM CONCRETE end shall be id D D sions D W L m Ends m square skew ) H V s fr th Variation s s b b s s b late or d p b gnment d th d Gravity of oup and ndons Deflection Deflected D w f Lifting Temporary t lo STA MENT of TR BEAMS STRUCTU dentified by pa Depth ( flange , Depth ( overall Depth ( flanges Width ( web ) Length of Bea Horizontal Vertical spacing betwe rom centres he beam spacing betw bearing plate beams spacing betw bearing plates deviation from projection abo beam deviation from he centre line differential bet Deflection poi with respect to ongitudinal ANDARD S RANSPORT URES ainting on the web and fille ) s plus fillet ) m een centres o of inserts to ween the c es to the en ween the c s m plane ove theoretica m a straight line e of beam tween adjacen nts are to be o the middle o SPECIFICA TATION an approximate ets ) of insert and the end of centres of nds of the centres of al top of the e parallel to nt beams e concentric of the beam ATIONS nd INFRAS compass dire ± 6 + 12 m + 10 m + 6 mm ± 1 mm p greater than + 6 ± 10 mm p height ± 1 ± ± 6 ± 1 mm pe but not great ± 2 ± 2 1 mm p 1 mm per maximum of ± 6 ± 10 ± 15 ± 2 TRUCTUR ITEM : 33 January , 20 ection .
6 mm mm , - 6 mm mm , - 6 mm m , - 3 mm per m but n 20 mm 6 mm per m of bea 12 mm ± 3o 6 mm r m of spaci ter than 20 m 2 mm 20 mm per m of span m of span f 25 mm 6 mm 00 mm 50 mm 25 mm RE 31 15 not am ng m to DEPA PRECA Janua 331.4 331.4.9 331.4.9 ARTMENT AST PRESTR ary , 2015 .9 Handlin 9 .1 Ge .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 9 .2 Lift .1 STAN of TRANS RESSED CO ng , Storage an neral Beams shall day strength The beams s when the b supported a from the end If the finishe wood or rubb Beams dam rejection if th Beams shall The use of s Where beam submit the d Work .
Should the b blocks leave Contractor s ing Devices Lifting devic and/or as sp .1 Beams steel pla and AAS .2 Beams steel pla Beams .
.3 Lifting d by the E .4 Beams adequat NDARD SP PORTATIO NCRETE BE nd Shipping l not be shipp h. shall be hand eams are in at a distance d of the beam ed beam is to ber shall be u maged by impr heir load carry l be handled/e slings which re ms are propos detailed Work bearing surfac e a gap betwe shall grind to f ces shall be s pecified in the having a mas ate , as indica SHTO type IV having a mas ate , as indicat evices for be Engineer and s shall be sto tely braced an PECIFICAT ON and INF EAMS STRUCTURES ed until the co led and store their final po equal to the , or as indicat o be stored on sed between roper handling ying capacity o erected by two esult in a horiz sed to be hand k plan and sh ces of the pres een the surfac it .
supplied in th e Contract Do ss of more tha ated on the S V-Beams .
ss of more tha ted on the Sta eams having a shall be subm ored on block nd secured to TIONS FRASTRUC S oncrete in the ed so that the osition , excep depth of the ted on the sho n concrete su the beam and g , storage , tra or service life o or more cra zontal force c dled/erected hall obtain wr stressed beam ce of the bea he beam as i ocuments , and an 23 tonnes Standard Draw an 43 tonnes andard Drawin a mass of mo mitted for appro ks at least 1 prevent overt CTURE e beams has r points of supp pt that for tra beam meas op drawings .
upports then a d the support ansportation o has been red nes .
omponent into by a single cr ritten approva ms or finishing ring pad and indicated in S d ; and less than wing 331-1 , ty and less than ng 331-1 , typi ore than 60 to roval as part o 150 mm off turning .
P reached the s port shall be t ansporting th ured along its a softer mate .
or erection ar duced .
o the beam is rane , the Con al prior to con g of the concr bottom of the Standard Dra n 43 tonnes s ypical for the n 60 tonnes s ical for the Bu onnes must b of 331.3.1. solid level g ITEM : 331 Page 331-11 specified 28- the same as hey may be s centreline rial such as e subject to s prohibited .
tractor shall nducting the rete bearing e beam , the awing 331-1 shall have a DTI type I- shall have a ulb-Tee type be approved ground and PR Pag 331 331 ECAST PRE ge 331-12 1.5 MEASU .1 The acco 1.6 BASIS O .1 Pay pres .2 The STRESSED C REMENT FO Quantity to b ordance with t OF PAYMENT ment for Wor stressed conc Owner shall m DEPARTM CONCRETE OR PAYMENT be measured f this Item .
T rk under this rete beam , as make partial p STA MENT of TR BEAMS STRUCTU T for payment s Item shall in s identified und payment for be ANDARD S RANSPORT URES shall be the nu nclude a sepa der the Contra eams in accor SPECIFICA TATION an umber of bea arate Unit Pri act .
rdance with 90 ATIONS nd INFRAS ams supplied a ce for each s 08.7 .
TRUCTUR ITEM : 33 January , 20 and installed size of preca RE 31 15 in ast DEPA POST- Janua 332.1 332.2 ARTMENT -TENSIONIN ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite MATERIAL .1 All mate .2 Concre concret the Con .3 Grout recomm .1 Gro of 2 ext .2 Gro ten .1 .2 .4 Grout s the spe the follo .1 An form .2 A w .3 A m tes the .5 Reinfor .6 Post-te of AST the Con .7 Post-te prestre where anchore STAN of TRANS G SYSTEM TION em consists o S erials and pro ete shall be te requiremen ntract Docum shall be a mended by th out shall conf 25 - 30 secon tended workin out shall not sioning steel Chlorides sh When testi CSA A23.2- shall be dete shall also be s ecified proper owing propert approved ex mulation ; water cement minimum com ted at 28 Day e 7- and 28-da rcing steel sha nsioning stran M A416 and ntract Docume ensioning wire ssed concret cold-end def ed by wedges NDARD SP PORTATIO of the supply a ocedures sha supplied in nts of the Stru ents .
pre-package e manufactur form to ASTM nds as per AS ng time of 30 contain chlor .
hall be determ ng for nitrat -4B , Clauses ermined in ac supplied in ac rties as indica ties : xpanding ag ratio between mpressive stre ys in accorda ay requiremen all be supplie nds shall be o have an ultim ents .
e shall be a h te and shall m formation is s. PECIFICAT ON and INF STRUCTURES and installation ll be supplied accordance ucture into wh ed natural a rer .
M C1107 Grad STM C939 , at minutes .
rides or othe mined in acco tes the sam 5 , 6.1 , 6.2 a ccordance wit ccordance wit ated in the C ent additive n 0.40 and 0. ength of 20 M ance with CS nts when test ed in accordan of the 7-wire st mate tensile st high tensile s meet the requ used for an TIONS FRASTRUC S n of the comp d by the Contr with Item 30 hich it is bein aggregate gr de B or Grade t temperature r chemicals k rdance with C mpling proced and 6.3 , then th ASTM D43 th CSA A23.1 ontract Docu or approved 45 ; and Pa at 1 Day , SA A23.2 whe ted and cured nce with Item tress-relieved trength of 186 strength wire uirements AS choring purp CTURE plete post-tens ractor .
02.2 and sh ng incorporate rout , mixed , e C when test e extremes of known to be CSA A23.2-4B dure shall b n the nitrates 327 .
1 and shall be ments and a d pre-manufa 40 MPa at 7 en cured at 23 d at the 5°C a 304.2. d type and sha 60 MPa , unle specifically m STM A421 an poses , or typ sioning system all match th ed and/or as placed and ted at a fluid c f 5 °C and 25 deleterious t B. be in accord s in water , so e proportioned s a minimum ctured non-s Days and 60 3°C and shal and 25°C limit all meet the re ss otherwise manufactured nd shall be of pe WA where ITEM : 332 Page 332-1 m. e specified specified in cured as consistency °C , and an to the post- dance with o extracted , d to provide m shall have shrink grout 0 MPa when ll also meet ts .
equirements specified in d for use in f a type BA e ends are PO Pag 332 332 OST-TENSION ge 332-2 2.2 .8 Pos CAN .9 Anc .10 The grou 2.3 SUBMIT .1 The the d .2 All p qua .1 .2 .3 The prior .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .4 The wob ultim force .5 The as p appr .1 NING SYSTE t-tensioning N/CSA S6 .
horages and Contractor s ut tight .
TTALS Contractor sh design , in acc post-tensionin lified in accor The Contract The post-tens materials and the required p Contractor s r to commenc A load-strain steel ; The physical the materials A mill certifica Hardness tes Any other sta minimum spe .1 The man submission bble coefficien mate strength es and eccen post-tensioni post-tensionin roval , when re Samples sub of manufactu investigation .
DEPARTM M tendons sha couplings sha hall supply br hall be respon cordance with ng Work sha rdance with Ite tor shall provid sioning firm s d suitably train post-tensionin hall provide th cing post-tens curve certify properties an conform to th ate for anchor st result ( s ) for andard test d ecification req ufacturer sha shall also s nts and belt f of tendons , s tricities as det ing system is g steel , ancho equested by t bmitted shall b ure and tech STA MENT of TR STRUCTU all also be s all be supplie right or galvan nsible for the Item 956. ll be carried em 907. de the Engine hall show to t ned and expe ng system .
he following i ioning Work : ying physical nd chemical c he minimum s rages and X-r heat treated a data required uirements ind ll provide qua how the pro friction , for sh sequence and tailed in the C subject to ap ors , couplings he Engineer .
be accompani hnical inform ANDARD S RANSPORT URES supplied in a ed in accordan nized sheet s design of the out by a qua eer with the na the Engineer's rienced staff t nformational properties for omposition fo pecification re rays of each m anchorages ; to certify tha dicated for the ality control pro posed arrang heathing and d rate of tensi Contract Docu pproval by the s , sheath and ed by all nece ation , to ena SPECIFICA TATION an accordance w nce with CSA steel sheaths e post-tension alified Contra ame of the pro s satisfaction to supply and items , for rev r each mill he or bar steel an equirements i multi-strand si at all compone ese componen ocedures for r gement , loca couplings ; m ioning in orde uments .
e Engineer an grout compo essary certific able the En ATIONS nd INFRAS with CAN/CS A A23.1 .
fabricated an ing system an actor , or subc oposed post-t that he has t d supervise the view , a minim eat of bar ste nd/or wire stee ndicated ; ngle wire anc ents of syste nts ; and review .
ation and det manufacture , er to provide p nd samples o onents shall be cates , source gineer to ca TRUCTUR ITEM : 33 January , 20 SA G279 an nd placed to b nd shall subm contractor pre tensioning firm the Equipmen e installation o um of 40 Day eel and/or wir el verifying tha chorage ; m conforms t tails , indicatin size , type an post-tensionin f material suc e submitted fo of supply , dat arry out a fu RE 32 15 nd be mit e- m. nt , of ys re at to ng nd ng ch or te ull DEPA POST- Janua 332.3.5 332.4 332.4 332.4 ARTMENT -TENSIONIN ary , 2015 5 .2 Suf the .1 .6 All stra manufa .7 Each co of the m zero str .8 The shi high-str amount for use .
.9 The Co records .1 Dat .2 Ide .3 Ide .4 Req .5 Init .6 Ant .7 Ant .8 Any .10 Submitt CONSTRU .1 Genera .1 The spe .2 All .2 Post-te .1 All mill ste .2 The .3 Du sha STAN of TRANS G SYSTEM fficient test sp Owner to det With each certificate st correspondin nded wire sh acturer 's name oil shall be ac metal tag , the ress to ultimat ipping packag rength post-te t of corrosion .
ontractor at t s : te of tensionin ntification and ntification of j quired total lo ial tension ; ticipated and ticipated and y problems en tals are requir CTION al e Contractor ecifically direct concrete Wor nsioning Stee post-tensionin l scale , loose el and concre e use of post- ring all stages all be thorough NDARD SP PORTATIO pecimens may termine comp sample of p tating the ma ng reel numbe all be deliver e , the heat nu ccompanied b e ultimate stre te .
ge or form sha ensioning cabl inhibitor used he conclusion ng ; d number of e acking Equipm oad per strand actual gauge actual elonga ncountered .
red in accorda shall carry ou ted by the Eng rk shall be car el ng steel must rust , corrosio ete .
tensioning ste s of transport , hly protected PECIFICAT ON and INF STRUCTURES y be taken fro pliance with th post-tensioning nufacturer 's m er and the dat red in coils w mber and the by a stress-st ength , the dat all be clearly m le ; the type of d , including th n of the post elements ; ment ; d ; pressure for e ation ; and ance with any ut the Work a gineer .
rried out in ac t be free of de on or any fore eel having kin handling , sto against corro TIONS FRASTRUC S om each coil he requiremen g cable for minimum gua te of manufac with a metal ta e coil number .
train curve , sh te of manufac marked with a f care to be us he date when t-tensioning s each strand o y cross referen as indicated i ccordance with eleterious mat eign material nks , bends , nic orage and con sion , crushing CTURE of post-tensio nts of this spec testing , there aranteed ultim cture .
ag attached to howing , the co cture and the a statement th sed in handlin placed , safet shall provide or strand grou nced Item form in the Contra h Item 302. terials such a which may p cks or other d nstruction , all p g or other dam oning steel an cification .
e shall be s mate tensile s o each coil s orresponding e stress-strain hat the packa ng ; and the typ ty orders and a copy of th p ; ming part of th act Documents as oil , grease , prevent bondin efects is not p post-tensionin mage .
ITEM : 332 Page 332-3 nd tested by submitted a trength , the howing , the information curve from age contains pe , kind and instructions he following his Item .
s and/or as frost , paint , ng between permitted .
ng materials PO Pag 332 332 OST-TENSION ge 332-4 2.4.2 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 2.4 .3 Plac .1 .2 .3 .4 NING SYSTE All water use ( calcium hydr .1 All compr When wires the axis of the .1 The butto .2 No cold f Post-tensioni shall be con inhibitor place When post-te stressing and tensioning ste .1 Post-tens the use steel .
.1 Post- the re In tensioning not located w .1 Welded s cement of Cab Post-tensioni position and a Cables shall attached to th The Contract become punc during the pla Where the en devices shall anchoring de otherwise ind .1 Following material a DEPARTM M ed for flushing roxide ) in the ressed air use are to be but e wire .
ons shall deve forming proce ng steel whic tinuously pro ed in the ducts ensioning stee d grouting a eel , rust which sioning steel of a corrosio -tensioning st equirements p strands , one within the conc strand joints o bles ng cables sh all kinks and u be supporte he vertical stir tor shall repa ctured or cru acement of co nd of a post-t l be recessed evices will be dicated in the C g post-tension and finished f STA MENT of TR STRUCTU ducts shall c amount of 10 ed to blow out tton-headed , elop the minim ss shall be us h is installed otected agains s or applied to el is installed re completed h may form sh installed , tens on inhibitor in teel installed pertaining to c approved spl crete member or wire splices hall be place undulations sh ed on rigid m rrups without w ir the sheath shed at any oncrete .
tensioned ass d so that the at least 50 m Contract Docu ning , the rece flush .
ANDARD S RANSPORT URES contain either kg/m3 .
t ducts shall b the buttons s mum guarante sed that cause in members p st rust or oth o the steel in t in the ducts a d within 10 D hall not be cau sioned and g the duct foll but not grout corrosion prot lice per strand .
shall not be p d within a to hall be avoide metal supports welding .
to the satisfa time during t sembly will no ends of the p mm inside of uments .
esses shall be SPECIFICA TATION an quick lime ( ca be oil free .
shall be cold f eed ultimate te es indentation prior to placing her corrosion the duct , until after completio Days after th use for rejecti grouted within lowing installa ted within 10 tection and ru d shall be per permitted in a olerance of ± ed .
s not exceed action of the the placemen ot be covered post-tensionin the end surfa e filled with an ATIONS nd INFRAS alcium oxide ) formed symm ensile strength ns in the wire .
g and curing n , by means grouted .
on of concrete he installation on of the stee n 10 Days , sh ation of the p Days shall be st. rmitted provid any reel or coi ± 5 mm of th ding a spacin Engineer sho nt of cables a d by concrete , ng steel and ace of the me n approved ty TRUCTUR ITEM : 33 January , 20 ) or slaked lim metrically abo h of the wire .
of the concret of a corrosio e curing , and n of the pos el .
hall not requir post-tensionin e subject to a ed the splice l of strand .
heir theoretic ng of 1 m an ould the sheat and prior to o , the anchorin all parts of th embers , unles ype of dry pac RE 32 15 me ut te on if st- re ng all is cal nd th or ng he ss ck DEPA POST- Janua 332.4 332.4 332.4 332.4 332.4 ARTMENT -TENSIONIN ary , 2015 .4 Anchor .1 All typ .2 Anc con .3 The ass .4 Ben sha pla .5 Anc .5 Sheath .1 The .6 Tension .1 Hyd .2 All cer .1 .2 .7 Cold W .1 Co .2 The gro of 5 .8 Superv .1 The pos ten pla STAN of TRANS G SYSTEM rages and Cou post-tensioni e anchoring d chorages sha ncrete without e final unit sembly shall n nding stresse all not exceed te when 100 % chorages sha e sheath shall ning Equipme draulic jacks a gauges or lo rtified within th If a pressure diameter an shall be acco If a load cell the post-tens Weather Requi ld weather req e temperature outing and the 5°C for not les ision e Contracto st-tensioned/p sioning syste cing , stressing NDARD SP PORTATIO uplings ng steel shal device .
all be capab t distress to th compressive not exceed 21 es in the plate d the yield po % of the ultima all be provided l be provided ent and pumps of oad cells use he previous 12 e gauge is u nd each jack ompanied in t l is used it sh sioning force rements quirements fo e of the conc e temperature ss than 7 Day or shall ret prestressed co em being used g and grouting PECIFICAT ON and INF STRUCTURES l be secured le of transfe he concrete .
stress on t MPa .
es or assembl oint of the ma ate load is app d with suitable with air vents f sufficient cap ed for registe 2 months of th sed it shall h and its corre the field by a c hall be calibrat in the cables or grout shall b crete surround e of the surrou s after groutin tain personn oncrete const d , and this pe g. TIONS FRASTRUC S at the ends b erring the ma the concrete lies induced b aterial nor cau plied .
e ports for the s at all high po pacity shall be ering the stre he time of the have an accu sponding gau certified calibr ted and shall may be deter be the same a ding the shea unding concre ng .
nel on site ruction and w erson ( s ) shal CTURE by means of aximum post- directly und by the pull of use visible dis injection of gr oints in the cab e used for tens essing forces Work .
urate reading uge shall be ration chart .
have an indi rmined .
as for concrete ath shall not ete shall be m e with ext who is thoroug l be present an approved -tensioning fo derneath the the post-tens stortion in the rout .
bles .
sioning of cab shall be cal dial at least calibrated as cator by mea e as outlined be less than maintained at tensive expe ghly familiar w at all times d ITEM : 332 Page 332-5 permanent orce to the anchorage sioning steel e anchorage bles .
ibrated and 150 mm in s a unit and ans of which in 302.4 .
5°C during a minimum erience in with the post- during cable PO Pag 332 332 332 332 OST-TENSION ge 332-6 2.4 .9 Pos .1 .2 .3 2.4 .10 Grou .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 2.5 MEASU .1 The shal 2.6 BASIS O .1 Pay NING SYSTE t-Tensioning No stressing reached the s Prior to po post-tensionin Stress in the by elongation ut All cable duc stressing .
During freezin The grouting 0.7 MPa and full-scale read Standby flush sufficient cap All grout shal introduced int If a breakdow flushed out a REMENT FO supply and i ll be on a lum OF PAYMENT ment for Wor DEPARTM M by post-tens strength spec ost-tensioning ng steel is fre cables shall n based on the cts shall be fil ng weather , th g Equipment d the grouting ding of not mo hing Equipme pacity to flush ll pass throug to the grout p wn of the grou nd the entire c OR PAYMENT nstallation of p sum basis .
T rk under this I STA MENT of TR STRUCTU sioning shall b ified in the Co any memb e and unbond be measured e stress-strain lled with grou he grout shall t shall be g Equipment ore than 2 MP ent capable o out any partia h a screen w ump .
t pump occur cable duct reg T the complete tem shall be ANDARD S RANSPORT URES be undertake ontract Docum ber , the Co ded in the duc d with a dynam n characteristi ut in one cont be kept at a m capable of shall be furn Pa. of developing ally grouted ca ith 1.8 mm m rs during the g grouted .
e post-tension at the Lump S SPECIFICA TATION an en until all co ments .
ontractor sh ct. mometer accu ics of the wire tinuous opera minimum of 5 grouting at nished with a a pumping p able ducts sha maximum clear grouting opera ning system in Sum Price .
ATIONS nd INFRAS oncrete in the all demonst urate to ± 0.5 e. ation after the 5°C for not les a minimum a pressure ga pressure of 1 all be provided r opening size ation , the cab n accordance TRUCTUR ITEM : 33 January , 20 e Structure ha rate that th 5 % and verifie e completion o ss than 7 Days m pressure auge having .7 MPa and o d. e prior to bein le duct shall b e with this Ite RE 32 15 as he ed of s. of a of ng be m DEPA STEEL Janua Artic 335 .
335 .
335 .
335 .
ARTMENT L SUPERSTR ary , 2015 cle 1 DESCRIPT 2 MATERIAL .1 Gener .2 Structu .3 High T .4 Weldin .5 Stud S .6 Formw 3 SUBMITTA .1 Qualifi .2 Shop D .3 Weldin .4 Confor .5 Erectio 4 CONSTRU .1 Gener .2 Fabric .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9 .1 .1 .1 .1 .1 .1 .1 .1 .3 Fractu .1 .2 STAN of TRANS RUCTURE TION .............. LS .................. ral .................. ural Steel ...... Tensile Bolts .. ng Electrodes Shear Connect work ............... ALS ................. ications of Fab Drawings ...... ng Procedures rmance ......... on .................. CTION ......... ral .................. cation ............. 1 Fabrication 2 Workmans 3 Storage an 4 Shipping o 5 Camber ... 6 Girder Spl 7 Re-entrant 8 Thermal C 9 Fabrication 10 Pre-assem 11 Hole Drille 12 Welding G 13 Repair We 14 Blast Clea 15 Blast Clea 16 Surface Co 17 Facing of B re Control …… 1 General …… 2 Identificatio NDARD SP PORTATIO STR C ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ..................... tions ............. ...................... ...................... bricator .......... ...................... s .................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... n Standards ... ship and Finish nd Handling of of Material ..... ...................... ices ............... t Cuts ............
Cutting ............ n Tolerances .
mbly of Field C ed using Nume General .......... elding ............. ning - Painted ning - Unpaint ondition of Bo Bearing Surfac ………………… ………………… n ……………… PECIFICAT ON and INF RUCTURES ONTENTS ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ....................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... h ................... f Material ...... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ......................
Connections .... erically Contro ...................... ...................... d Areas .......... ted Areas ...... lted Parts ...... ces … ............ ………………… ………………… ………………… TIONS FRASTRUC ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... olled Machines ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ………………… ………………… ………………… CTURE ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ....................... ...................... ...................... ...................... s .................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ……………… .
………………… ………………… P Page .. 335-2 ... 335-2 ... 335-2 ... 335-3 .. 335-3 .. 335-3 .. 335-3 .. 335-3 .. 335-4 .. 335-4 .. 335-4 ... 335-5 ... 335-5 .. 335-5 ... 335-6 ... 335-6 ... 335-6 ... 335-6 .. 335-6 .. 335-6 .. 335-6 ... 335-6 ... 335-7 ... 335-7 ... 335-7 ... 335-7 .. 335-9 .. 335-9 .
335-10 ... 335-10 ... 335-10 ... 335-11 ... 335-11 .. 335-11 335-11 … 335-11 … 335-11 ITEM : 335 Page 335-1 STE Pag A 3 3 3 3 3 3 335 335 335 EEL SUPERS ge 335-2 Article 335.4 .4 Tra 335.4 .5 Sto 335.4 .6 Ere 335.4 .7 Qua 335.5 MEASU 335.6 BASIS F 5.1 DESCR .1 This deliv .2 The load 5.2 MATER 5.2 .1 Gen .1 .2 STRUCTURE ansportation ... orage ............. ection ............. .1 General .2 Erection .3 Erection .4 Falsewo .5 Field As .6 High Str ality Control .. .1 Respons .2 Inspectio .3 Owner ’ s .4 Samples .5 Transfer .6 Inspectio .7 Repair o .8 Standard UREMENT FO FOR PAYMEN IPTION s Item consist very and erect Bridge Supe ding and all W IALS neral All materials s The supply o necessary fo maintain stab DEPARTM E ...................... ...................... ...................... ..................... and Construc Methods and ork and Guys .
sembling of S rength Bolts ... ...................... sibility ............ on ................. s Representati s and Testing r of Heat Num on of Welds .. of Welds ........ ds of Acceptan R PAYMENT NT .................. ts of the supp tion of steel S rstructure has ork shall confo shall be suppl of any addition r the erection bility , shall be a STAN MENT of TR STRUCTURES CONTENTS ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ction Stresses d Equipment .. ...................... teel ............... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ve ................. ...................... bers .............. ...................... ...................... nce of Defects ..................... ...................... ply including b uperstructure s been design orm to this , ex ied by the Co nal structural n condition , in at the Contrac DARD SPE RANSPORT S ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ..................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... s .................... ...................... ....................... but not limited to the Work S ned according xcept as noted ntractor .
steel not sho ncluding false ctor ’ s own exp ECIFICATIO TATION an ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ....................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... d to , the fabr Site .
g to CAN/CSA d in the Contra own on the Co ework and gu pense .
ONS nd INFRAS Page ....... 335-1 ....... 335-12 ....... 335-12 ........ 335-12 ....... 335-13 ........ 335-13 ........ 335-14 ....... 335-14 ........ 335-14 ........ 335-14 ....... 335-14 ........ 335-14 ........ 335-15 ........ 335-15 ........ 335-15 ....... 335-16 ....... 335-1 ....... 335-1 ........ 335-1 ....... 335-1 rication , surfac A-S6 , with a C act Document ontract Docum uys that may TRUCTUR ITEM : 33 January , 201 e 1 2 2 2 3 3 4 4 4 4 4 4 5 5 5 6 7 7 7 7 ce preparatio CL625-ONT liv ts .
ments , deeme be required t RE 35 15 n , ve ed to DEPA STEEL Janua 335.2 335.2 335.2 335.2 335.2 ARTMENT L SUPERSTR ary , 2015 .2 Structu .1 All me Co A58 .1 .2 All CA .3 Sam G4 .4 All .5 Stru G4 ship .6 All con .3 High Te .1 Hig the Typ .2 Nut ( su .3 A32 .4 Welding .1 Ele .2 Fille .3 Dep min .4 The 5 o .5 Stud Sh .1 Stu CA .6 Formwo .1 All STAN of TRANS RUCTURE ral Steel structural stee eet the requir rrosion Resis 88 when Cha This materia tested at min tee sections AN/CSA G40.2 mple prepara 0.20. steel shall be uctural shape 0.21 or CAN/ pped in bundl anchor and a nform to CAN/ ensile Bolts gh tensile bolts Contract Do pe 3 for unpain ts shall be G itable ) for unp 25 nuts and b g Electrodes ectrodes shall er metal shall posited weld nus 30°C .
e selection , su f CAN/CSA W hear Connecto ud shear conn AN/CSA W59 .
ork formwork sha NDARD SP PORTATIO STR el with the ex rements of C tant Structura rpy Impact En al shall posses nus 30°C as e s , channels , 21 M Grade 35 ation and testi delivered in a s and angles /CSA G40.20 es and tagged anchor bolt as /CSA G40.21 s , nuts and w cuments .
AST nted corrosion Grade A563 D painted applica olts shall be s conform to CA be in accorda metal shall upply and stor W59-M. ors nectors shall b all be carried o PECIFICAT ON and INF RUCTURES xception of sec CAN/CSA G4 al Steel ” with nergy test dem ss a minimum evidenced by r rolled beam 50A or ASTM ing shall be i accordance wi shall be indiv , when shape d in bundles .
ssemblies inc Grade 350A .
washers shall c TM A325M bo n-resistant ste DH for galvan ations .
shipped togeth AN/CSA W48 ance with CAN have a min rage of electro be of a headed out in accorda TIONS FRASTRUC condary mem 0.21 Grade “ Improved Lo monstrates ad m Charpy V No rolling mill cer and angle s A588 .
in accordance ith CAN/CSA vidually colour es under 150 cluding fabrica conform to AS olts shall be eel .
nized applicat her as an asse 8 .
N/CSA W59 , T nimum Char odes and flux d stud type , in nce with Item CTURE mbers compris 350 AT - Ca ow Temperatu dequate tough otch impact e rtificates .
shapes and e with the re G40.20 .
r marked in ac mm in cross ated sections , STM A325M o galvanized Ty ions and C3 embly .
Table 5-1. rpy Impact E xes shall be in n accordance 958 .
P sed of rolled s ategory 3 , “ A ure Properties hness .
energy of 27 J pintles shall quirements o ccordance with s sectional dim , nuts and wa or A490M , as ype I for pain ( recommend Energy of 27 n accordance e with the requ ITEM : 335 Page 335-3 shapes shall Atmospheric s ” or ASTM Joules when conform to of CAN/CSA h CAN/CSA mension are ashers shall specified in nted steel or ed ) or DH3 7 Joules at with Clause uirements of STE Pag 335 335 335 335 EEL SUPERS ge 335-4 5.3 SUBMIT 5.3 .1 Qua .1 5.3 .2 Sho .1 5.3.2 .2 STRUCTURE TTALS alifications of F Within 12 Da submit the fol .1 Documen fabricator .2 Documen certified t op Drawings The Contract limited to , the .1 The Con copies of for review .1 For s must revie .2 The Con five ( 5 ) w .3 After the transpare revisions .4 No fabric the Cont .5 The revie Contracto .6 All shop such doc Shop Details .1 Shop dra .1 Full d .1 T s d .2 All ne .3 Ident DEPARTM E Fabricator ays after Tend llowing : ntation from r has been ce ntation from th to the requirem tor shall subm e following add ntractor shall f the shop dra w. steel delivere t submit certi ew 48 hours p ntractor shall weeks prior to e Engineer 's encies to the have been m cation shall be ractor .
ew of the Co or of her/his re drawings , er cuments shall awings shall p detail dimens These dimen shrinkage , ca differ from init ecessary spe tification of ar STAN MENT of TR STRUCTURES der Closing an the Canadian rtified with the he Canadian ments of CAN mit shop draw ditional require provide shop awings and th ed to the fabr ified mill test prior to cutting arrange to ha the start of fa review , the C e Engineer fo made .
e undertaken ontractor 's sh esponsibility f rection drawin be stamped provide shop d ions and size sions shall m amber and an tial dimension ecifications for reas requiring DARD SPE RANSPORT nd prior to Aw n Institute of e CISC Steel B Welding Bure /CSA W47.1 , wings in acco ements : p drawings of hree ( 3 ) copie rication shop reports and g steel or usin ave the shop abrication .
Contractor sh or his/her rec until the Eng hop drawings for the correct ngs , welding and signed b details , which es of all comp make allowan ny other effec ns .
r the materials g special surfa ECIFICATIO TATION an ward of the C f Steel Const Bridge Certific eau indicating Division 1 or ordance with f all metal Wo es of certified during produ nesting/cuttin ng the steel in p drawings in hall submit o cords of the gineer has ret s by the Eng tness of his/he procedures , by a Professio h includes : ponents and p nce for chan cts which ca s to be used ; ace treatment ONS nd INFRAS Contract , the C truction indica cation .
g the fabricatio 2 .
Item 956 and ork and shall mill reports to uction Work , ng bills to the n production .
the hands o one complete as-built draw turned the sho gineer , shall n er drawings .
design briefs onal Engineer parts of the St ges in shape use finished t ; TRUCTUR ITEM : 33 January , 201 Contractor sha ating the ste on shop is ful d with , but n submit six ( 6 o the Enginee the Contracto e Engineer fo of the Enginee set of plast wings , after a op drawings t not relieve th s , and all othe r. tructure ; e due to we dimensions t RE 35 15 all el lly ot 6 ) er or or er tic all to he er ld to DEPA STEEL Janua 335.3 .
335.3 .
335.3 335.3 335.3 ARTMENT L SUPERSTR ary , 2015 2.2.1 2 .3 Sym the .3 Welding .1 The she wee .1 .4 Conform .1 The fab 335 .5 Erection .1 The ere in t ere .2 The wee Eng STAN of TRANS RUCTURE .4 Identific .5 Bolt inst .6 Details o mbols for wel e provisions of g Procedures e Contractor s eets , conform eks in advanc The followin .1 The weld if require tempera electrica .1 All g cert Ene CAN .1 .2 The met .3 Measure residual .4 The prop .5 The weld mance e Contractor rication , three 5.2.5.1. n e Contractor ection procedu the various s ection he prop e whole of th eks before th gineer .
NDARD SP PORTATIO STR ation of fractu tallation requi of all welds .
lding and non f CAN/CSA W shall submit th ming to CAN/C ce of fabricatio ng shall be inc ding process ed , joint conf atures if requi al stick-out and groove welds ified by the C ergy of 27 Jou N/CSA W47.1 This shall inc ( CVN ) impac specimens .
thods that sha es which sha stresses .
posed method ding Equipme shall submit t e ( 3 ) copies o shall , prior to ure drawings , stages of ere oses to use .
his informatio e Work of ere PECIFICAT ON and INF RUCTURES ure critical an rements ; and n-destructive t W59 .
he welding pr CSA W59 an on and review cluded , but no to be used , th figurations , nu red , sequenc d polarity , and shall be con Canadian Wel les at minus 3 , Annex E. clude the test ct test specim all be used for all be taken t ds and sequen ent used shall to the Engine of a letter ce o commencin together with ction and sha n shall be su ection is to co TIONS FRASTRUC d primary ten d test on shop rocedure spec nd CAN/CSA must be obta ot limited to ; he position of umber and si ce of passes , d methods of s nsidered as pr lding Bureau 30°C , in accor ting of five su mens and fiv r the preparati to control the nce of assem be calibrated eer , at least tw rtifying that th g the Work o complete cal all inform the ubmitted to th ommence an CTURE nsion member drawings sha cifications and W47-1 , to th ained before c welding , filler ze of passes current , rate storing consum rimary tension to provide a rdance with th ubsurface wel ve subsurface on of the edge e effects of d bling .
as stated in s wo ( 2 ) weeks he stud shea of erection , fu lculations of s e Engineer fu he Engineer d shall be sta P rs and compo all be in acco d welding proc he Engineer a commencing th metal , flux , sh s , preheat and of pass , ele mables .
n members a minimum Cha he testing requ d metal Char e HAZ CVN es .
distortion , shr section AWS D s in advance ar connectors urnish the En stresses in the ully as to the for review , a amped by a P ITEM : 335 Page 335-5 onent parts ; rdance with cedure data at least two he Work .
hielding gas d inter-pass ctrode size , and shall be arpy Impact uirements of rpy V Notch test impact rinkage and D1.5 .
of the steel conform to ngineer with e steelworks e method of at least four Professional STE Pag 335 335 335 335 335 335 335 335 335 EEL SUPERS ge 335-6 5.3 .6 Sub spec 5.4 CONST 5.4 .1 Gen .1 .2 5.4 .2 Fab 5.4.2 .1 5.4.2 .2 5.4.2 .3 5.4.2 .4 5.4.2 .5 STRUCTURE mittals are re cific phase of RUCTION neral The Contract specifically di The Contract in production rication Fabrication S .1 The fabr Specifica welding s Workmanship .1 All edges view or w mm minim Storage and H .1 Structura elsewher kept free .2 Structura corrosion .3 Long me .4 Plates da Shipping of M .1 Damage Camber .1 All plate vertical c Documen .1 The CAN DEPARTM E equired for th the Work bein tor shall carry rected by the tor shall notify to allow for th Standards rication of a ation , AWS D shall conform p and Finish s of all memb weather in the mum radius b Handling of M al materials , e re above the g from dirt and al materials , ei n. mbers shall b amaged due to Material ed members s girders shall curve as ma nts .
maximum /CSA W59 , ex STAN MENT of TR STRUCTURES his Item that ng undertaken y out the Wo Engineer .
y the Enginee he scheduling all structural D1.5 Bridge W to CAN/CSA W bers and plate e finished asse y grinding , pri Material either plain or ground upon p other foreign ither plain or f e supported to o handling tec hall be repaire be cambered ay be require error in gi xcept that the DARD SPE RANSPORT are containe n , separate an rk as indicate r a minimum g of QA testing steel shall c Welding Code W59 and CAN es , whether ro embly , and ar or to blast cle fabricated , s platforms , skip matter .
fabricated , sha o prevent yield chniques or de ed or replaced d to compensa ed by the pr rder cambe e error shall no ECIFICATIO TATION an ed within the nd distinct to t ed in the Con of 48 hours p g. conform to t e and to CAN N/CSA W47.1 olled , cut or s re to be coate eaning and/or hall be stored ps or other su all be protecte ding of the ma evices may be d as required ate for full de rofile grade r shall con ot exceed ± 2 ONS nd INFRAS sections ap those listed h ntract Docum prior to any pl the AASHTO N/CSA W59 , .
heared , that a ed , shall be ro fit up .
d at the fabric uitable suppor ed as far as p aterial .
e subject to re by the Engine ead load defle as shown in nform to C 0 mm .
TRUCTUR ITEM : 33 January , 201 plicable to th ere .
ents and/or a ate being use O Constructio except that a are exposed t ounded to a 1 cator ’ s shop o rts and shall b practicable fro ejection .
eer .
ections and th n the Contra lause 5.8 o RE 35 15 he as ed on all to .5 or be m he act of DEPA STEEL Janua 335.4.2 335.4.2 335.4.2 335.4.2 335.4 .
335.4 .
ARTMENT L SUPERSTR ary , 2015 2.5 .2 2 .6 Gir .1 .2 2 .7 Re- .1 2 .8 The .1 .2 .3 2 .9 Fab 2.9 .1 STAN of TRANS RUCTURE Rolled sectio shall have th due to cuttin der Splices The location .1 Addition allowed .
The location .1 No othe Enginee .2 Welded .3 The loca Contract .4 Should weld sp the Engi .5 The loca shall be -entrant Cuts A fillet of no cuts , and the ermal Cutting Steel may be guide .
Flame cuttin shall be mad The quality a brication Tole Structural M .1 Structur toleranc by more .2 A variat length o NDARD SP PORTATIO STR ons may be h he required c g , welding , an s of the field b al field splice .
s of the shop- er shop-welde er .
field splices o ations of the m t Documents .
the Contracto lices in the fla ineer .
ation of comp subject to the ot less than 2 e fillet shall be e flame-cut , p g by hand sha de smooth by and repair of t erances Members ral members ces of CAN/C e than 1/1000 tion of not m of members w PECIFICAT ON and INF RUCTURES heat cambered amber cut int nd heat-curvin bolted main gi es or the reloc -welded splice d splices sha of the main gir main girder sh or require add anges , these plete penetra e approval of t 5 mm radius e formed befor provided a sm all be done on planing , chipp the cut edges consisting of SA G40.20 , e of the length ore than 1 m which have bo TIONS FRASTRUC d using an ap to the web wi ng .
irder splices a cation of the es are shown all be permitte rders shall not hop welded sp ditional shop shall only be ation shop we the Engineer .
shall be prov re the cuts are mooth surface nly when appr ping or grindin shall conform a single rolle except that co h between poi mm from the oth ends finish CTURE pproved proce ith suitable al are shown in th main bolted in the Contrac ed without prio t be allowed .
plices for the f welded com permitted wit elded groove .
vided at the j e made .
is secured by roved by the E ng .
m to Clause 5 ed shape sha olumns shall ints of lateral detailed leng hed for contac P edure , while p lowance for c he Contract D field splices s ct Documents or written app flanges are sh plete penetra th the written welds for the junctions of a y the use of a Engineer , and of CAN/CSA all meet the s not deviate fr support .
gth is permis ct bearing .
ITEM : 335 Page 335-7 plate girders camber loss Documents .
shall not be s. proval of the hown on the ation groove approval of e web plate all re-entrant mechanical the surface W59 .
straightness rom straight sible in the STE Pag 335 335 335 335 EEL SUPERS ge 335-8 5.4.2.9.1 5.4.2.9 5.4.2.9 5.4.2.9 STRUCTURE .3 Othe of no for m .2 Abutting .1 Whe conta .1 T b r .2 At joi betw .3 Bearing P .1 Bear .1 R p .2 Rolle by p bear .3 Rolle surfa and a .4 Fabricate .1 Toler .2 Dime presc .3 Built- CAN .4 Bear with .1 C .5 All in 25 % .1 C .6 Use appr DEPARTM E er members w ot more than 2 members over Joints n compressio act faces sha The complete bearing , defin remainder sha ints where loa ween main me Plates ring plates sh Rolled steel b planing provid ed steel beari ressing or by ing .
ed steel beari aces , except f are grouted to ed Componen rances for we ensional tole cribed in Clau -up , bolted s /CSA G40.20 ring stiffeners a maximum s Contact is def ntermediate s , and a maxim Contact is def of force to oved by the E STAN MENT of TR STRUCTURES without finishe 2 mm for mem r 10 m in leng on members ll be milled or ed joint shall ed as not mo all not exceed ads are not tra mbers shall n all meet the fo bearing plate ded that a sat ing plates ove y planing on ng plates ove for those surf o ensure full b nts elded compon rances of w uses 5.8 and structural me 0 for rolled wid s fitted to bea separation of fined as a gap tiffeners shal mum separati fined as a gap move flange Engineer .
DARD SPE RANSPORT ed ends may h mbers 10 m o gth .
are butted to r saw-cut .
have at leas ore than 0.5 m 1 mm .
ansferred in b not exceed 10 ollowing requ es 50 mm or tisfactory cont er 50 mm bu all bearing s er 100 mm in faces which a bearing .
nents shall co welded structu 12.5.3 of CAN embers shall de flanged sh r shall have a 1 mm over th p less than 0. l be fitted hav on of 1 mm .
p less than 0. es inward to ECIFICATIO TATION an have a variat or less in leng ogether to tra st 75 % of the mm separation bearing , the no mm .
uirements : less in thick tact bearing i t not over 10 surface to ob thickness sh are in contac onform to Clau ural member N/CSA W59 .
satisfy the hapes .
a minimum be he remaining .25 mm .
ving a minim .25 mm .
o achieve fit ONS nd INFRAS tion from the d gth , or not mo ansmit loads e entire conta n , and the se ominal dimen kness may be s obtained .
00 mm may b btain a satisf hall be planed ct with concre use 5.4 of CA rs shall conf straightness earing contac area .
um bearing c up tolerance TRUCTUR ITEM : 33 January , 201 detailed lengt ore than 4 m in bearing , th act area in fu eparation of th sion of the ga e used witho be straightene factory conta d on all bearin ete foundation AN/CSA W59 .
form to thos tolerances o ct area of 75 % contact area o e shall be a RE 35 15 th m he ull he ap ut ed ct ng ns .
se of % , of as DEPA STEEL Janua 335.4.2 335.4.2 335.4.2 ARTMENT L SUPERSTR ary , 2015 2 .10 Pre 2.10 .1 2 .11 Hol .1 .2 .3 STAN of TRANS RUCTURE e-assembly of Shop Trial A .1 Girders verify the .2 Compon the Brid required .3 Holes in size whi .1 The ream .2 Drift disto .3 If re .4 Where a Bridge , t the prec .5 Trial ass .1 Eac of ho .2 The prio .1 le Drilled usin As an altern numerically c be demonstr be made .
If the check required .
If the check repaired in a .1 Further demons NDARD SP PORTATIO STR f Field Connec Assembly and other ma e field-splices nents shall be dge , as define d to offset the e n the webs an le in assembly components ming or drilling ting done duri ort the steel .
quired , reamin a number of s the second an ceding assemb semblies are r ch assembly s oles , and fit-u Engineer sh r to drilling , re Corrective W the Engineer g Numerically ative to the a controlled dril rated by a ch k assembly is k assembly is a manner acce check asse trate that the PECIFICAT ON and INF RUCTURES ctions ain componen .
e supported in ed in the Con effects of dea nd flanges of m y. s shall be pi g. ing assembly ng shall be us sequential ass nd subsequen bly to provide required when hall be checke p of welded jo all be given t eaming or cutti Work , if necess .
y Controlled M bove trial ass ling or using a eck assembly s satisfactory s unsatisfacto eptable to the mblies shall required accu TIONS FRASTRUC ts shall be pre n a manner co ntract Docum ad-load deflect main compon inned and fir shall only be sed to enlarge semblies are nt assemblies continuity of a n the field-splic ed by the fabr oints and mille the opportunit ing .
sary , shall be Machines sembly , when a suitable tem y consisting o y , further ass ory for any re Engineer .
be required uracy of fit-up CTURE e-assembled onsistent with ments , with all tion .
ents shall be rmly drawn t sufficient to a e holes .
required beca shall include alignment .
ces are bolted ricator for cam ed surfaces .
ty to verify al carried out in the bolt holes mplate , the acc of the first com semblies of li eason , the W d as specifie has been ach P in the shop to the finished g lowance for a reamed or dr ogether by b align the holes ause of the le at least one s d. mber , alignmen ignment and n a manner ac s have been p curacy of the mponents of e ike compone Work shall be ed by the E hieved .
ITEM : 335 Page 335-9 o prepare or geometry of any camber rilled to final bolts before s and not to ength of the section from nt , accuracy dimensions cceptable to prepared by drilling may each type to nts are not e redone or Engineer to STE Pag 335 335 335 EEL SUPERS ge 335-10 5.4.2 .12 5.4.2 .13 5.4.2 .14 .
STRUCTURE Welding Gen .1 All weldin requirem .1 The W59 comp .2 Groo W59 when .3 All gr to the .4 No fie Repair Weldin .1 All weldin 10.23 , pe .2 Repair of Blast Cleanin .1 All steel Painting C .2 All oil and requirem started .
.3 The blas surface p .4 The Con manufact cleaning .1 No b .5 No blast .6 The blast .7 Under no .8 If the bla after the s .9 The Con blast clea 10 All surfac DEPARTM E eral ng , including ents of CAN/C electroslag a ) shall not be ponents of me ove weld proc and CWB ce n tested at mi roove welds i e welding of f eld groove we ng ng corrections ertaining to fra f base metal b g - Painted Ar that is to be Council '' spec d grease and ents of SSPC sting medium profile accepta ntractor shall turer stating th is acceptable last cleaning s cleaning shall t cleaned surfa o circumstance ast cleaned ar steel has dried ntractor shall aning operatio ces to be paint STAN MENT of TR STRUCTURES Workmanshi CSA W59 , exc and electroga e used for we embers subje cedures shall ertified to pro nus 30°C per n web and fla flanges to the elds shall be a s and repairs acture critical m by welding , at reas painted shall cification SSPC any other su C SP1 `` Solve ( silica sand , able to the ma supply the O hat the propos .
shall commen l be carried ou aces shall be es are blast cl reas become d. ensure that a on .
ted shall be fr DARD SPE RANSPORT p , technique , cept where mo as welding p elding quench ect to tension be pre-qualif ovide a minim r CAN/CSA W ange plates s e web plates .
allowed .
shall be perfo members .
the producing be blast clea C SP10 No .
1 rface contami ent Cleaning '' , grit or shot ) nufacturer of t Owner with a sed method , E nce until the O ut when the su coated with in leaned surface damp and/o all applicable ee from any o ECIFICATIO TATION an , qualification odified by the processes ( s hed and temp stress or stre fied welds in mum Charpy I W47.1 Annex hall be done ormed accord g mill shall not aned to confo 0 `` Near-White ination shall b , before any o used shall be the inorganic a letter from Equipment an Owner is in pos urfaces of the norganic zinc es to be left u r rusted , thes safety preca or all contamin ONS nd INFRAS , etc. , shall c e following con ee Clause 5 pered steels n ess reversal .
accordance w mpact Energ E. to the individu ding to CAN/C t be permitted orm to `` The S e Blast Cleani be removed a other surface e of a size th zinc coating b the inorgani nd materials us ssession of th steel are dam before any ru uncoated over se areas shal utions are ta nants .
TRUCTUR ITEM : 33 January , 201 conform to th nditions ; 5 of CAN/CS nor for weldin with CAN/CS gy of 27 Joule ual plates prio CSA S6 , claus .
Steel Structure ing '' .
according to th e preparation hat produces being used .
ic zinc coatin sed in the bla his letter .
mp .
sting occurs .
night .
ll be re-blaste ken during th RE 35 15 he SA ng SA es or se es he is a ng ast ed he DEPA STEEL Janua 335.4.2 335.4.2 335.4 .
335.4 335.4.3 335.4.3 335.4 ARTMENT L SUPERSTR ary , 2015 2 .15 Bla .1 .2 2 .16 Sur .1 .2 2 .17 Fac .1 .2 .3 Fracture 3 .1 Ge .1 .2 3 .2 Ide .1 .4 Transp .1 A s tie- .2 Prim .3 Prim dam STAN of TRANS RUCTURE ast Cleaning - All exposed Painting Cou The blast c structural ste completed , p marks or oth rface Conditio All bolted co bolts .
The surface joints shall b cing of Bearin The surface Surfaces of with CAN/CS .1 Outside .2 The bea e Control neral All bridge m shapes , sha 10.23 .
Attachments welded to th entification For each co heat numbe ortation shipping plan -down points f mary membe mary membe mage or place NDARD SP PORTATIO STR Unpainted Ar steel surface uncil '' specifica cleaning shall eel , but may provided the her foreign ma on of Bolted Pa onnections ar e condition for be blast cleane ng Surfaces finish of beari flanges which SA W59 .
this area 2 m aring surface members with all be treated s having a le he members s omponent of a r of the mater shall be prov for primary m rs shall be sh ers shall be e excessive s PECIFICAT ON and INF RUCTURES eas es shall be b ation SSPC S preferably b be carried o Contractor cl aterial after the arts re friction type r bolted frictio ed and coated ing and base h are in conta mm deviation shall be perp h the except d as fracture ength of mor shall be treate a fracture criti rial and its co vided by the members durin hipped upright loaded , supp stress on the m TIONS FRASTRUC blast cleaned SP6 “ Commerc be carried ou out in the sho eans the stee e completion o e connections on connection d with Class B plates shall be act with beari from flat is ac pendicular to t tion of secon critical in ac re than 100 ed as part of t ical member , orresponding Contractor in ng transportat t , unless othe ported , and member .
CTURE to conform t cial Blast Clea ut after the c op after all fa el work of all of the erection s and are de ns for painted B inorganic zin e in accordan ng sole plate cceptable .
the web and b ndary membe ccordance wit mm in the d the member .
records are mill test certif ndicating supp tion to the Wo erwise approv unloaded in P to `` The Stee aning ” .
complete erec abrication wor cutting oil , d n. esigned for sta d Structures nc silicate coa nce with CAN/ s shall be in bearing stiffen ers comprise th CAN/CSA direction of t to be kept to ficate .
port , lateral b ork Site .
ved by the En a manner th ITEM : 335 Page 335-11 l Structures ction of the rk has been dirt , erection andard size with coated ating .
CSA S6 .
accordance ners .
ed of rolled S6 , clause ension and identify the bracing , and ngineer .
hat will not STE Pag 335 335 335 335 EEL SUPERS ge 335-12 5.4.4 .4 .5 5.4 .5 Stor .1 .2 .3 5.4 .6 Erec 5.4.6 .1 STRUCTURE Any damage Engineer .
All fastener c the content c rage Fabricated m supports and Primary mem All members ction General .1 The erec of erectio members .1 Deta .2 Calcu durin .2 The Con supplies .3 The Cont AASHTO AASHTO .4 Compone bracing , g .5 Additiona capacitie .6 All falsew Bridge sh .1 The C for te .7 All tempo steelwork .8 Any add Documen the Cont .9 The co CAN/CSA DEPARTM E d members s components clearly labelled material shall d shall be kep mbers shall be shall be store tion procedure on including s , and the loca ils of tempora ulations shall ng erection .
ntractor shall under the Con tractor shall e O Load and R O Bridge Cons ents shall be guys or stiffen al permanent s are not exce work , includin hall be design Contractor sh emporary purp orary falsewor ks following co ditional bracin nts , to mainta ractor at a tim mpany unde A W47.1 .
STAN MENT of TR STRUCTURES shall be repai shall be ship d on the outs be stored ab t clean from d e stored uprig ed in a manne e drawings an the sequenc ation and lifting ary bracing and be provided t erect the wh ntract .
erect the struc Resistance Fa struction Spec lifted and pl ning devices s material may eeded during g necessary ned , furnished all not use an poses during e rk towers , cab omplete erecti ng or guys ain the stabilit me that is mut ertaking fiel DARD SPE RANSPORT red or replac ped and stor ide .
bove ground dirt and other ght and braced er to prevent nd calculations ce of erection g capacities o d bents to be to show the m hole of the fa ctural steel in ctor Design ( ifications , and laced , using o that they are y be provided , erection .
foundations , d , maintained ny of the mate erection , unles bles , dampers ion of the stee required , oth ty for the cons tually suitable d-welding s ECIFICATIO TATION an ced by the Co red in sealed on platforms r foreign matte d to ensure s permanent d s shall fully illu n , the weight of the cranes u used during c members and abricated stru accordance w LRFD ) Bridge d CAN/CSA S appropriate li e at no time o , if approved , required for t d and removed erial intended f ss such use is s , etc. , shall b elworks .
her than thos struction stag e to the Engin shall be ce ONS nd INFRAS ontractor as r , watertight c , blocking or er .
stability .
amage .
ustrate the pro ts and lifting used to lift the construction s supports are ctural steel W with the requi e Design Spe S6 .
ifting Equipm overloaded or to ensure th the safe cons d by the Cont for use in the s approved .
be removed fro se shown in ge shall only b neer and the C ertified to D TRUCTUR ITEM : 33 January , 201 required by th containers wit other suitab oposed metho points of th em .
hall be shown not overloade Work which h irements of th ecifications , th ent , tempora unstable .
at the membe struction of th tractor .
finished Bridg om the erecte n the Contra be removed b Contractor .
Division 1 o RE 35 15 he th le od he n. ed he he he ry er he ge ed ct by of DEPA STEEL Janua 335.4 .
335.4.6 335.4.6 ARTMENT L SUPERSTR ary , 2015 6.1 .10 .11 .12 6 .2 Ere .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 6 .3 Ere .1 .2 .3 .4 STAN of TRANS RUCTURE Tack welds unless they The use of Documents , The Substru the Contract ection and Con The Contrac stresses and erection proc The Contrac these calcula .1 Review maintain Under no cir the basic allo .1 All allow Design C Release of te circumstance The method Engineer , bu the safety of the Work in f .1 The Co obtained ection Method The Contrac and properly The Contrac to carry out t The Enginee satisfy himse Equipment th .1 The insp Contract methods All structura impact loadin NDARD SP PORTATIO STR used for att subsequently f tack welds , shall not be cture shall be t Documents , nstruction Stre ctor shall assu d shall provid cedure .
ctor shall not c ations , along w of these calcu n overall stabil rcumstances owable stress wable stresses Code or the A emporary sup es shall a sud of erection p ut such autho f the propose full accordanc ontractor shall d. s and Equipm ctor shall ensu y maintained a ctor shall ensu the required s er shall have elf that such hat is , in his/h pection of the tor of her/his s and Equipm l steelworks s ngs to any ste PECIFICAT ON and INF RUCTURES tachments , or y become par which are made on any e protected pri against rust-s esses ume full respo de any addit commence ere with erection s ulations shall lity of the stee may stresses ses , except wit s shall be bas AASHTO LRFD pports or temp dden release b proposed to b orization shall ed method of ce with the Co l not start an ment ure that all cr at all times dur ure that all cra teel erection .
the right to in Equipment is her opinion , in e erection Equ primary respo ent .
shall be hand eel member or TIONS FRASTRUC r for any oth rt of welds de not part of y portion of th ior to erection staining by wa onsibility to ve tional steel a ection until the stresses and e not relieve the el in the constr s occurring in th the express sed upon CA D Bridge Desi porary membe be permissible be used shall not relieve th erection , or o ontract .
ny erection o ranes , rigging ring the period anes , rigging a nspect all Equ of good qual any way fault uipment by the onsibility for th dled in such a r Substructure CTURE her purpose , etailed in the C the welds d e girders .
, under a sep ater run off from erify all Bridge nd/or bracing e Engineer ha erection meth e Contractor o ruction phase the members s permission o AN/CSA S6 C ign Specificat ers , etc .
must e. be subject to he Contractor of the Equipm operation bef and Equipme d of the Work .
and Equipmen uipment to be lity , and he m ty .
e Engineer sh he safety and a manner , so e component .
P are expressly Contract Docu detailed in th arate Item as m the Bridge .
components g , if required , as received an hods .
of her/his resp .
s of the Struct of the Enginee Canadian High ions .
be gradual , an o the authoriz r of any respo ment , or from c fore this auth ent are in goo .
nt is of adequa e used for the may forbid the hall in no way d adequacy of o as to preve ITEM : 335 Page 335-13 y forbidden uments .
he Contract specified in .
for erection for his/her nd reviewed ponsibility to ture exceed er .
hway Bridge nd under no zation of the onsibility for carrying out horization is od condition ate capacity e erection to e use of any y relieve the f all erection ent shock or STE Pag 335 335 335 335 335 335 335 EEL SUPERS ge 335-14 5.4.6.3 5.4.6 .4 5.4.6 .5 5.4.6 .6 5.4 .7 Qua 5.4.7 .1 5.4.7 .2 STRUCTURE .5 Slings an type whic Falsework an .1 The Con all falsew .2 Falsewor designed come upo .3 Falsewor Field Assemb .1 Insofar as a membe further m .2 Cylindrica to obtain .3 Shop rea High Strength .1 High stre Structura Council specificat .2 The `` turn .1 The conn Docu .3 The Con additiona ality Control Responsibility .1 It is the maintain testing by obligation Inspection .1 Inspectio preparati DEPARTM E nd other lifting ch will not dam nd Guys tractor shall c work and guys rk shall includ d and substan on it .
rk shall be car bling of Steel s the cantileve er to the part embers are p al erection pin an accurate m amed holes sh h Bolts ength bolts sh al Joints using on Bolted S tions with late n-of-the-nut '' m Contractor sh nections for uments .
ntractor shall al test requirem y Contractor 's the Work in s y the Enginee ns .
n by the En on , fabrication STAN MENT of TR STRUCTURES apparatus us mage shop pri construct , erec required for th de all tempor ntially constru rried out in acc er method of e t of the Struc ut in place .
ns for use in sh matching of co hall not be re-r hall be install g ASTM A32 Structural Joi st revisions .
method , per CA hall supply pe conformance pay particula ments required responsibility strict accordan er shall not b ngineer may n or manufact DARD SPE RANSPORT sed in the han med or painte ct , maintain a he erection of rary supports cted and ma cordance with erection is foll cture already hop-reamed h orresponding reamed on the ed and inspe 25 or ASTM ints of the AN/CSA S6 s ersonnel to as to the job r attention to d for galvanize y to supply th nce with the t be deemed to extend to al ure of any of t ECIFICATIO TATION an ndling of struct ed surfaces of and subseque f the Work .
s and foundat intained to su h Item 957. lowed , the spl erected shal holes shall be holes .
e site .
ected in acco A490 bolts '' Engineering hall be used f ssist in inspec b inspection o the lubrican ed bolts .
he material a terms of the C o relieve the C ll or any par the materials .
ONS nd INFRAS tural steelwor f fabricated ste ently remove tions and sha ustain the loa lice or splices l be fully bolt machined to ordance to `` S approved by Foundation for tightening b cting all high torque and nt required for and execute , Contract , and Contractor of rt of the Wo TRUCTUR ITEM : 33 January , 201 ks shall be of eelworks .
and dispose all be proper ads which sha s which conne ted before an a push fit so a Specification fo the Researc and AASHT bolts .
strength bolte the Contra r the nuts an complete an inspection an f any of his/he ork and to th RE 35 15 f a of rly all ect ny as or ch TO ed act nd nd nd er he DEPA STEEL Janua 335.4.7 335.4.7 335.4.7 335.4.7 ARTMENT L SUPERSTR ary , 2015 7.2 .2 .3 7 .3 Ow .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 7 .4 Sam .1 .2 .3 7 .5 Tra .1 STAN of TRANS RUCTURE The Enginee make a com phases of th Any Work do be ordered to wner 's Represe An Owner ’ s progress of secure adhe Contractor to to such failur Testing engi to those of t the testing o The Enginee them by the with the req authority to r No represen Contractor 's The Contrac fabrication p .1 The offic be furnis .1 The .2 Conven services mples and Te The Enginee that are , in h the Work .
The Contrac and specime not meeting The Owner s of the Engine ansfer of Heat The Contrac plates and d NDARD SP PORTATIO STR er shall be fur mplete and de e Work .
one or materi o be removed entative representative the Work as erence to the r o fulfil the req re .
ineers and ins the Engineer f materials an er 's representa e Engineer , ha uirements of revoke , alter , e ntative of the behalf .
ctor shall prov lant to accom ce space so p shed with a su e office room te ient telephon s shall also be sting er shall have his/her opinion ctor shall bea ens , including the requireme shall bear the eer .
Numbers ctor shall tran iaphragm plat PECIFICAT ON and INF RUCTURES rnished by the etailed inspec ials used with d and replaced e shall be ass a whole and requirements uirements of spectors may in connection nd Work .
ative ( s ) shall , ave authority the Contract , enlarge , relax e Engineer s vide regular a modate the E provided shal uitable standa emperature s e , internet , fa e provided .
the right to ca n , necessary r all costs for the costs of r ents of the Co costs and fee sfer heat num tes in the pres TIONS FRASTRUC e Contractor w ction and sha hout supervisi d at the Contra signed to the p the manner of the Contrac the Contract a be appointed n with various within the lim to reject mat , but no repre x or release an shall perform and practically Engineer or the l be ventilated ard office desk shall be mainta facsimile , pho all for any add to secure pro r the provision re-inspection ontract Docum es of the testi mbers on plate sence of the E CTURE with such info all be allowed on or inspect actor 's own ex project to repo in which they ct , to report on and to direct t d by the Engin aspects of th mits of the writt terial or Work esentative of ny requiremen m any duty o y located offic e Owner ’ s rep d , heated , lig k and chair .
ained at 20°C otocopy , mail ditional samp oper quality co n , preparation and retesting ments .
ng engineer a es for flanges Engineers repr P ormation as is d access to a tion by the En xpense .
ort to the Eng y are being pe n any noted fa the Contracto neer to fulfil d he Work and ten authorizat k that is not in the Engineer nt of the Contr or managem ce space at h presentative .
hted and clea C. and messag les , specimen ontrol of the m n and testing as associated and other repr s , webs , stiffe resentative .
ITEM : 335 Page 335-15 s required to all parts and ngineer may ineer on the erformed , to ailure by the or 's attention uties similar to carry out tion given to n conformity r shall have ract .
ent on the her/his steel an and shall ge handling ns and tests material and of samples d with Work resentatives eners , splice STE Pag 335 335 EEL SUPERS ge 335-16 5.4.7.5 5.4.7 .6 STRUCTURE .2 Heat num pieces o marked w .1 Chal .3 The Con compone Inspection of .1 The Eng testing .
.1 If fau she/h Work .2 Any weld own expe .3 The amo .4 In genera .1 All w .2 Groo partic .1 A 1 .2 W m a .3 F i .4 A .3 Web acco .4 Fillet of the DEPARTM E mbers or any r plates unle with chalk or c k or crayon sh tractor shall p ents of the stee Welds ineer reserve ults in the weld he may cons kmanship of th ds found to be ense .
unt and locati al , the followin elds shall be v ove welds in f cle , radio-grap All flange tens 100 % radiogra Web splices s minimum of ha and 25 % of th Flange comp nspection .
All groove wel to flange f rdance with T S S welds for atta e total tested b STAN MENT of TR STRUCTURES y other identif ss authorized crayon in the p hall be a non-o prepare a dra el Superstruct es the right to ds are discove sider necessa he welded con e faulty shall b on of non-des ng minimum te visually inspec flanges and w phically and/o sion splices an aphic and/or u shall receive alf of the dept e remainder o ression splice ds shall receiv fillet welds s Table 335-1 .
Magnetic P Submerged ar Semiautomati Manual we aching gusset by magnetic p DARD SPE RANSPORT fication numbe d in writing b presence of th oil based prod awing indicatin ture .
o submit weld ered , the Engi ary to satisfy nstruction .
be removed , re structive testin esting shall be cted .
webs of built-u or ultrasonicall nd flange splic ultrasonic insp 100 % radiog th beginning a of the web spl es shall rece ve 100 % mag shall be subj Table 335 Particle Inspe rc welds c welds elds plates , diaph particle inspec ECIFICATIO TATION an ers are not to by the Engine he Engineers r duct .
ng the heat n ds , chosen at ineer may ord y himself as e-welded and ng shall be det e conducted .
up members ly as follows : ces subject to pection .
graphic and/or at the point or ice shall be so eive 25 % rad gnetic particle ject to magn 5-1 ection Seque 25 per 50 per 100 pe ragm welds a ction .
ONS nd INFRAS o be stamped eer .
Heat num representative number of ste random , to n der such addit to the overa d retested at th termined by th shall be teste stress revers r ultrasonic in r points of ma o tested .
diographic an inspection .
netic particle ence rcent of length rcent of length ercent of length and stiffeners s TRUCTUR ITEM : 33 January , 201 d on individu mbers shall b e. eel used for a non-destructiv tional testing a all quality an he Contractor he Engineer .
ed by magnet sal shall receiv nspection for aximum tensio nd/or ultrason inspection h h h shall have 25 % RE 35 15 al be all ve as nd r ’ s tic ve a on nic in % DEPA STEEL Janua 335.4.7 335.4.7 335.4.7 335.5 335.6 ARTMENT L SUPERSTR ary , 2015 7.6.4 .5 .6 7 .7 Re .1 .2 7 .8 Sta .1 MEASURE .1 The lab fabricat accorda BASIS OF .1 Paymen .2 The Co section .1 The bre por pla and fas .2 The pay ma .1 STAN of TRANS RUCTURE .5 All trans .6 All guss 100 % of Radiographi to the web .
In the event corrected an pair of Welds Any welds w re-tested at t The repair a shall be in ac andards of Acc The standar “ Welded Ste MENT FOR P bour , Equipme tion , surface ance with this PAYMENT nt for Work un ontractor may 4 and ; e Contractor eakdown of th rtion of the pr te and rolled d erection ex teners .
e Owner sha yment , howe aintenance for The Contrac any materia period of th the Work .
NDARD SP PORTATIO STR verse welds o set plates and f the length fro c and/or ultra that defects a nd retested , at s which do not m the Contracto and non-dest ccordance wit ceptance of D rds of accept eel Constructio PAYMENT ent and mater preparation , Item shall be nder this Item be granted p shall provid he Lump Sum rice attributab shapes ) , stee xcluding tem all take owne ver the Con r all such mat ctor shall be s ls or compon e progress p PECIFICAT ON and INF RUCTURES on flanges sha d stiffeners fo om the mid de sonic testing are found , all w t the Contracto meet the acce rs expense .
ructive testing th 335.4.2 .
Defects tance of defe on ( Metal Arc rials required delivery and on a lump su shall be at the progress paym de the Engin m Price , inclu ble to the sup el fabrication , mporary acces ership of the tractor shall terials until pla solely respon nents of the W ayment and TIONS FRASTRUC all receive 100 or attaching d epth of the we shall be perfo welds shall be or ’ s own expe eptance stand g of fracture- ects shall be Welding ) Clau for , but not lim erection of t m basis .
e Lump Sum ments in acco neer , at the ding but not pply of materia , shop paintin ss Structures e materials a assume the aced and acc nsible to repai Work which b the inclusion CTURE 0 % magnetic p diaphragm bra b to the tensio ormed prior to e tested and a ense .
dards shall be -critical and p e in accordan use 12 - Cycli mited to , the l the complete Price .
ordance with t time of sign necessarily l als to the fab ng preparation s , temporary and Work co full respons cepted in the S ir or replace , become dama of the mater P particle inspec acing shall be on flange .
o assembly of all inferior weld removed , re- primary-tensio nce with CAN cally Loaded loading , shipp e steel Super the Terms of ning of the C imited to , ide bricator ’ s shop n , material tra y erection su overed by th sibility for the Structure .
at his/her ow aged or lost b rials or comp ITEM : 335 Page 335-17 ction .
e tested for f the flanges ding shall be -welded and on members N/CSA W59 Structures ” .
ping , supply , rstructure in Payment A Contract , a entifying the p ( structural ansportation upports and he progress e care and wn expense , between the ponents into DEPA STEEL Janua 341.1 341.2 341.2 341.2 ARTMENT L LAMINATE ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite MATERIAL .1 Genera .1 All CA .2 The and .3 The ± 5 .4 The beh .5 The min thic .6 The .1 .7 Bea to t .8 Wh loc .1 .9 The sha 12 .
.10 Bea .2 Elastom .1 The .1 .2 STAN of TRANS ED BEARING TION em consists of S al materials sha AN/CSA S6 .
e bearings sh d movement c e elastomer u 5 durameter h e elastomer c haviour .
e steel lamina nimum yield ckness .
e rubber/stee Vulcanizing shall not be aring pressur the limits as s here indicated ating dowels The minimu penetration .
e effective rub all be the sum arings shall b mers e elastomers Virgin natura The physica Table 341-1 NDARD SP PORTATIO S f the supply an all be supplie hall be of an capacities ind used in the be ardness havi compound us ations incorpo strength of 2 l bearings mu or otherwise accepted .
res , compress specified in CA d on referen and PVC cap m effective ru bber thickness m of the thickn be stored at le shall conform al polyisopren al properties o . ECIFICATI ON and INF STRUCTURES nd installation ed by the Con approved typ dicated in the earings shall b ng properties sed in the be orated into the 230 MPa an ust be moulde e bonding rub sive deflectio AN/CSA S6 .
nce bearings ps .
ubber thickne s , denoted as nesses of all l east 100 mm o m to the follow ne shall be th of the polyiso IONS FRASTRUC S n of steel reinf ntractor and pe sufficient t Contract Doc be 100 % virg s conforming t earings shall c e bearings sh d not less th ed as comple bber sheet to ns , rotation a s , all bearing ess shall take T in CSA Sta laminates with off the ground wing : e only raw po oprene used CTURE forced bearing shall conform o provide as cuments .
gin natural pol to the require conform to G hall be rolled han 3 mm n te units .
o bearings c and shear def gs shall be into consider andard CSA S h a shape fac d in a weathe olymer permit shall conform gs .
m to the requ a minimum , lyisoprene of ements of CAN Grade 5 low t mild steel sh nor more tha cut from large formations sh supplied com ration the effe S6 and Te in T ctor less than erproof enclos tted ; and m to the requ ITEM : 341 Page 341-1 irements of the loading nominal 55 N/CSA S6 .
emperature eets , with a n 5 mm in er moldings hall conform mplete with ect of dowel Table 341-2 , or equal to sure .
irements of STE Pag 341 EEL LAMINA ge 341-2 Hardne Tensile Ultimat Heat R Chan Chan Chan Compre Ozone Bond b Elastom Brittlen Low tem increas °Shore 1.3 SUBMIT .1 Only the E .1 .2 The man .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9 .10 .3 The certi deta ATED BEARI Prope ess , °Shore A e Strength , MPa e Elongation , % esistance nge in hardnes nge in tensile s nge in ultimate ession Set , % between steel a mer laminates , ess at - 40°C mperature crys se in hardness , e A TTALS y bearings wh Engineer , in w The Contract name of the number and t Contractor s nufacturer sha Individual lam Part numbers Maximum loa Compression Maximum mo Installation de Load capacity .1 maximum .2 compress .3 shear stif Number of ste Rotational ca Material prop properties .
Contractor s ification , as a ailed in the Co DEPARTM NGS Physic rty a % ss , °Shore A strength , % elongation , % and N. mm-1 stallization hich comply w writing , shall be or shall subm e pre-approve the physical d hall submit sh all provide the minate and tota s for bearings ; ad capacity in n stiffness ; ovement capa etails ; y at serviceab m compressive sive stiffness , ffness ; eel plates in e apacity of each perties of the b shall submit t written affida ontract Docum STA MENT of TR STRUCTU Table 3 cal Properties AS A A A A A Mount 2 A A P AS with the Contra e considered it in writing , a ed manufactu imensions of t hop drawings full data for th al bearing dim ; compression ; acity in shear ; bility limit state e permanent a and each bearing ; h bearing und bearing compo o the Engine avit , that the m ments .
ANDARD S RANSPORT URES 341-1 s of Polyisop Test STM D2240 ASTM D412 ASTM D412 ASTM D573 ASTM D395 Method B ASTM D518 ting Procedure 20 % strain 40 ± 2°C ASTM D429 Method B ASTM D746 Procedure B STM D2240 act Document acceptable fo minimum of 3 urer supplying the bearing to for the bearin he bearings in mension ; ; es Combinatio and total loads der maximum onents and te eer , in advanc materials sup SPECIFICA TATION an prene Req m 70 m 22 A 25 n n 168 m ts and have p or supply .
30 Days in ad g the bearing o be supplied .
ngs in accord cluding as a m n 1 , including s , and minimum est procedures ce of the inst plied meet th ATIONS nd INFRAS quirements 55 ± 5 min .
17.0 min .
400 0h at 70°C max .
+10 max .
-25 max .
-25 2h at 70°C max .
25 pphm , 48 h no cracks min .
7.0 no failure 8 h at -25°C max .
+15 previously bee dvance of the gs , the manu dance with Ite minimum the f : m load ; and s employed to tallation , the e specified re TRUCTUR ITEM : 34 January , 20 en approved b installation , th ufacturer 's pa m 956 and th following : o determine th manufacturer equirements a RE 41 15 by he art he he r ’ s as DEPA STEEL Janua 341.3 341.4 341.4 341.4 ARTMENT L LAMINATE ary , 2015 .4 All bear placem CONSTRU .1 Genera .1 The spe .2 Fabrica .1 The .2 Wh one .3 Eac alp the num .1 .4 The Beari Beari Thick Devia Cove Pintle Relat Note STAN of TRANS ED BEARING rings being su ent of the bea CTION al e Contractor ecifically direct ation e fabrication o here pintles ar e steel plate .
ch laminated hanumeric id e supplier and mber .
The charact adjacent sid mm in depth e tolerances s ng thickness ng plan dime ness of indivi ation from pla r to embedde e hole diamete ive position o 1 : The toleran ( a ) The d measu bearin bearin ( b ) The d shall b ( c ) The c effecti NDARD SP PORTATIO S upplied for the aring into the s shall carry ou ted by the Eng of the steel lam re specified , th bearing shall entification .
T source follow ters shall be n des , with the in h. shall be as ind B nsion dual layers o ne parallel to ed steel er of pintle holes nce of steel la istance from ured .
Measur ngs and at the ngs .
ifference betw be recorded .
umulative tota ive rubber thi ECIFICATI ON and INF STRUCTURES e Work shall structure .
ut the Work a gineer .
minated bearin he depth of th be marked w The latter sha wed by the let not less than ndentations o dicated in Ta Table 341 Bearing Toler f elastomer theoretical su Ste to each othe aminates sha the base of th rements shall e extremities o ween the high al of the differ ckness of the IONS FRASTRUC S be approved as indicated i ngs shall conf he pintle holes with the date o all consist of t tter “ I ” for poly 10 mm high , or protrusions ble 341-2 .
-2 rances  40 mm > 40 mm urface Top Sides eel Laminates r ll be determin he bearing to be taken at e of two perpen hest and lowe rences record e bearing , sha CTURE in writing by in the Contra form to CAN/C s shall be suc of manufactu the designate yisoprene an stamped or e s not less than m -0 m -0 -0 p s s 0 .
-0 ned as follows the bottom o each corner o ndicular diam est measurem ded , expresse all be recorde the Engineer act Documents CSA S6 .
ch as to fully e re and an ind ed identificatio d a sequentia engraved into n 1 mm in wid mm to +3 mm mm to +6 mm mm to +6 mm ± 20 % 1 in 200 1 in 100 25 Te ( Note 1 ±2 mm mm to + 2 mm ± 2 mm s : of every plate of rectangular eters of circu ments for ever ed as a fractio ed .
ITEM : 341 Page 341-3 prior to the s and/or as engage only dividual on letter of al five digit two dth and 1 m m m ) m shall be r lar ry plate on of the STE Pag 341 341 341 EEL LAMINA ge 341-4 1.4 .3 Insta .1 .2 .3 1.5 MEASU .1 The supp 1.6 BASIS O .1 Pay .2 The ATED BEARI allation The Contract level and smo Bearing block bearing thickn The tolerance Struc Conc Stee Box G Devia REMENT FO Quantity to plied and insta OF PAYMENT ment for Work Owner shall m DEPARTM NGS tor shall place ooth bearing s k elevations s ness shown in es shall be as Toler cture Type crete Structure l Structures Girders ation from lev OR PAYMENT be measured alled in accord T k under this Ite make partial p STA MENT of TR STRUCTU e bearings ac surfaces , as in shall be adjus n the Contract s indicated in T Ta rance For Top es el T d for paymen dance with this em shall be at payment for st ANDARD S RANSPORT URES ccurately with ndicated in the sted when bea t Documents .
Table 341-3. ble 341-3 p Of Bearing Top Of nt shall be th s Item .
t the Unit Pric teel laminated SPECIFICA TATION an respect to th e Contract Do aring thicknes g Elevations Bearing Elev  2.5 mm + 3 mm + 2 mm  0.1 he number o ce .
d bearings in a ATIONS nd INFRAS e location an cuments .
ss varies from vation m of steel lamin accordance w TRUCTUR ITEM : 34 January , 20 d elevation , o m the referenc nated bearing ith 908.7 .
RE 41 15 on ce gs DEPA BRIDG Janua Artic 342 .
342 .
342 .
342 .
342 .
342 .
ARTMENT GE POT BEA ary , 2015 cle 1 DESCRIPT 2 MATERIAL 3 SUBMITTA .1 Gener .2 Approv 4 CONSTRU .1 Design .1 Ge .2 Tr .3 Sl .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .4 Gu .5 To .6 Fa .7 Re .8 Du .9 Co .2 Fabric .1 W .2 Fa .3 An .4 Ma .5 Ro .6 At .7 Co .8 Ide .9 To .1 .2 .3 Installa .1 Ge .2 Gr 5 MEASURE 6 BASIS OF STAN of TRANS ARINGS TION .............. LS .................. ALS ................ ral .................. val of Supplier UCTION ......... n Requiremen eneral ........... ranslation Rota iding Surfaces 1 General ..... 2 TFE Eleme 3 Stainless St 4 Lubrication 5 Thickness o 6 Contact Pre 7 Coefficient o uide for Latera op and Base P asteners and A eplaceability .. urability ......... oncrete Bearin cation ............. elding ........... asteners ........ nchors ........... achining ........ oughness of M tachment of T orrosion Prote entification .... lerances ....... 1 General ...... 2 Elastomer .. ation ............. eneral ........... routing of Bea EMENT FOR P PAYMENT ... NDARD SP PORTATIO CO ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... r .................... ...................... nts .................. ...................... ation .............. s .................... ...................... nt .................. teel ............... ..................... of TFE and De essure ........... of Friction ..... al Restraint .... Plates ............ Anchorage .... ...................... ...................... ng Pressure .. ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... Metal Surface TFE ................ ction ............. ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... rings ............. PAYMENT ..... ...................... PECIFICAT ON and INF STRUCTURES ONTENTS ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... epth of Recess ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... TIONS FRASTRUC S ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... s .................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... CTURE ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ..................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ..................... ..................... ...................... ..................... ...................... ..................... ...................... ...................... ...................... ...................... .....................
Page 342-2 342-2 342-4 342-4 342-5 342-6 342-6 .
342-6 .
342-6 .
342-7 342-7 .
342-7 342-8 342-8 342-8 342-8 342-9 342-9 342-9 342-9 342-10 342-10 342-10 342-10 .
342-10 .
342-11 .
342-11 342-11 342-11 342-11 342-12 342-12 342-12 342-12 342-13 342-13 .
342-13 .
342-14 .
342-14 342-14 ITEM : 342 Page 342-1 BR Pag 342 342 RIDGE POT B ge 342-2 2.1 DESCR .1 This Brid 2.2 MATER .1 All m .2 Bea cons .1 .2 .3 .3 Bea .4 The poly CAN .5 Stee the .6 Stai AST .7 Stee G16 .1 .8 Bras .9 Poly be 5 .10 TFE AST .1 BEARINGS IPTION s Item consis ge bearings r IALS materials shal arings shall p structed for th The rotationa transmit all lo translations o At serviceabi which would At ultimate lim the factored l aring material allowable ytetrafluoroeth N/CSA S6 .
el component requirements nless steel fo TM A167 Type el fasteners s 64 .
For centre gu ss sealing ring yisoprene ( n 50 ± 5 .
E resin for TM D1457 .
It shall be un DEPARTM sts of the fab required in the ll be supplied possess the he movement al bearings an oads ( includin of the Structu ility limit state affect their pe mit states , the loads and acc and workman bearing pre hylene polym ts of the bear s of CAN/CSA or sliding sur e 304. shall conform uide bars alte gs for confine atural rubbe use in slidi filled and con STA MENT of TR STRUCTU brication , sup e Contract .
by the Contr minimum ho t capacities , a nd sliding sur ng uplift ) and re .
e , the design s erformance .
e strength an commodate m nship shall co essures on mer ( TFE ) el rings ( other t A G40.21M , G rfaces shall h to ASTM A3 rnative steel f ed elastomer er ) shall con ing surfaces nform to the p ANDARD S RANSPORT URES pply and inst ractor .
orizontal and as indicated in rfaces shall c d accommoda shall be such nd stability of movements of omply with CA the confine lements are han stainless Grade 350A .
have a minim 325 and shall fasteners ma bearings sha nform to 34 shall be v physical requir SPECIFICA TATION an tallation of a d vertical loa n the Contrac consist of com ate the rotatio h that the bea the bearings f the Structur AN/CSA S6 .
ed elastome to be as s s steel sliding mum corrosio l be galvanize ay be approve all conform to 41.2 except virgin materi rements indic ATIONS nd INFRAS ll confined e ad capacity , ct Documents mponents arra ons and , whe rings will not shall be ade re .
er and bon stipulated in g surfaces ) sh n resistance ed to conform ed .
ASTM B36 H that the h ial and sha cated in Table TRUCTUR ITEM : 34 January , 20 elastomer ( po and shall b . anged so as t ere necessar suffer damag equate to resi nded confine clause 11 o hall conform t conforming t m to CAN/CS Half-hard .
hardness ma ll conform t e 342-1 .
RE 42 15 ot ) be to ry , ge st ed of to to SA ay to DEPA BRIDG Janua 342.2 ARTMENT GE POT BEA ary , 2015 Physical Tensile S Elongatio Relative .11 Materia .1 Unf .2 TFE .3 Lea .12 Lubrica .13 Adhesiv N/mm w service .14 All stee with a microns Limited .15 All surf unders Item 33 paint ( C .1 Ea .16 The org Steel S Cleanin .17 All surfa .18 The bo galvani .19 At full exceed .20 Grout s 28-day STAN of TRANS ARINGS Property Strength , MPa on , % Density al used as ma filled TFE ; E filled with u ad filled TFE ant shall be si ves for bond width when te e environment el bearing co primer coat o s or +15 mic d , or approved faces , with th ide of the tap 35 ) , shall be Carbomastic 1 ach of these to ganic zinc pr Structures Pa ng ” .
ace preparati olts for attach zed .
design load , d 3 % of the dia shall be In-Pa strength of 40 NDARD SP PORTATIO Physical R a ating surface f p to 25 % by m in a bronze m licone grease ing TFE to m ested in accor t. mponents , ot of inorganic z crons ) of Ca d equivalent in e exception o pered shoe pla top coated w 15 ) in accorda op coats shal imer shall be ainting Coun on and painti hing the bea the maximu ameter of the kt Nonshrink 0 MPa .
PECIFICAT ON and INF STRUCTURES Table 342 Requirements ASTM Test M D 638 D 638 D 792 for guides for mass of glass matrix .
e and shall co metal shall pro rdance with A ther than the zinc silicate p arbo Zinc 11 n accordance of the faying ate attached t with two coat ance with 335 ll have a film t e applied to a ncil ” specifica ng shall confo ring top plate m rotation a e elastomeric Premix Grout TIONS FRASTRUC S 2-1 s for TFE Re Method 8 8 2 r lateral restra s fibres ; or onform to OPS oduce a bond ASTM D429 M e stainless ste paint with a d , manufactur e with 335.2 a surface betw to the bottom ts of high bui 5.2 and 335.4 thickness of 1 a surface that ation SSPC-S form to 335.2 e to the gird and/or the ec disc .
t or approved CTURE esin Require minimum minimum 2.16 ± 0 aint may be : SS 1203.05.0 d with a mini Method B and eel sliding su dry film thickn red by Corro and 335.4. ween the top m flange of the ild , modified 4 .
125 microns ± t is blast clea SP10 - No .
and 335.4. der shoe plat ccentricity of equivalent an ment m 20 m 200 0.03 06. imum peel st d shall not deg urfaces , shall ness of 75 m osion Service of the top pla e girders ( sup aluminum ep ± 20 microns .
aned to confo 10 “ Near W te shall be A the axial loa nd shall have ITEM : 342 Page 342-3 trength of 4 grade in the be painted microns ( -10 e Company ate and the pplied under poxy mastic .
orm to “ The White Blast A325-Type I ad shall not a minimum BR Pag 342 342 342 RIDGE POT B ge 342-4 2.2 .21 The the slidi the Sup .1 .22 Bea 2.3 SUBMIT 2.3 .1 Gen .1 .2 .3 .4 BEARINGS entire bearin base plate us ng interface , concrete , we perstructure m Bearings sha arings shall be TTALS neral The Contrac translation an .1 Notwiths limited to .1 Bear .2 The t .3 Insta .4 Meth .5 Load .1 m .2 m .3 m a .6 The .2 The Con during sit Upon reque performed by “ pot ” bearing The Contrac procedures fo The Contract guaranteeing .1 Each bea a period DEPARTM ng assembly , sed to ancho shall be repl lds or anchor more than 5 m all not be rece e stored at lea ctor shall su nd load capac tanding the r o : ring layout an top and botto allation details hod of attachm d capacity at s maximum ver maximum late maximum rota axis through t bearing ID let ntractor shall te installation st , the Cont y a recognize s. tor shall sub or handling , s tor shall subm g as a minimu aring is to per of five years STA MENT of TR STRUCTU except for the or it to the Su laceable with rages perman mm .
essed into pla ast 100 mm o bmit the de cities , in acco equirements d orientation ; om plate detai s ; ment of bearin serviceability rtical permane eral load and ational capac the centre of t tter and numb have a stam .
tractor shall ed bearing ma mit to the En storing and in mit the manu um : rform satisfac after the Brid ANDARD S RANSPORT URES e top plate us ubstructure bu out damage nently attache ates that are p off the ground sign for the ordance with I in 342.3.1.1 , ils including a ngs to the top limit states C ent and total l correspondin city about an the bearing ; bers .
mped copy of submit cert anufacturer h ngineer a cop stallation of th ufacturer ’ s sig ctorily , in the o ge has been SPECIFICA TATION an sed to attach ut including b to the Struct ed to the Stru permanently a in a weather bearings , d tem 956. the submiss anchorages ; p and bottom Combination 1 load , ng vertical loa y horizontal f these drawi tification that having experi py of the ma he bearings .
gned written g opinion of the opened to re ATIONS nd INFRAS it to the Supe both contact s ture and witho ucture and wit attached to th rproof enclosu designed for ion shall inclu plates ; , including : ad , and axis and abo ings at the s t the fabrica ence in the m anufacturer ’ s guarantee for e designer/ma gular vehicula TRUCTUR ITEM : 34 January , 20 erstructure an surfaces of th out removal o thout lifting th he Structure .
ure .
the specifie ude but not b out the vertic site before an ation is bein manufacture o recommende r the bearing anufacturer , fo ar traffic .
RE 42 15 nd he of he ed be cal nd ng of ed s , or DEPA BRIDG Janua 342.3 .
342.3 ARTMENT GE POT BEA ary , 2015 1.4 .2 .5 All .6 Sub .2 Approva .1 The req .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9 .10 .11 .12 STAN of TRANS ARINGS If , during the manufacture .1 All costs other W incident .2 All requ approve grouting proc bmittals are re al of Supplier e Engineer m quired to subm Typical draw restraint dev Load range ( Maximum ro centre of the Maximum tra Lateral Load Capacity of l Corrosion pr A TFE samp A typical sam A sample of of at least ± The design c Final approv bearing , and Documents .
.1 Any dev typical s for appro NDARD SP PORTATIO e five year gu er of the bear s related to re Work necessa al to this gua ired repairs s ed by the Eng cedures shall equired in acc ay request for mit the followin wings showing vices , if applica ( minimum and otational capa e bearing .
anslational ca d capacity of ro lateral restrain rotection .
ple of at least 2 mple of elasto the smallest p 50 mm , the sh calculations sh val of the so d the shop d viation from th sample shall b oval .
PECIFICAT ON and INF STRUCTURES uarantee peri ings shall rep epairs , replac ary to comple rantee and sh shall be carri ineer .
be submitted cordance with r the supplier g data for eac g all materials able , and met d maximum ) .
acity about an pacity .
otational bear nts of translatio 200 mm in dia meric disc .
production siz hop drawings hall be stamp ource of supp rawings with e materials a be cause for c TIONS FRASTRUC S iod , the beari place the bear cements , jack ete the Work hall be borne ied out in acc d for approval any cross refe to be approv ch class and ty s , tolerances , thods of instal ny horizontal rings .
onal elements ameter .
ze unidirection and the desig ed and signe ply shall be b the specified nd details ind cancellation o CTURE ings do not p rings .
ing of the Brid k of replacing by the manuf cordance wit prior to comm erenced Item ved , in which c type of bearing details of co lation .
axis and the s. nal bearing wit gn calculations ed by a Profes based on co d requirement dicated on the of approval an perform satisfa dge , installati g the bearing facturer of the h this Item a mencement o forming part o case the supp g : nstruction inc vertical axis th a translatio s for the bear ssional Engin ompliance of ts noted in th typical drawin nd necessitate ITEM : 342 Page 342-5 actorily , the ion and any gs shall be e bearings .
nd shall be of the Work .
of this Item .
plier may be cluding uplift through the nal capacity ing .
eer .
the sample he Contract ngs and the e application BR Pag 342 342 342 342 RIDGE POT B ge 342-6 2.4 CONST 2.4 .1 Des 2.4.1 .1 2.4.1 .2 BEARINGS RUCTION sign Requirem General .1 The bear of the ma the servi Documen .2 Bearings specified .3 All steel conforma .4 The aver conform t Translation R .1 Provision mating T .2 The tran specified .3 Translati the latera .1 For Com .2 For b 5 % o .4 Provision confined .5 The rotat as specif .6 Uplift res .7 At servic axial load .1 3 % o .8 Rotationa specified DEPARTM ments rings shall be aximum and m iceability limit nts .
subject to up .
components ance with the r rage stress in to the requirem Rotation n for translati TFE element .
nslational cap d , or ±50 mm , onal element al loads as sp bearings wit bination 1 , 10 bearings with of the vertical n for rotation elastomer for tional capacit fied or ± 1° , w straint devices ceability limit d from the ce of the diamete al bearings s d in combinati STA MENT of TR STRUCTU proportioned minimum facto t state and t plift shall limit s of the bea requirements the elastome ments of 342. on shall be t pacity in the whichever is ts with lateral pecified or eith th a capacity 0 % of the vert h a capacity o load in exces about any h r pot bearings .
ty about the v whichever is g s shall not res state Combin ntre of bearin er of the confi shall be capab on with the a ANDARD S RANSPORT URES to function sa ored loads and the ultimate the separatio arings , includi of CAN/CSA er at serviceab 2.4. through slidin e unrestraine greater .
restraints sh her of the follo y of 5000 k tical load capa over 5000 kN ss of 5000 kN orizontal axis .
vertical axis th greater .
strict rotations nation 1 loads ng shall not ex ined elastome ble of resistin pplicable vert SPECIFICA TATION an atisfactorily un d the factored limit states a n of the beari ing fasteners S6 .
bility limit stat ng of a stainle ed direction hall be capabl owing : kN or less a acity .
N at serviceab N. s shall be by hrough the ce s. s and maximu xceed the foll er for pot bea ng , in any dir tical loads .
ATIONS nd INFRAS nder the critica translations a as shown on ing componen s , shall be p te Combinatio ess steel sur or directions le of resisting at serviceabi bility limit stat means of a entre of the be um rotation , t owing values arings .
rection , the la TRUCTUR ITEM : 34 January , 20 al combination and rotations n the Contra nts to the valu proportioned on 1 loads sha rface against s shall be a g the greater o lity limit stat te Type II plu single disc o earing shall b the shift in th s : ateral loads a RE 42 15 ns at ct ue in all a as of te us of be he as DEPA BRIDG Janua 342.4 .
342.4 .
342.4 .
342.4 .
ARTMENT GE POT BEA ary , 2015 1.2 .9 .10 .11 .12 .13 .14 .15 .16 .17 1 .3 Slid 1.3 .1 1.3 .2 STAN of TRANS ARINGS The rotation that the ver Combination Brass sealin elastomer to A minimum positioned a surface of th The sealing The upper e The depth o remains bet rings with t rotation plus The pot and with silicone The bearin compressibl the pot and Any joint in strength of t ding Surfaces General .1 Sliding against .1 For surf .2 The mov the Dus TFE Elemen .1 Except w shall be spherica .2 The dia the TFE thicknes NDARD SP PORTATIO n of confined e rtical strain a n 1 loads doe ng rings at l o prevent the of two layers around the ci he inside perim rings shall be edge of the ela of the pot wa tween the top the pot wall s 1° .
d piston surfa e grease .
g shall be le ring agains piston contac the ring sha the ring .
s surfaces sha a mating TFE plane surface faces , the me e metal surfa vement and e TFE element st and dirt to f nt when used a e virgin mate al reservoirs f meter of the E , and the d ss of the TFE PECIFICAT ON and INF STRUCTURES elastomeric b at the perime es not exceed least 6 mm elastomer fro s of flat sealin rcumference meter of the p e flat and smo astomer shall all shall be s p of the pot w upon rotating aces in conta sealed by a st entry of dir ct surfaces .
all be bonded all allow tran E element .
es , the metal tal surface sh ace shall ove except for gui t so that the s all off .
s mating surf erial and sha for lubricant p reservoirs sh depth shall n . TIONS FRASTRUC S bearings abou eter of the el d 0.15 of the e wide shall b om extruding ng rings shal of the elasto pot wall .
ooth on all su l be recessed such that a m wall and the c g the piston ct with the co a one piece rt , Dust and m d and the str slation or ro l surface shal hall be stainle erlap the TFE des for latera sliding movem faces for guid all be used a pressed into it hall not excee not be less t CTURE ut a horizonta lastomer , at elastomer thic be provided between the ll be used wit omer and sha urfaces .
d to accommo minimum vert closest point o and amoun onfined elasto e continuous moisture betw rength shall b tation by slid ll be stainless ess steel or an E by at least al restraint , sh ments will cau des for latera as unfilled sh ts surface .
ed 8 mm , me than 2 mm al axis shall b serviceability ckness .
at the perim piston and th th the split e all fit snugly odate the sea ical distance of contact of nt equal to th omer shall be s performed ween the ela be at least e ding of a me s steel ; and fo nodized alum t 5 mm at e hall be positio use the accum l restraint , the heets and sh asured at the nor more tha ITEM : 342 Page 342-7 e limited so y limit state meter of the he pot wall .
nds equally against the ling rings .
of 2.5 mm the sealing he required e lubricated closed-cell stomer and equal to the etal surface or spherical inum alloy .
extremes of oned above mulations of e TFE resin hall contain e surface of an half the BR Pag 342 342 342 342 342 RIDGE POT B ge 342-8 2.4.1.3.2 2.4.1.3 2.4.1.3 2.4.1.3 2.4.1.3 BEARINGS .3 The occu .4 Mate 342.2 .3 Stainless .1 The 342-2 direc .4 Lubricatio .1 All T subje with .5 Thicknes .1 The a rigi .2 Thick 342- Maxim Thick Depth .6 Contact P .1 The the T Limit St Service Ultimat DEPARTM reservoirs sh py not less th erial used as 2.12 and 342 s Steel thickness of t 2 for dimens ction of movem Dimens Sta on TFE surfaces ect to a conta silicone greas ss of TFE and TFE element id backing ma kness of the 3 .
Thick mum Plan Dim kness , mm h of Recess , Pressure average cont TFE , shall not Ave tate eability - Com e STA MENT of TR STRUCTU hall be evenly han 20 % nor m mating surfa .2.13 and sha the stainless sional differe ment .
Thickne sional Differen ainless Steel a mm  300  300 and   500 and  s except thos act pressure se .
d Depth of Re t shall be fully aterial .
TFE element ness of TFE mension , mm mm tact pressure t exceed the v erage Contac bination 1 ANDARD S RANSPORT URES y distributed a more than 30 ace for guide all not be dim steel sheet s ences betwee Table 342- ess Of Stainl nce between and TFE m 500 1500 se which act of less than ecess y bonded in th t and the dep Table 342-3 Elements an m for unfilled T values given i Table 342-4 ct Pressure F Dead Lo 3 4 SPECIFICA TATION an across the su 0 % of the surf es for lateral pled or lubric shall not be le en stainless -2 ess Steel Minimu Sta as mating s 5 MPa , shall he manufactu pth of recess 3 nd Depth of  120 5.0 2.5 FE elements in Table 342- 4 For TFE Elem oad MPa 30 45 ATIONS nd INFRAS urface of the face .
l restraint sh cated .
ess than that steel and th um Thickness ainless Steel mm 1.5 2.0 3.0 surfaces for l be permane urer ’ s plant an s shall be as Recess 00  12 5.5 3.0 based on the -4. ments Total Load 45 65 TRUCTUR ITEM : 34 January , 20 TFE and sha hall conform t given in Tab he TFE in th s of guides or ar ently lubricate nd recessed given in Tab 200 5 0 e gross area o MPa RE 42 15 all to le he re ed in le of DEPA BRIDG Janua 342.4 .
342.4 .
342.4 .
342.4 .
342.4 .
ARTMENT GE POT BEA ary , 2015 1.3.6 1.3 .7 1 .4 Gu .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 1 .5 Sho .1 1 .6 Fas .1 STAN of TRANS ARINGS .2 The ma element .3 The ave filled TF not exce .1 TFE .2 Lea Coefficient O .1 The coe exceed pressure Con ide For Later The guides both the hor Unless the g not less than The translat steel and sh TFE conform Lead filled T bonded to th Glass fill or 342.4.1.3.5. oe and Base The shoe pl provided wit Structure .
steners and A Fasteners , devices sha either of the NDARD SP PORTATIO aximum conta ts shall not ex erage contact FE elements u eed the follow E filled with up d filled TFE in Of Friction efficient of fric the values giv es within the r Co ntact Pressure 10 25 and abov al Restraint for lateral res rizontal and th guide bars a n 5 mm into th tional elemen hall provide l ming to 342.2 TFE shall be he substrate .
r virgin TFE s Plates ate and base th the bearing Anchorage used to atta all be capable following : PECIFICAT ON and INF STRUCTURES act pressures xceed 1.2 time t pressure at used to face m wing : p to 25 % by m n a bronze m ction between ven in Table range given .
Table 342 oefficient Of F e MPa ve straint shall b he vertical ax re machined he plate to wh nts of guides lateral restrai .12 and 342.2 at least 2 m shall be rece e plate which a gs and shall c ch the beari e of resisting TIONS FRASTRUC S s at the extr es the values t serviceabilit mating surfac mass of glass atrix 60 MPa .
stainless ste 342-5 and sh 2-5 Friction Coefficient 0.0 0.0 be arranged t is .
from the sol hich they are for lateral re int by sliding 2.13. mm thick and essed and bo are permane conform to the ing to the to g the greater CTURE reme edges s given in Tab ty limit state ces for guides fibres 45 MP .
eel and lubrica hall be interpo of Friction 06 03 to permit the id they shall attached .
estraint shall g against mat shall be me onded to the ntly attached e requiremen op and base r of the latera of flat and c ble 342-4 .
Combination s for lateral re Pa. ated virgin TF olated linearly required rota be bolted an be faced wit ting surfaces echanically fa substrate to to the Structu ts of the bear plates , and al loads as s ITEM : 342 Page 342-9 curved TFE 1 loads for estraint shall FE shall not y for contact ations about nd recessed th stainless faced with stened and conform to ure shall be ring and the anchorage specified or BR Pag 342 342 342 342 342 342 RIDGE POT B ge 342-10 2.4.1.6.1 2.4.1 .7 2.4.1 .8 2.4.1 .9 2.4 .2 Fab 2.4.2 .1 BEARINGS .1 For Com .2 For b 500 k .2 The ben anchors .
Replaceabilit .1 The ent Superstr both con the Struc attached .2 Bearings Structure Durability .1 The bea against c .2 Bearings surfaces Concrete Bea .1 At servic shall not .2 At ultima 24 MPa .
.3 The top permissib .4 The effec elastome dispersal rication Welding .1 Welding .2 Welding CAN/CSA .3 The weld DEPARTM bearings wit bination 1 , 10 bearings with kN plus 5 % o eficial effect ty ire bearing ucture and th ntact surfaces cture and wit to the Struct s shall not b e. rings shall be corrosion so to s shall be de .
aring Pressur ceability limit s exceed 17 M ate limit stat and base p ble bearing p ctive area for d er or TFE tran lines drawn a of structural q of stainless A W48.2 or A ding procedur STA MENT of TR STRUCTU th a capacity 0 % of the vert capacity ove of the vertical of friction sh assembly , ex he base plate s of the slidin hout removal ure and witho be recessed e fabricated f o perform the esigned to pr re state Combin MPa .
tes , the ave plates of the ressures are distributing the nsferring the lo at 45 to the lin quality steels steel shall b AWS A5.22 .
re shall be ap ANDARD S RANSPORT URES y of 5000 k tical load capa er 5000 kN at load capacity hall be neglec xcept for th e used to anc ng interface , s l of any conc out lifting the S into plates from materia eir intended fu revent moistu nation 1 loads erage concret bearing sha not exceeded e bearing load oad to the pla ne of applicati shall conform be done with proved by the SPECIFICA TATION an kN or less a acity .
t serviceabilit y in excess of cted in propo e top plate chor it to the shall be repla crete , welds o Superstructur that are per ls which are unction .
ure and dirt s the average te bearing p all be propor d. d shall be take ate plus the a ion of the load m to 335.4. h appropriate e Canadian W ATIONS nd INFRAS at serviceabi ty limit state C f 5000 kN .
ortioning the used to att Substructure aceable witho or anchorage re more than rmanently at durable and from enterin e concrete be pressure sha rtioned to en en as the con area within the d from the con e electrodes Welding Burea TRUCTUR ITEM : 34 January , 20 lity limit stat Combination fasteners an tach it to th e but includin out damage t es permanent 5 mm .
ttached to th are protecte ng the intern aring pressur all not excee nsure that th tact area of th e uninterrupte ntact area .
conforming t au .
RE 42 15 te 1 , nd he ng to tly he ed al re ed he he ed to DEPA BRIDG Janua 342.4 .
342.4.2 342.4.2 342.4.2 342.4 .
342.4.2 ARTMENT GE POT BEA ary , 2015 2.1 .4 .5 2 .2 Fas .1 2 .3 Anc .1 .2 2 .4 Ma .1 .2 .3 .4 2 .5 Ro .1 .2 2 .6 Atta .1 .2 .3 STAN of TRANS ARINGS The stainles continuously moisture .
The weld sh area in cont steners The thread installation .
chors When the Co the top and welding proc .1 The anc indicated Alternative m achining Machining s Metal to met The pots an plate or cast There shall elastomer o ughness Of M The roughne B95 , shall no The roughn CAN/CSA B achment of T Virgin or gla shall be bon The rigid ba Lead filled T NDARD SP PORTATIO ss steel she y welded aro hall be clean , act with TFE .
ed portion o ontract Docum base plate an cess , unless o chorage for st d on Standard methods of an shall be carrie tal contact su d pistons for tings .
be no openin r TFE .
Metal Surface ess of metal s ot be greater t ess of metal B95 , shall not FE ass filled TFE nded over the cking materia TFE shall be m PECIFICAT ON and INF STRUCTURES eets which w ound the peri uniform and .
of the bolts ments specify nchorage to co otherwise indic teel structures d Drawing 342 nchoring thes ed out after we urfaces shall b confined elas ngs or discon e surface in con than 0.25 m surfaces in be greater th E elements s entire area w al shall be grit mechanically TIONS FRASTRUC S will be in con imeter to its without over shall be co that bearings oncrete may cated in the C s shall be pro 2-1 and in the se plates may elding wherev be machined stomer bearing ntinuities in th ntact with TF arithmetic ave contact with han 3.0 m ar shall be reces with an adhes t blasted prior fastened , and CTURE ntact with T backing plat rlaps and sha oated with s s shall be supp be provided b Contract Docum ovided with b Contract Doc y be approved ver possible .
or fine groun gs shall be m he metal surf E , measured erage for plan elastomers m rithmetic aver ssed in a rig sive .
r to applying t d bonded to t P FE shall be te to prevent all be located silicone greas plied from a lis by studs , usin ments .
bolts and anch cuments .
d. d. machined from faces in conta to conform to ne surfaces .
measured to age .
gid backing m the adhesive .
the backing p ITEM : 342 Page 342-11 one piece t ingress of outside the se prior to sted source , g the fusion hor bolts as m solid metal act with the o CAN/CSA conform to material and .
lates .
BR Pag 342 342 342 342 RIDGE POT B ge 342-12 2.4.2 .7 2.4.2 .8 2.4.2 .9 2.4.2.9 BEARINGS Corrosion Pr .1 All expos to steel S epoxy ma .2 Steel fas .3 For corro Superstr Identification .1 The bear and an in .2 The latte followed .3 The cha clearly le .4 The char mm in wi Tolerances .1 General .1 The with shall circu bear elem .2 For c shall .3 The of th diam mm .
.4 The plan diam .5 Over .6 Over .7 Mach DEPARTM otection sed metal surf Superstructur astic system c steners shall b osion protecti uctures shall rings shall be ndividual alph er shall consis by a sequent racters shall egible after ins racters shall n idth and 0.5 m deviation from TFE for plan not exceed lar TFE elem ing , R is the ment .
confined elast be +0.75 mm inside diame he elastomer meters up to a plan dimensi dimensions meter or diago rall bearing pl rall bearing he hined surface STA MENT of TR STRUCTU faces except s res shall be p conforming to be galvanized ion purposes be considere e supplied wit hanumeric ide st of the desig tial five digit n be stamped stallation .
not be less th mm in depth .
m flatness of e surfaces an 0.0003 LH m ments , where e radius of a tomer bearing m to +1.25 mm ter of the pot and shall b and including ions of the re of the TFE a nal .
lan dimension eight ± 3 mm .
es except whe ANDARD S RANSPORT URES stainless stee protected aga 335.2 and 33 d or protected , bearing com ed part of the th each bearin entification .
gnated identi number .
or engraved han 10 mm h stainless ste nd from the th mm for recta e L is the gr a circular bea gs , the tolera m. t cylinder sha be machined 500 mm and ecess for the and shall be m n ± 3 mm. . ere otherwise SPECIFICA TATION an el , and compo ainst corrosion 35.4. d by other app mponents per structural ste ng marked w fication letter d into two ad igh with the i eel or aluminu heoretical su angular beari reater plan d aring and H nce of fit betw all be the sam to a toleran d -0 , +0.175 m TFE shall be machined to specified ±0 .
ATIONS nd INFRAS onents perman n by an inorg proved metho rmanently att eel .
with the date o r of the suppl djacent sides ndentations n um alloy surfa rface for sph ng nor 0.000 imension for is the free ween the pist me as the nom nce of -0 , + mm for diame e the same a a tolerance o .4 mm .
TRUCTUR ITEM : 34 January , 20 nently attache ganic/aluminu ods .
tached to ste of manufactur ier and sourc s and shall b not less than aces in conta erical surface 06 RH mm fo a rectangula height of TF ton and the po minal diamete 0.125 mm fo eters over 50 as the nomin of 0 , +0.2 % o RE 42 15 ed m el re ce be 1 ct es or ar FE ot er or 00 al of DEPA BRIDG Janua 342.4.2 342.4 342.4.3 ARTMENT GE POT BEA ary , 2015 2.9 .2 .3 Installat 3 .1 Ge .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 STAN of TRANS ARINGS Elastomer .1 Diamete .2 Thickne .3 Brass ri .1 Diffe the .2 Diffe mou .4 Recesse .5 Guides element .6 TFE pla .7 TFE thic .8 Depth o tion neral The Contrac Documents .
The Contrac shall conform expanded up All steel plate The bottom machined fro Tabs for bolt pot .
.1 Welding Structural st direction of 2 The Contrac direct superv NDARD SP PORTATIO er +0.0 +0.0 ess -0.0 ngs erence betwe moulded elas erence betwe ulded elastom ed Guide Bar for Lateral ts shall be 0.5 an dimension ckness - 0 / of recess for T ctor shall car ctor shall ensu m to the req pon by this Ite es shall be pre portion of th om a solid pie ting the pot to g of the tabs fo teel compone 25 mm .
ctor shall ens vision of a Qu PECIFICAT ON and INF STRUCTURES / -1.5 mm for / -2.0 mm for / +1.0 mm een internal d stomer shall b een sum of t mer shall be -0 rs - American - Gap betwe 50 mm ± 0.25 + 0 / - 0.2 + 10.0 % of th TFE - 0 / + 0.3 rry out the W ure that all m uirements of em and/or sub essed or mac he bearing ( t ece of steel .
the masonry or attachment ents of the b sure that all b alified Technic TIONS FRASTRUC S r diameters  r diameters  diameter of b be -0 / + 0.5 m thickness of 0 / + 0.25 mm Standard Cle een metal su 5 mm .
2 % of diamete hickness 3 mm Work at the lo materials , work 335.2 and 3 bmission unde chined flat prio the pot ) , whi plate shall be of the tabs to bearings shall bearings shall cal Represent CTURE  500 mm  500 mm brass ring an mm .
brass rings a m. earance Loca urfaces Rest er or diagona ocations as in kmanship , con 335.4 , except er 342.3.1.1. or to manufact ich contains e machined fro the pot will no l have a min l be installed tative of the b P nd diameter o and recess d ational Fit Cla traints and m l ndicated in th nstruction and as further m ture of the bea the elastome om the same ot be permitte nimum dimens in the Bridge bearing manuf ITEM : 342 Page 342-13 of recess in depth in the ss LC3 .
mating TFE he Contract d inspection modified and arings .
er , shall be plate as the ed .
sion in any e under the facturer .
BR Pag 342 342 342 342 RIDGE POT B ge 342-14 2.4.3.1 2.4.3 .2 2.5 MEASU .1 The acco 2.6 BASIS O .1 Pay .2 The acco BEARINGS .8 The bea recomme .1 As a kept Grouting of B .1 Prior to tolerance anchor b .1 All co and the g .2 The annu flowable instructio .3 The spac “ dry pack .1 Follo .2 Grou perio .1 N .4 Superstru obtained REMENT FO fabrication , ordance with t OF PAYMENT ment for Wor Owner will ordance with DEPARTM arings shall b endations .
minimum the out of direct s Bearings the grouting e of 1 in 200 a bolts .
oncrete surfa all dirt , rust , o grout area prio ular space be consistency on .
ce between th k ” grout mixed owing dry pac ut shall be m od .
No grouting s ucture compo a minimum st OR PAYMENT supply and this Item shall T rk under this I make parti 908.7 .
STA MENT of TR STRUCTU be shipped e bearings sh sunlight .
g , the bearin and locked by aces to be gro oil , grease , a or to the com etween the an y mixed and he bearing ba d in accordan cking , the grou maintained at hall be done w onents shall trength of 80 % T installation o l be on a lump tem shall be ial payment ANDARD S RANSPORT URES and stored hall be stored g base plate y means of th outed are to b and other suc mencement o nchor bolts an d placed in ase plates an nce with the m ut shall be cov t a temperatu when the con not be place % of the specif of all confine p sum basis .
at the Lump S for confined SPECIFICA TATION an in accordanc d at the site in es shall be he levelling an be roughened ch contaminan of grouting .
nd sleeves sh accordance nd top of conc manufacturer ’ s vered for 4 D ure of at lea ncrete or stee ed on the be fied 28-day st ed elastomer Sum Price .
d elastomer ATIONS nd INFRAS ce with the n weatherproo carefully lev nd top nuts p d to an amplit nts are to be hall be groute e with the m crete shall be s instructions Days with wet ast 10°C dur el is below free earings until trength .
r ( pot ) Bridg ( pot ) Bridge TRUCTUR ITEM : 34 January , 20 manufacture of shelters an velled within provided on th tude of ±5 m removed fro ed with grout o manufacturer e filled with th .
burlap .
ring the curin ezing .
the grout ha ge bearings e bearings RE 42 15 rs nd a he m m of r ’ s he ng as in in DEPA SEALE Janua 343.1 343.2 ARTMENT ED EXPANS ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite modula MATERIAL .1 All mate .2 The ap Docum .3 Cast-in the exp .4 All stee finish a Type 1 thick ) .
.5 The su the bott concret .6 All cent or mac .7 The de 625-ON CAN/C .8 The ro Grade 2 .9 All stee require strengt .1 All - G .10 Welded shall be .11 Cover minimu .12 Anchor equival screws STAN of TRANS ION JOINT A TION em consists o ar assemblies S erials shall be pproved expa ents .
-place type a pansion joint a el surfaces , w and coated w ( 100 µm ± 1 pport boxes f tom plate tran te beneath th tre beams ( se hined shapes esign loading NT plus the dy SA S6 .
ound bar a 260 W. el used for e ments of CAN h are required other steel co Grade 300 W. d anchor stud e made from s plates are to um thickness o rs for cover ent , a minim with Allen so NDARD SP PORTATIO ASSEMBLIES of the supply s. e supplied by ansion joint a anchors or ins assemblies .
with the exce with an appro 2 µm thick ) o for the sliding nsfers the loa e support box eparation bea s and shall no for sealed e ynamic load a nchorages a extrusions , ed N/CSA G40.2 d to satisfy th omponents sh s , when requ steel meeting o be galvaniz of 175 µm an plates shall um of 70 mm ocket head or PECIFICAT ON and INF S STRUCTURES and installatio the Contracto assemblies to serts , steel co eption of anch oved inorgan or zinc metali plates in mo ad to the side xes .
ams ) and edg ot be built-up w xpansion join allowance , an and cover p dge beams a 21 - Grade 35 e stresses re hall conform t uired , shall be g the requirem zed by hot di d/or a minimu be Richmond m long sized approved eq TIONS FRASTRUC S on of sealed or .
o be supplied over plates a hor studs , sh ic zinc coatin ized in accor odular expans plates , assum ge beams sha welded memb nt assemblies nd all stresses plates shall and support 50A or ASTM esulting from t to the minimu e the size indic ments of ASTM pping in acc um applicatio d Insert Type for 13 mm d quivalent .
CTURE expansion jo d shall be as nd cap screw hall be sandb ng conformin rdance with C sion joints sha ming no supp all be solid or bers .
s and for cen s shall be with conform to bars shall co M A588 , unles the loading sp um requireme cated in the C M A-108 .
cordance with on of 1 kg/m2 .
e LFW ( close diameter x 32 oint assemblie s noted in th ws shall be su blasted to a w ng to CGSB CAN/CSA G18 all be designe port from the t r voided stee ntre beams s hin the limits o CAN/CSA onform to th ss grades of h pecified .
ents of CAN/C Contract Docu h CAN/CSA G ed ferrule ) o 2 mm long th ITEM : 343 Page 343-1 es including he Contract upplied with white metal 1-GP-171B 89 ( 125 µm ed such that thin layer of l extrusions hall be CL- specified in G40.21 - e minimum higher yield CSA G40.21 uments and G-164 , to a or approved readed cap SEALE Page 3 343.2 343.3 343.4 ED EXPANS 343-2 .13 Sealed to main SUBMITTA .1 The Co accorda .2 The Co comme .1 All cer CONSTRU .1 The Co specific .2 A repre when m .1 All me .3 The ins be cas concret .4 All weld .5 Cover p .6 The ste fabricat .7 Portion recoate .8 Spacing concret .9 The ste indicate 343-1 .
DE ION JOINT A expansion jo ntain the cross ALS ontractor sha ance with Item ontractor shal encing the Wo welders sha rtification leve CTION ontractor sha cally directed b esentative from modular expan materials , an eet the represe serts for attach t in the conc te has attained ding shall conf plates are to b eel portions o ting shop , unle s of inorgani ed in the field .
g hardware s te .
eel portions ed in the Co EPARTMEN ASSEMBLIES oint assemblie s slope and a all submit the m 956. ll submit proo ork .
ll be certified el of Qualified all carry out t by the Engine m the expans nsion joints ar nchor bolt spa entative ’ s app hing the steel crete and the d a minimum form to the re be anchored o of the expan ess otherwise ic zinc coatin shall be relea of the expan ontract Docum STAN NT of TRAN S STRUCTURES es shall be st avoid permane e shop drawi of of certificat d by the CWB Welder as is the Work as er .
sion joint asse re installed .
acing and the proval before t cover plates e steel plates 24 hour set .
quirements of on the approa nsion joint as e specified .
ng , damaged ased within 2 nsion joint as ments and a NDARD SP NSPORTAT S tored at least ent distortion ings for the tion for the w B to CAN/CS ssued by the P indicated in embly ( s ) man e recesses fo the Contracto at curb ( s ) , Si are to be fa f CAN/CSA W ching traffic s semblies sha in the field , 2 hours maxi ssemblies sh are subject to PECIFICATI TION and I t 150 mm off .
sealed expa welders condu SA W47.1 sp Province of N the Contrac nufacturer or s ormed to rece or may place th dewalk ( s ) and astened for f W59 .
side of the join all be fabrica shall be me imum of the hall be fabric o the toleran IONS INFRASTR Jan the ground in ansion joint a ucting the Wo pecifications , New Brunswic ct Documents supplier shall eive the assem he assemblies d/or barrier wa inal installatio nt .
ated in one p echanically c placing of th cated to the nces indicate RUCTURE ITEM : 343 nuary , 2015 n a manner assembly in ork , prior to and/or to a k. s and/or as be present mblies shall s. all ( s ) , are to on after the piece in the leaned and he adjacent dimensions ed in Table DEPA SEALE Janua 343.4 343.5 343.6 ARTMENT ED EXPANS ary , 2015 .10 The Doc MEASURE .1 The sup this Item BASIS OF .1 Payme expans .2 The Ow with 90 STAN of TRANS ION JOINT A Dimensions Crown e expansion j cuments and Elevation This toleranc 343-1 Joint Opening MENT FOR P pply and insta m shall be on PAYMENT nt for Work ion joint assem wner shall m 8.7 .
NDARD SP PORTATIO ASSEMBLIES Exp joint assemb are subject to Exp e shall not be g PAYMENT allation of the a lump sum b under this Ite mbly , as ident ake partial p PECIFICAT ON and INF S STRUCTURES Ta pansion Joint Face of Face to lies shall be o the tolerance Ta pansion Joint e considered a complete sea basis .
em shall be tified under th payment for s TIONS FRASTRUC S able 343-1 t Fabrication curb to back face of curbs installed in t es indicated in able 343-2 t Installation additive with th aled expansio at the Lump e Contract .
sealed expan CTURE Tolerances of curb s the position in n Table 343-2 Tolerances - 3 mm he tolerances ± 3 mm on joint assem p Sum Price nsion joint as ± 6 mm ± 6 mm ± 1 mm in ndicated in th 2. s presented in mblies in acco for each typ semblies in a ITEM : 343 Page 343-3 m m 1 m he Contract Table ordance with e of sealed accordance DEPA FINGE Janua 344.1 344.2 344.3 ARTMENT ER JOINT AS ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite MATERIAL .1 All mate .2 All stee finish a .1 Ca .2 San .3 The ro Grade 2 .4 Welded shall be .5 Cover minimu .6 Anchor equival screws .7 Structu CAN/C of 27 jo .8 Stainles .9 Steel fi maintai SUBMITTA .1 The Co Item 95 .2 The Co comme .1 All cer STAN of TRANS SSEMBLIES TION em consists o S erials shall be el surfaces , w and coated wit rbo Zinc 11 a ndblasting sh ound bar a 260 W. d anchor stud e made from s plates are to um thickness o rs for cover ent , a minim with Allen so ral steel SA G40.21M oules when te ss steel shall inger joint as in the cross s ALS ontractor shall 56. ontractor shal encing the Wo welders sha rtification leve NDARD SP PORTATIO f the supply a e supplied by with the exce th an approve and Dimecote hall not be use nchorages a s , when requ steel meeting o be galvaniz of 100 µm an plates shall um of 75 mm ocket head .
in finger Grade 350W ested at minus conform to th ssemblies sha slope and avo l submit the s ll submit proo ork .
ll be certified el of Qualified PECIFICAT ON and INF STRUCTURES and installatio the Contracto eption of anch ed inorganic z 9 are approv ed on stainles and cover p uired , shall be g the requirem zed by hot di d/or a minimu be Richmond m long sized plate asse WT Category 3 s 30°C .
he requireme all be stored oid permanent shop drawings of of certificat d by the CWB Welder as is TIONS FRASTRUC S on of steel fing or .
hor studs , sh zinc coating .
ved coatings .
ss steel .
plates shall e the size indic ments of ASTM pping in acc um applicatio d Insert Type for 13 mm d emblies sha 3 or with a ce nts of ASTM at least 150 t distortion .
s for the finge tion for the w B to CAN/CS ssued by the P CTURE ger joint asse hall be sandb conform to cated in the C M A-108 .
cordance with on of 1 kg/m2 .
e LFW ( close diameter x 50 all meet ertified Charpy A240 : AISI T 0 mm off the er joint assem welders condu SA W47.2 sp Province of N mblies .
blasted to a w o CAN/CSA Contract Docu h CAN/CSA G ed ferrule ) o 0 mm long th the require y V-notch imp ype 316. ground in a mblies in acco ucting the Wo pecifications , New Brunswic ITEM : 344 Page 344-1 white metal G40.21 - uments and G-164 , to a or approved readed cap ements of pact energy manner to ordance with ork , prior to and/or to a k. FINGE Page 3 344.4 344.4 ER JOINT AS 344-2 CONSTRU .1 The Co specific .2 The ins be cas concret .3 All weld .4 Cover p .5 The ste .6 Steel fi otherwi .1 All .2 Por and .3 Ino prio .4 Stu CA .7 Steel fi Docum .8 Steel fin and are DE SSEMBLIES CTION ontractor sha cally directed b serts for attach t in the conc te has attained ding shall conf plates are to b eel trough sha inger joint as se specified .
expansion joi rtions of inorg d recoated in t organic zinc sh or to installatio ud anchors o AN/CSA W59 .
inger joint as ents and are Dimensions Crown nger joint ass e subject to th Elevation This toleranc 344-1 Joint Opening EPARTMEN all carry out t by the Engine hing the steel crete and the d a minimum form to the re be anchored o all be sealed to ssemblies sha nt assemblies ganic zinc coa the field .
hall have all c on of assembl on steel expa ssemblies sha subject to the Finge semblies shall e tolerances i Finger Jo e shall not be g STAN NT of TRAN STRUCTURES the Work as er .
cover plates e steel plates 24 hour set .
quirements of on the approa o the finger jo all be fabrica s field welded ating , damage curing solution lies .
ansion joint a all be fabrica e tolerances in Table er Joint Fabri Face of Face to be installed i indicated in Ta Table 344 oint Installatio e considered a NDARD SP NSPORTAT S indicated in at curb ( s ) , Si are to be fa f CAN/CSA W ching traffic s oint assembly ated in one p shall be grou ed by field we n and residue assemblies s ated to the d ndicated in Ta 344-1 cation Tolera curb to back face of curbs in the position able 344-2 .
4-2 on Tolerance additive with th PECIFICATI TION and I the Contrac dewalk ( s ) and astened for f W59 .
side of the join to construct a piece in the und flush .
elding , shall b e removed by hall conform dimensions in able 344-1. ances of curb s n indicated in es - 3 mm he tolerances ± 3 mm IONS INFRASTR Jan ct Documents d/or barrier wa inal installatio nt .
a durable wate fabricating sh be mechanica y water and b to the requ ndicated in th ± 6 mm ± 6 mm ± 1 mm in the Contract s presented in RUCTURE ITEM : 344 nuary , 2015 s and/or as all ( s ) , are to on after the ertight joint .
hop , unless ally cleaned ristle brush , irements of he Contract m m 1 m Documents Table DEPA FINGE Janua 344.5 344.6 ARTMENT ER JOINT AS ary , 2015 MEASURE .1 The su Item sh BASIS OF .1 Payme .2 The Ow STAN of TRANS SSEMBLIES MENT FOR P pply and inst hall be on a lum PAYMENT nt for Work un wner shall mak NDARD SP PORTATIO PAYMENT allation of the mp sum basis nder this Item ke partial pay PECIFICAT ON and INF STRUCTURES e complete st s. shall be at th ment for stee TIONS FRASTRUC S teel finger join he Lump Sum l finger joint a CTURE nt assemblies Price .
assemblies in s in accordan accordance w ITEM : 344 Page 344-3 ce with this with 908.7 .
DEPA STEEL Janua 345.1 345.2 345.3 345.4 ARTMENT L BALLASTW ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite ballastw MATERIAL .1 All mate .2 All stee finish a .1 Ca .3 The ro Grade 2 .4 Welded shall be .5 Structu G40.21 .6 Steel b the cros SUBMITTA .1 The Co Item 95 .2 The Co comme .1 All cer CONSTRU .1 The Co specific .2 All weld STAN of TRANS WALL ANGL TION em consists o wall .
S erials shall be el surfaces , w and coated wit rbo Zinc 11 a ound bar a 260 W. d anchor stud e made from s ral steel in M-300W .
ballastwall ang ss slope and ALS ontractor shall 56. ontractor shal encing the Wo welders sha rtification leve CTION ontractor sha cally directed b ding shall conf NDARD SP PORTATIO E of the supply e supplied by with the exce th an approve and Dimecote nchorages a s , when requ steel meeting n the ballas gle shall be s avoid perman l submit the s ll submit proo ork .
ll be certified el of Qualified all carry out t by the Engine form to the re PECIFICAT ON and INF STRUCTURES and installatio the Contracto eption of anch ed inorganic z 9 are approv and cover p uired , shall be g the requirem stwall angle stored at leas nent distortion shop drawings of of certificat d by the CWB Welder as is the Work as er .
quirements of TIONS FRASTRUC S on of the stee or .
hor studs , sh zinc coating .
ved coatings .
plates shall e the size indic ments of ASTM shall mee st 100 mm off n. s for the stee tion for the w B to CAN/CS ssued by the P indicated in f CAN/CSA W CTURE el angle on th hall be sandb conform to cated in the C M A108 .
et the requi f the ground el ballastwall a welders condu SA W47.1 sp Province of N the Contrac W59 .
he top of eac blasted to a w o CAN/CSA Contract Docu irements of in a manner angle in acco ucting the Wo pecifications , New Brunswic ct Documents ITEM : 345 Page 345-1 ch abutment white metal G40.21 - uments and CAN/CSA to maintain rdance with ork , prior to and/or to a k. s and/or as STE Pag 345 345 345 EEL BALLAS ge 345-2 5.4 .3 Stee othe .1 .2 .3 .4 Balla in th 5.5 MEASU .1 The this 5.6 BASIS O .1 Pay .2 The 908 STWALL ANG el ballastwall erwise specifie Portions of in and recoated Inorganic zin prior to install Stud anchors W59 .
astwall assem he Contract Do REMENT FO supply and in Item shall be OF PAYMENT ment for Work Owner will m .7 .
DEPARTM GLE assemblies ed .
norganic zinc d in the field .
c shall have a lation of asse s on steel ball mblies shall be ocuments and OR PAYMENT nstallation of on a lump su T k under this It make partial p STA MENT of TR STRUCTU shall be fabr coating , dam all curing solu mblies .
lastwall assem e fabricated to d Standard Dr T the complete m basis .
tem shall be a payment for s ANDARD S RANSPORT URES ricated in on maged by field ution and resi mblies shall c o the dimensio rawing 345-1. steel ballastw at the Lump S steel ballastw SPECIFICA TATION an e piece in th d welding , sha due removed conform to the ons and insta wall angle ass um Price .
wall angle ass ATIONS nd INFRAS he fabricating all be mecha d by water and e requirement alled in the po semblies in ac semblies in ac TRUCTUR ITEM : 34 January , 20 g shop , unles nically cleane d bristle brus ts of CAN/CS sition indicate ccordance wit ccordance wit RE 45 15 ss ed h , SA ed th th DEPA GUIDE Janua 346.1 346.2 346.3 346.4 346.5 346.6 ARTMENT E RAIL SYST ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite Structu MATERIAL .1 All mate SUBMITTA .1 The Co Item 95 CONSTRU .1 The Co specific .2 The Co formwo .3 The Co .4 All cont .5 Aluminu .6 Rail po specifie .1 The a w MEASURE .1 The Qu rail syst .2 The me guide r Structu BASIS OF .1 Paymen guide ra STAN of TRANS TEM - STRUC TION em consists o re .
LS erials shall be ALS ontractor shall 56 .
CTION ontractor sha cally directed b ontractor sha ork and concre ontractor shall tacting alumin um posts sha sts bases bea ed by grouting e grout shall p waterproof sea MENT FOR P uantity to be m tem on a High easured Quan ail system , m re .
PAYMENT nt for Work u ail system on NDARD SP PORTATIO CTURES of the supply a e supplied by t submit shop all carry out t by the Engine ll be respons ete at the stag install all pos num and conc ll be separate aring unevenl g under the ba provide a smo al .
PAYMENT measured for p hway Structure ntity shall be measured from under this Item a Highway St ECIFICATI ON and INF STRUCTURES and installatio the Contracto drawings for the Work as er .
sible for the ge of the Work sts and railing ( crete surfaces ed from steel b ly on concrete ase plate of th ooth bearing s payment shal e supplied and the direct stra m end cap to m shall include ructure , as ide IONS FRASTRUC S on of an alum or .
the aluminium indicated in placing and k when this pl ( s ) and these shall be sepa bolts by nylon e surfaces sh e rail post wit surface under l be the numb d installed in a aight line mea end cap of e e a separate entified under CTURE minum guide ra m guide rail sy the Contrac alignment of lacement mus shall be secu arated by a fa n or plastic bus hall be brough th an approve the full base ber of linear m accordance w asurement alo each section a Unit Price fo r the Contract .
ail system on ystem in acco ct Documents the anchor st occur .
ured firmly in p bric pad .
shings .
ht to bear in a ed epoxy grou plate area an metres of alum with this Item .
ong the cente and on both s or each type o .
ITEM : 346 Page 346-1 n a Highway ordance with s and/or as bolts in the place .
alignment as t. d shall form minum guide erline of the sides of the of aluminum DEPA SERV Janua 348.1 348.2 348.2 348.2 348.2 348.2 348.2 348.2 348.3 ARTMENT ICE DUCT - S ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite MATERIAL .1 Genera .1 All .2 Fibregla .1 Fib epo .3 Polyvin .1 All Spe .2 Eac and .1 .2 .3 .4 Steel S .1 Ste .2 All .5 Fish Ro .1 The in e .6 Storage .1 Ma ind SUBMITTA .1 The Co the mat STAN of TRANS STRUCTURE TION em consists of S al materials sha ass Duct breglass duct oxy ( FRE ) and nyl Chloride D PVC duct ecifications - ch section of d at intervals Manufacture Inside diame Type design Supports eel in supports steelworks sh ope e fish rope sh each duct .
e aterials are to ividual pieces ALS ontractor shal terials meet o NDARD SP PORTATIO ES f the supply an all be supplied , couplings , d shall confor Duct t , bends , c '' Semi-Rigid P f PVC duct sh not exceeding er 's name and eter in millime nation .
s and sleeves hall be galvan hall be polypro o be stored i s contained o l submit to th or exceed the PECIFICAT ON and INF STRUCTURES nd installation d by the Cont bends and e rm to CAN/CS couplings a Plastic Duct '' hall have the g 1.5 m : d trademark ; etres ; and s shall confor nized in accor opylene not le n an organiz r strapped .
he Engineer , specified gra TIONS FRASTRUC S n of all service tractor .
end caps sha SA C22.2 .
and caps s - CT20-286 a following inf rm to CAN/CS rdance with C ess than 5 m zed fashion a upon request ade .
CTURE e ducts in Stru all be made shall confor and shall be T formation prin SA G40.21-30 CAN/CSA G-1 m in diamete at least 100 t , the manufa uctures .
of fibreglass rm to Bell Type II ( Thick nted on the d 00 .
164. er and shall be mm off the g acturer ’ s certif ITEM : 348 Page 348-1 s reinforced Canada 's Wall ) .
duct surface e one piece ground with fication that SERV Page 3 348.4 348.4 348.4 348.4 ICE DUCT - S 348-2 CONSTRU .1 Genera .1 The spe .2 The Wo sur .2 FRE Du .1 The .2 The 1.5 .3 Wh sha com .4 A m Eng .5 Exp and .3 PVC D .1 Joi cou .2 The 1.5 .3 Exp and .4 Eac sho .5 A 3 lea .1 .2 DE STRUCTURE CTION al e Contractor ecifically direct e Contractor ork is accept rrounding and uct e duct shall b e duct shall 5 m. here external all supply an mplete the Wo minimum of 3 gineer to allow pansion sleev d shall be of t uct nts shall be f upling .
e duct shall 5 m. pansion sleev d shall be of t ch duct run sh own in the Co 300 mm long ves the end o The galvani Sidewalk an The expose outside .
EPARTMEN ES shall carry ou ted by the Eng shall ensure ted , in writing d encasing the e of the bell a be tied wit supporting st nd install this ork .
3 Days notic w inspection o ves shall be the type indica fitted with pus be tied wit ves shall be the type as ind hall be equipp ontract Docum galvanized s of the abutme zed steel sle nd shall exten ed 100 mm o STAN NT of TRAN STRUCTURES ut the Work a gineer .
that an insp g by the En e Work .
and spigot typ th wire to th teelworks is d s Structure a e prior to pla of the FRE se provided at e ated in the Co sh-fit type co th wire to th provided at e dicated on th ped with two ments or as di steel pipe slee ent wingwalls eeve shall be d 100 mm be of the galvan NDARD SP NSPORTAT S as indicated i pection of the ngineer , prior pe with all join he reinforcin detailed in the at the stage acing concret ervice ducts .
each expansi ontract Docum uplings and t he reinforcin each expansi e Contract Do ( 1 m ) 45° ben irected by the eve shall be or Sidewalks embedded 2 eyond the con nized steel pi PECIFICATI TION and I in the Contra e Work has b r to the plac nts fully seate ng steel at i e Contract Do of the Cont te on the du on joint in th ments .
the duct shall ng steel at i on joint in th ocuments .
nds in each a e Engineer .
provided on s. 200 mm in th ncrete surface ipe sleeve sh IONS INFRASTR Jan act Documents been complet cement of an ed together .
ntervals not ocuments , the tract most b ct shall be g e Bridge Sup l be fully sea ntervals not e Bridge Sup abutment and each PVC du he abutment es .
hall be threa RUCTURE ITEM : 348 nuary , 2015 s and/or as ted and the ny concrete exceeding e Contractor eneficial to given to the perstructure ted into the exceeding perstructure shall be as uct where it wingwall or ded on the DEPA SERV Janua 348.4 348.4 .
348.5 348.6 ARTMENT ICE DUCT - S ary , 2015 .4 Testing 4 .1 Ge .1 .2 .2 Afte term .1 .3 Ca the MEASURE .1 The Qu and ins .2 The line the con BASIS OF .1 Paymen identifie .2 The Ow STAN of TRANS STRUCTURE g neral After the in diameter of through the The Contrac the mandrel er completion minate at eac A surplus of ps shall be af e galvanized s MENT FOR P uantity to be m talled in acco ear measurem tinuous direct PAYMENT nt for Work u ed under the C wner shall mak NDARD SP PORTATIO ES stallation is c f the installed length of the ctor shall be test .
n of testing , ch end in a `` sc f approximate ffixed to each steel pipe slee PAYMENT measured for rdance with th ment shall be t t run of the du under this Item Contract .
ke partial paym PECIFICAT ON and INF STRUCTURES complete , a d duct and a duct system responsible t the Contract crew-eye '' ins ely 1 m of fish h end of the d eves at the en payment sha his Item .
taken from en ct. m shall includ ment for duct TIONS FRASTRUC S mandrel with a minimum l in the presen to clear and/o tor shall thre serted in the r rope shall be duct with an a nds of abutme all be the num nd to end on e de a separate in accordance CTURE h a diameter ength of 250 nce of the Eng or replace any ead each duc recess provid e provided at appropriate so ent wingwalls mber of linear each duct and e Unit Price f e with 908.7 of at least 9 0 mm , shall gineer .
y ducts that d ct with a fish ed in the duc each duct en olvent welding s or Sidewalks r metres of du shall be mea for each size ITEM : 348 Page 348-3 90 % of the be passed do not pass h rope and ct cap .
nd .
g cement to s. uct supplied asured along of duct , as DEPA WATE Janua 351.1 351.2 351.3 351.4 ARTMENT ERPROOFING ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite MATERIAL .1 All mat .1 The con .2 The con bal .1 .3 The Doc .2 Materia SUBMITTA .1 The Co Work , t .1 The the .2 The on .3 The acc .4 The CONSTRU .1 The Co specific .2 All conc .1 Any .3 The Co manufa STAN of TRANS G TION m consists of S terials shall be e waterproofi nsisting of a pr e waterproofi nsisting of a p lastwalls of St Protection b equivalent a e approved w cuments .
als shall be sto ALS ontractor shal the proposed e manufactur e waterproofin e manufactur the waterproo e Contractor cordance with e waterproofin CTION ontractor sha cally directed b crete surfaces y primed surfa ontractor shall acturer ’ s instal NDARD SP PORTATIO f the supply an e supplied by t ng system “ A rimer , a memb ng system “ B primer , a mem tructures and board shall be nd having a m waterproofing ored at least 1 ll submit to th type of water rer ’ s recomme ng system and rer 's specified ofing system .
shall select a the manufact ng and aspha all carry out t by the Engine s shall be dry a aces left overn prepare the a llation specific PECIFICAT ON and INF STRUCTURES nd installation the Contracto A ” shall be a brane and a m B ” shall be a mbrane , a mas on concrete b e Vibraflex T maximum abso system shall 00 mm off the he Engineer , rproofing syst ended proced d its compone d minimum te a product app turer 's specific lt concrete sh the Work as er .
and free of for night shall be area and insta cations and ins TIONS FRASTRUC S of waterproof or .
a manufactur mastic and sha a manufactur stic and a prot box Culverts .
Type 70 or IK orption of 3 % .
be selected e ground in a w 7 Days in ad tem including dures for inst ents .
emperature fo propriate for t cations .
hall perform as indicated in reign material re-primed prio all the waterp structions .
CTURE fing systems o red waterproo all be used on red waterproo tection board KO 1/8 “ Prote .
from the list weatherproof dvance of the the following tallation and or asphalt con the applicatio s a waterproo the Contrac s prior to prim or to membran proofing system on Structures .
ofing membra n the decks of ofing membra and shall be ecto Board o provided in th enclosure .
e commencem g : instructions f ncrete during on and field c ofing system .
ct Documents ming .
ne application m in accordan ITEM : 351 Page 351-1 . ane system f Structures .
ane system used on the or approved he Contract ment of the for handling g placement conditions in s and/or as n. nce with the WATE Page 3 351.4 351.5 351.6 ERPROOFING 351-2 .4 For all w .1 The spe .2 Any sun .3 All .5 For B Drawing .1 Sol wat .6 For bal downwa .1 The 150 .2 The .7 For con .1 The .2 The .3 The and 600 .4 The of t sys .8 The Co waterpr MEASURE .1 The Qu system .1 Sta me BASIS OF .1 Paymen system .2 The Ow DE G waterproofing e membrane ecified protect y protection bo nlight exposur exposed edge ridge decks g 351-1 or 35 lvent based m terproofing me last walls the ard angle of th e membrane 0 mm overlapp e details for in ncrete box Cul e membrane s e membrane s e protection b d sides and 0 mm centres e protection b the sides is s stem .
ontractor sha roofing .
MENT FOR P uantity to be m supplied and arter strips , fla easured as a s PAYMENT nt for Work un , as identified wner shall mak EPARTMEN applications t shall be pro ion board , adh oard which is re in accordan e terminations , the edge 1-4. materials shall embrane .
membrane s he ballast wal shall cover ping onto the nstallation are lverts , the follo shall be applie shall be install oard shall be d adhered between the boards shall b specified and ll pave a Br PAYMENT measured for installed in ac ashing , overla single layer of nder this Item under the Co ke partial paym STAN NT of TRAN STRUCTURES the following s otected , when hered to the w to be left expo nce with the m s shall receive e details sh l be cured for shall be applie l angle .
the entire approach slab shown on Sta owing conditio ed in strips pe led in accorda applied over t to the me two surfaces .
e butted tight d in all cases ridge deck w payment sha ccordance wit apped joints , the waterproo shall include ontract .
ment for the w NDARD SP NSPORTAT S shall apply : n so noted in waterproofed s osed for more manufacturer ’ s e a trowelled b hall be con r appropriate ed in vertical back face o b and wingwa andard Drawin ons shall apply erpendicular to ance with Stan the top of the embrane by tly and shall b s shall comple within 3 Days ll be the num th this Item .
double plied ofing system .
a separate Un waterproofing PECIFICATI TION and I n the Contra surface .
e than 48 hour instructions .
bead of mastic nstructed as time period p strips starting of the ballast alls .
ng 351-2. y : o the long axis ndard Drawing waterproofing placing go be orientated etely cover th of the insta mber of square areas , patch nit Price for ea system in acc IONS INFRASTR Jan act Document rs shall be pro c. shown on prior to the pla g at the mid-d t wall with a s of the Culver g 351-3. g system , on obs of the vertically whe he applied wa allation of the e metres of wa hes and seam ach type of wa cordance with RUCTURE ITEM : 351 nuary , 2015 ts , with the otected from n Standard acing of the depth of the a minimum rt .
both the top mastic at en coverage aterproofing e deck slab aterproofing ms shall be aterproofing 908.7 .
DEPA SHOR Janua 361.1 361.2 361.3 361.4 ARTMENT RING ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite shore e MATERIAL .1 All mate .2 Timber grade m mark lu .3 Timber .4 Steel sh .5 Steel m differing reduce .6 When t the yiel SUBMITTA .1 The Co submit .1 Sho Sec .2 Submitt CONSTRU .1 The Co specific Work p .2 The Co .3 The Co workme time as .4 The Co Contrac STAN of TRANS TION em consists o excavations .
S erials shall be and lumber mark used by umber in Cana piles used in heeting shall b members with g from those the design ca the grade of th d point of the ALS ontractor shall the design , in oring shall ction 21 of the tals are requir CTION ontractor sha cally directed b rogresses .
ontractor shall ontractor sha en and the W the shoring is ontractor sha ctor and he sh NDARD SP PORTATIO of the design , e supplied by t used in the the Canadian ada and/or lum shoring shall be free from k reduced cro shown in the apacity of the he steel mem steel is 200 M be responsib n accordance also be de e Industrial Sa red in accorda all carry out t by the Engine design and c all be respon Work Area , co s removed .
all remove th hall dispose o PECIFICAT ON and INF STRUCTURES supply , const the Contracto construction n Lumber Man mber approve meet the req kinks and ben ss-sectional a e design sub members sha bers is not kn MPa .
ble for the des with Item 956 esigned by afety Code .
ance with any the Work as eer and/or as m construct all sh sible for the ntinuously fro e shoring an f them outside TIONS FRASTRUC S truction and r or .
of shoring sh nufacturing A ed by the Engi uirements of C nds .
areas due to bmission and/ all not be used nown and/or c sign of the sho 6. the Contrac y cross-referen indicated in may be requir horing to withs adequacy o om the time o nd all materia e the Work Si CTURE removal of the hall be grade Association an neer .
CAN/CSA 05 holes , cuts , /or in the Co d. certified , the E oring and ass ctor to mee nced Item form the Contrac red due to Wo stand the anti of the shoring of placement als shall rem ite .
e materials n d and stamp nd agencies a 6. and other dis ntract Docum Engineer will a ociated bracin t the requir ming part of th ct Documents ork Site condi icipated desig g and the sa of the shoring main the prop ITEM : 361 Page 361-1 ecessary to ped with the uthorized to scontinuities ments which assume that ng and shall rements of his Item .
s and/or as itions as the gn loadings .
afety of the g until such perty of the SH Pag 361 361 ORING ge 361-2 1.5 MEASU .1 The desi .2 The the horiz 1.6 BASIS O .1 Pay REMENT FO Quantity to igned , constru area to be m excavation to zontally along OF PAYMENT ment for Work DEPARTM OR PAYMENT be measured ucted and rem measured for p o a point ver g the edge of t T k under this It STA MENT of TR STRUCTU T d for paymen moved in acco payment shall rtically upward the base of th tem shall be a ANDARD S RANSPORT URES nt shall be th ordance with th be the extent d 300 mm be e excavation .
at the Unit Pric SPECIFICA TATION an he number of his Item .
t of the shorin elow the surr .
ce .
ATIONS nd INFRAS f square met ng exposed fro rounding natu TRUCTUR ITEM : 36 January , 20 tres of shorin om the base o ural grade an RE 61 15 ng of nd DEPA ENGIN Janua 365.1 365.2 365.3 365.4 ARTMENT NEERED FILL ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite MATERIAL .1 All mate .2 Enginee gravel , uncons accorda rock ba .3 Enginee materia .4 Enginee materia .5 The ma shall ha .6 The Ow past fie Enginee SUBMITTA .1 The Co enginee .2 Where shall s enginee CONSTRU .1 The Co specific .2 The ex from co to the s .3 The in- of 300 the max .4 The en 200 mm ( modifie STAN of TRANS L TION em consists o S erials shall be ered fill shall composed o solidated rock ance with AST ase or 31.5 mm ered fill shall als or condition ered fill shall al or its by-pro aterial , when ave a Micro-D wner reserves eld performan er , regardless ALS ontractor shal ered fill .
engineered ubmit , for a ered fill .
CTION ontractor sha cally directed b cavation for ; ommencemen specified elev situ material , mm below the ximum dry de gineered fill s m and compa ed Proctor ) m NDARD SP PORTATIO f the supply a e supplied by t consist of cle of clean , un material , orga TM C117 and m crushed gra l not contain ns that would l not present oducts , when e tested by th Deval loss not the right to re nce , documen s of complianc ll advise the fill placemen pproval , the all carry out t by the Engine and the place nt of the Work ation .
on which the e placement g ensity .
shall be place cted in accord maximum dry d PECIFICAT ON and INF STRUCTURES and placemen the Contracto ean hard soun coated partic anic materials d/or C136 , sha avel base per any friable , make the agg t any environ exposed to th he Micro-Dev t greater than eject any sour nted by the r ce with gradat Engineer a m t occurs betw proposed m the Work as er .
ement of ; the k up to and u e engineered f grade in acco ed on a firm , d dance with Ite density .
TIONS FRASTRUC S nt of engineer or .
nd durable cr cles , free of s and other de all conform to 201.2. soluble or re gregate prone nmental haza e natural elem val test metho n 30 % .
rce of supply o records and tion or physica minimum of 7 ween Novem method of pr indicated in engineered f until the engin fill is to be fou ordance with I dry base and em 936 , to a CTURE red fill .
rushed rock , c mud , muds eleterious mat the grading li eactive miner e to decompo ard , from the ments after pla od in accorda of engineered experience o al requiremen 7 Days prior t mber 1st and rotection to p the Contrac fill must be on neered fill pla unded , shall b Item 936 and shall be plac minimum of 9 crushed grave stone , siltston terial , and wh imits of 31.5 m rals or other sition or disint presence of acement in th ance with MT d fill solely on of the Owner nts .
to start of pla May 1st , the prevent freez ct Documents ne continuous acement is co be compacted to a minimum ced in lifts not 95 % of the AS ITEM : 365 Page 365-1 el or pit run ne or other en tested in mm crushed deleterious tegration .
f the parent e Work .
TO LS-618 , the basis of r and/or the acing of any Contractor zing of the s and/or as s operation , ompleted up d to a depth m of 98 % of t exceeding STM D1557 ENGIN Page 3 365.4 .
365.5 365.6 NEERED FILL 365-2 4 .1 Adj as .5 Neither placem .6 The tole Table 3 Base Top o MEASURE .1 The Qu supplied .2 The me Docum BASIS OF P .1 Paymen .2 Haulag DE L jacent fill mat the engineere r the excava ment , shall be erances in ele 365-2 .
T Surfa e of Engineere of Engineered MENT FOR P uantity to be m d and placed easurement s ents .
PAYMENT nt for Work un e for enginee EPARTMEN terial shall be ed fill .
ation below e permitted to f evation for the olerances Fo ce ed Fill d Fill PAYMENT measured for in accordance shall be calcu nder this Item ered fill shall b STAN NT of TRAN STRUCTURES e placed simu existing grad freeze until af e placement o Table 365 or Placement  5 % of th specified  25 mm payment sha e with this Item ulated based shall be at the be paid for in NDARD SP NSPORTAT S ultaneously a de , nor the e fter the bearin of the enginee 5-2 t Of Engineer Toleran he nominal th in the Contra all be the num m. on the payme e Unit Price .
accordance w PECIFICATI TION and I and maintaine engineered f ng concrete h ered fill shall m red Fill ce in Elevati hickness of th act Document mber of cubic ent lines as i with Item 801 IONS INFRASTR Jan ed at the sam fill as supplie has been cast meet the requ ion he engineered ts metres of en indicated in th .
RUCTURE ITEM : 365 nuary , 2015 me elevation ed or after t. uirements of d fill ngineered fill he Contract DEPA FREE- Janua 366.1 366.2 366.3 ARTMENT -DRAINING B ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite MATERIAL .1 The Co .2 Free-dr .3 Free-dr accorda .1 Co und SUBMITTA .1 The Co draining .2 The Co as a so STAN of TRANS BACKFILL TION em consists of S ontractor shall raining backfil raining backfi ance with AS ncrete aggreg der this Item .
ALS ontractor shal g backfill .
ontractor shal ource of suppl NDARD SP PORTATIO f supply and p supply all ma l shall be clea ll shall meet t TM C136 .
gates meetin Free A Siev 63 50 25 19 12 9.5 4.7 1.1 l submit the s l submit a req ly for this Item PECIFICAT ON and INF STRUCTURES placement of f aterials .
an , sound dura the grading re g the require Table e-Draining Ba ASTM ve Size 3 mm 0 mm 5 mm 9 mm .5 mm 5 mm 75 mm 18 mm source of mat quest in writin m. TIONS FRASTRUC S free-draining b able crushed equirements s ements of Item 366-1 ackfill Grada Perce 90 35 1 0 0 terial for appr ng for approv CTURE backfill .
rock , crushed shown in Tab m 302.2 may ation nt Passing 100 0 - 100 5 - 100 5 - 85 0 - 53 0 - 30 0 - 4 0 - 2 roval in advan val of the use d gravel or pit ble 366-1 , whe y be approved nce of obtaini e of concrete ITEM : 366 Page 366-1 run gravel .
en tested in d for supply ng the free- aggregates FR Pag 366 366 366 EE-DRAININ ge 366-2 6.4 CONST .1 The spec .2 Whe free Stan .3 Free mate .4 The and/ 6.5 MEASU .1 The back .2 The Doc 6.6 BASIS O .1 Pay G BACKFILL RUCTION Contractor s cifically directe en the water -draining bac ndard Drawing e-draining bac erial .
free-draining /or on the Sta REMENT FO Quantity to b kfill supplied a measuremen cuments .
OF PAYMENT ment for Work DEPARTM L shall carry o ed by the Eng table is below ckfill shall be g 366-1. ckfill shall be backfill shall ndard Drawin OR PAYMENT be measured and placed in a nt shall be ca T k under this Ite STA MENT of TR STRUCTU ut the Work gineer .
w the bottom provided as placed simu be placed to t g 366-1 .
T for payment accordance w alculated base em shall be at ANDARD S RANSPORT URES as indicated m of the free-d indicated in ultaneously w the dimension shall be the with this Item .
ed on the pa t the Unit Pric SPECIFICA TATION an d in the Cont draining back the Contract with the placin ns as indicated number of c ayment lines a ce .
ATIONS nd INFRAS tract Docume kfill , positive d t Documents ng of adjacen d in the Contr cubic metres o as indicated i TRUCTUR ITEM : 36 January , 20 ents and/or a drainage of th and/or on th nt embankme ract Documen of free-drainin in the Contra RE 66 15 as he he nt ts ng act DEPA REMO Janua 371.1 371.2 371.3 371.4 371.5 371.6 ARTMENT OVAL OF ASP ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite waterpr MATERIAL .1 None i SUBMITTA .1 None id CONSTRU .1 The Co specific .2 All rem outside .3 The Co the con abutting .1 The rep .4 All asph may be orthotro .5 The Co milling .
.6 The ap the asp MEASURE .1 The rem on a lum BASIS OF .1 Payme STAN of TRANS PHALT CONC TION em consists o roofing system S dentified .
ALS dentified .
CTION ontractor sha cally directed b moved materia e of the Work ontractor must ncrete Bridge g components e Contractor placement of s halt concrete e in place , to opic Bridge de ontractor shall proach aspha phalt at the inte MENT FOR P moval and dis mp sum basis PAYMENT nt for Work u NDARD SP PORTATIO CRETE - STR of the remova m , from a Brid all carry out t by the Engine als shall beco Site .
t take care wh deck , steel o s of the Structu r shall be re such damage shall be comp o expose an eck .
l not be allow alt shall be re erface of new PAYMENT sposal of the a s. nder this Item PECIFICAT ON and INF RUCTURES STRUCTURES al and dispos dge deck .
the Work as er .
ome the prop hen removing orthotropic Brid ure .
esponsible , a e resulting from pletely remov nd leave bare wed to remove moved in a st and old asph asphalt concre m shall be at t TIONS FRASTRUC S sal of the exi indicated in perty of the g the existing a dge deck , Ro at his/her ow m the Work .
ved , including e the Portlan e the existing tepped fashio alt .
ete carried ou the Lump Sum CTURE isting asphalt the Contrac Contractor an asphalt concr oadway drains wn expense , any deck wat nd cement co asphalt from on to avoid a ut in accordan m Price .
t concrete , in ct Documents nd shall be d rete so as not s , joints , curb , for the rep terproofing sy oncrete surfa the Bridge d vertical face f nce with this It ITEM : 371 Page 371-1 ncluding the s and/or as disposed of t to damage bs and other pair and/or ystem which ace or steel eck by cold full depth of tem shall be DEPA REMO Janua 372.1 372.2 372.3 372.4 ARTMENT OVAL OF CO ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite MATERIAL .1 None id SUBMITTA .1 The Co Days p CONSTRU .1 Genera .1 The spe .2 The und .3 All and .4 Unl con occ .5 The sup .6 The and dire res .1 .7 The .8 The abu .9 The adj STAN of TRANS NCRETE TION em consists o S dentified .
ALS ontractor sha rior to the com CTION al e Contractor ecifically direct e removal of der Item 371. removed mat d shall be disp less otherwis nstruction ope curs during the e Contractor pports during t e Contractor s d any damage ect or indirect ponsibility of t The Contrac arising from e Contractor s e Contractor s utments and fr e Contractor acent and abu NDARD SP PORTATIO f the removal ll submit the mmencement shall carry ou ted by the Eng the asphalt c terials genera posed of outsid se specified t erations and e Work .
shall take al the Work .
shall pay parti e incurred to result of the the Contractor ctor shall ind damages or in shall be respo shall be requir rom the Work shall be resp utting features PECIFICAT ON and INF STRUCTURES and disposa proposed me t of the Work .
ut the Work a gineer .
concrete to ba ated as a resu de the Work S the railing an the Contracto ll care not to icular attention vehicles or th Contractor ’ s r. emnify and s njuries .
nsible to ensu red to remove k Site before th ponsible , at h s. TIONS FRASTRUC S l of concrete ethod and se .
as indicated i are exposed lt of the Work Site .
nd rail posts or shall ensu o damage an n to the flow o heir cargo or action , proced save harmles ure the securit e all concrete he Contract is his/her own e CTURE from a Struct equencing of in the Contra concrete surf k shall be the p s are to rem ure that no d ny portion of of traffic throu injury sustain dures or negl ss the Owner ty of the fall ar rubble and ot s completed .
expense , for ture .
the removal act Documents face shall be property of the ain in place damage to th the Superstr ugh the constr ned to their oc ligence , shall r with regard rea below the ther waste fro any damage ITEM : 372 Page 372-1 at least 14 s and/or as carried out e Contractor during the ese articles ructure and ruction zone ccupants as be the sole s to claims Structure .
m piers and e or loss of RE Pag 372 372 372 372 372 MOVAL OF C ge 372-2 2.4 .2 Equ .1 2.4.2 .2 2.4.2 .3 2.4.2 .4 2.4 .3 Type .1 .2 .3 CONCRETE ipment All Equipme approval of th Chipping ham .1 Chipping .2 Chipping Jackhammers .1 Jackham .2 Concrete .1 Withi .2 Withi place .3 Withi Rig-Mounted .1 Utilizing a areas : .1 For b the g .2 For b to be .3 Withi .4 Loca and t Docu 5 .
Withi studs e A - Partial D This section c The actual lo Engineer .
Partial depth .1 Sidewalk .2 The top s .3 Barrier w DEPARTM nt used to r he Engineer .
mmers hammers sha hammers sha s mmers shall we e removal utiliz in100 mm of c in100 mm of t e ; and in 25 mm of re Breakers a rig-mounted barrier walls , p girders are to b barrier walls a e removed ; in deck joint a ated within a d the lap length uments ; and in 600 mm fro s to remain in Depth Remova consists of the ocations , area removal shall ks and curbs ; surface of dec walls , endposts STA MENT of TR STRUCTU remove conc all weigh less all be permitte eigh less than zing a jackham concrete that i the edges and einforcing stee d breaker for c parapet walls be removed ; and parapet w assembly ; istance from c of steel reinfo om the edge place .
al e partial depth a and extent apply to but i cks ; and s and ballastw ANDARD S RANSPORT URES rete from the than less than ed in all areas 40 kg .
mmer shall no is to remain in d faces of stru el that is to rem concrete remo and deck sla walls supported concrete to re orcement to re and faces of h removal and t of removal s not limited to walls .
SPECIFICA TATION an e repair area n 15 kg .
of concrete re ot be permitted n place ; ctural steel m main in place .
oval shall not abs supported d by steel bea emain in place emain in place structural ste disposal of lo shall be dete to : ATIONS nd INFRAS as shall be emoval .
d in the followi members that a . be permitted d by concrete ams , unless t e equal to the e as specified eel members i oose and unso ermined on t TRUCTUR ITEM : 37 January , 20 subject to th ing areas : are to remain in the followin girders , unles he deck slab sum of 600m in the Contra including shea ound concrete the site by th RE 72 15 he in ng ss is m act ar e. he DEPA REMO Janua 372.4 .
372.4 ARTMENT OVAL OF CO ary , 2015 3 .4 Co oth .5 Re com .6 Ha deb .7 Co 72 .8 The det 15 .1 .2 .9 All san con .10 The rein .11 In a reti .4 Type B .1 Thi .2 The Eng .3 Ful con less .4 All san and .5 Ca .6 Exp STAN of TRANS NCRETE ncrete shall b er componen inforcing ste mponents to r mmers shall bonding of ba ncrete remov hours and to e unsound a termined by t mm orientate Concrete sh of reinforcin .1 Any add removed Removal of by the Engin of the exp ndblasting ( or ncrete .
e maximum nforcing steel areas where ed at each in - Full Depth s section con e actual loca gineer .
l depth remo ncrete surface s. of the exp ndblasting ( or d concrete .
re shall be ta posed reinfor NDARD SP PORTATIO be removed i nts and utilitie el , prestress remain in plac not come in ars in adjacen val shall not b a minimum c nd delaminat the Engineer , ed perpendicu hall be remove g steel .
ditional unso d from these concrete bey neer .
osed reinforc r Engineer ap size of the shall be 156 the top mat tersection po Removal nsists of the fu tions , area a oval areas sh e to a depth osed reinforc r Engineer ap ken not to da cing steel sha PECIFICAT ON and INF STRUCTURES n such a ma s that are to r sing tendons ce shall not b n contact with nt concrete are be permitted w ompressive s ted areas of shall be saw ular to the orig ed to a minim und concrete areas .
yond the spec cing steel w pproved altern air hammer N. of reinforcin oint .
ull depth remo and extent of hall be saw c of 25 mm or cing steel w pproved altern mage , cut or all be retied a TIONS FRASTRUC S anner as to pr remain in plac , shear con e damaged o h reinforcing eas not being within 1 m of strength of 20 the concrete w cut along a ginal concrete mum of 20 mm e , beyond th cified limit sh within these nate method ) r to be used g steel is co oval and disp f removal sha cut along all r to the top la within these nate method ) loosen the re at each interse CTURE revent damag ce .
nnectors , stru or loosened .
bars in a m g repaired .
newly placed MPa .
e deck slab , all edges to a e surface .
m below the b he minimum hall only be ca repair areas ) such that it d when rem ompletely exp posal of concr all be determ edges , perpe ayer of reinfor repair areas such that the einforcing stee ection point .
ge to adjacen uctural steel manner which d concrete for curbs and en a depth of ap bottom bar of specified , sh arried out wh s shall be c is free of sca moving concr posed , the ba rete .
mined on the endicular to t rcing steel , w s shall be c ey are free of el .
ITEM : 372 Page 372-3 nt concrete , and other h will cause r a period of ndposts , as proximately the top mat hall also be hen directed cleaned by ale , rust and ete around ars shall be site by the the existing whichever is cleaned by f scale , rust RE Pag 372 372 372 372 MOVAL OF C ge 372-4 2.4.4 .7 .8 2.4 .5 Typ .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 2.5 MEASU .1 The rem 2.6 BASIS O .1 Pay iden CONCRETE The Contract not to dama way .
The Contrac Superstructu e C - Comple This section girders/floor s The use of ex The Contract The Contrac supporting m operations in Where suppo the Contract those embed REMENT FO Quantity to b oved and disp OF PAYMENT ment for Wor ntified under th DEPARTM tor must take ge the existi ctor shall em re from falling ete Removal n consists of stringers of a xplosives sha tor shall not d tor shall clea members in n order to prev orting membe or shall emp dded elements OR PAYMENT be measured f posed of in ac T k under this It he Contract .
STA MENT of TR STRUCTU care during ng reinforcing mploy method g concrete de f the comple Structure .
all not be perm drop any mate arly mark , on advance to vent cutting , n ers have shea ploy concrete s nor the sup T for payment s ccordance with tem shall inclu ANDARD S RANSPORT URES the removal o g steel , gran ds approved ebris .
ete removal mitted .
erials from the the surface o performing nicking or spa ar connection removal me porting memb shall be the nu h this Item .
ude a separat SPECIFICA TATION an of deck concr nite curbing , r by the Eng and disposa e Bridge deck of the Bridge saw cutting alling of the su s or stirrups e ethods that w bers .
umber of squ te Unit Price f ATIONS nd INFRAS rete in the cu railposts and gineer to pro al of concre k area .
e deck , the lo g and/or jac upporting me embedded in will not result are metres of for each type TRUCTUR ITEM : 37 January , 20 rb areas so a d railing in an otect the ste ete above th ocations of th ck hammerin mbers .
the deck sla in damage t f deck concret of removal , a RE 72 15 as ny el he he ng b , to te as DEPA REMO Janua 381.1 381.2 381.3 381.4 ARTMENT OVAL OF STR ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite MATERIAL .1 None id SUBMITTA .1 The Co .2 The Co comme Structu Govern .1 The from into ma CONSTRU .1 The Co specific .2 For Stru Item 94 .1 The wat .2 The equ .3 The Co .4 Explosi .5 All Wor Demolit .1 The .6 The fol .1 Fou .2 Bac dep STAN of TRANS RUCTURES TION em consists o S dentified .
ALS ontractor shal ontractor sha encement of re for appro nment .
e submittal sh m the Structu o the wetted p aterial which in CTION ontractor sha cally directed b uctures in or o 48 and the follo e Structure sh tercourse .
e removal of uipment in the ontractor shal ves will not be rk shall be ca tion of Structu e Structure sh lowing condit undation exca ckfilling of th pending on th NDARD SP PORTATIO f the removal l submit draw all submit to the Work , th oval by the hall include th ure , the prop portion of the nadvertently f all carry out t by the Engine over watercou owing : hall be remov material whic e wetted porti l protect publ e permitted fo rried out in ac ures ” .
hall be remove ions shall app avation for the he Work Are he backfill mat PECIFICAT ON and INF STRUCTURES of Structure ( wings and des the Enginee he proposed Engineer an he proposed osed retentio watercourse falls into the w the Work as er .
urses , the Con ved without re ch falls into t ion of the wat ic traffic from r demolition .
ccordance wit ed in such a m ply for buried e Work shall b ea shall be c terial to be pl TIONS FRASTRUC S ( s ) including t sign calculatio er , upon req method and nd the Depa method for th on system for and techniqu watercourse .
indicated in ntractor shall eleasing harm the river shal tercourse or d the dust and th CAN/CSA manner to elim portions of th be carried ou carried out i aced .
CTURE the disposal o ons in accorda uest , at leas d sequencing artment of E he capture an r preventing ues to be use the Contrac carry out the mful materials ll be accomp disturbing the debris result S350 - “ Code minate contac he Structures ut in accordan n accordanc of all debris .
ance with Item st 14 Days p g of the rem Environment nd removal o the material ed for the rem ct Documents Work in acco or contamina lished withou e riverbed .
ting from the W e of Practice f ct with the rive : nce with 161.4 ce with 106.4 ITEM : 381 Page 381-1 m 956. prior to the oval of the and Local f the debris from falling moval of any s and/or as ordance with ants into the ut stationing Work .
for Safety in erbed .
4 .
4 or 108.4 , REMO Page 3 381.4 381.5 381.6 OVAL OF STR 381-2 .7 All was dispose Disposa .1 Wa .8 Any da repaire MEASURE .1 The rem BASIS OF .1 Paymen DE RUCTURES ste and dem ed of outside al Site .
aste and demo mage to the d by the Cont MENT FOR P moval of a Stru PAYMENT nt for Work un EPARTMEN molition debris e the Work olition debris riverbed or to tractor at his/ PAYMENT ucture ( s ) in ac nder this Item NT of TRAN STRUCTURES s shall becom Site at an shall be recy o portions of t her own expe ccordance wit shall be at the SPECIFIC NSPORTAT S me the prope approved Co ycled where p the Structure ense .
th this Item sh e Lump Sum CATIONS TION and I erty of the C onstruction a ossible .
which are to hall be on a lu Price .
INFRASTR Jan Contractor an and Demolitio remain in pla ump sum basis RUCTURE ITEM : 381 nuary , 2015 nd shall be on Material ace shall be s. STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS DEPARTMENT of TRANSPORTATION and INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARD DRAWINGS ITEM : 399 January , 2015 STRUCTURES Standard Drawing 302-1 Roadway Drain For Structures 600 | DRAIN 80 100 75 30 100 75 30 VIEW X 26.7 O.D .
x 2.87 mm PIPE ( TYPICAL ) 15M BAR THRU PIPE ( 4 REQ ’ D - LENGTH = 600 ) 400 300 600 70 225 26.7 O.D .
x 2.87 mm PIPE ( TYPICAL ) 300 70 B B 225 A A 100 | DRAIN 60 60 9 - 12x40 BARS @ 60 = 480 TYPICAL 15M BAR THRU PIPE ( 2 REQ ’ D - LENGTH = 850 ) PLAN WELDING = REINFORCING : CSA G30.12 , GRADE 400 MATERIALS = STEEL : CAN/CSA - G40.20/G40.21 - M92 - TYPE 300W CSA W47.1 - 1983 AND CSA W59 - M1989 ALL STEEL PLATES ARE TO BE 6mm THICK UNLESS OTHERWISE NOTED .
NOTES : ALL WELDERS SHALL BE CERTIFIED BY THE CWB TO CAN/CSA W47.1 SPECIFICATIONS , AND/OR TO A CERTIFICATION LEVEL OF QUALIFIED WELDER AS ISSUED BY THE PROVINCE OF NEW BRUNSWICK .
15M REINFORCING BARS SHALL BE SUPPLIED WITH DRAINS .
15M BAR THRU PIPE ( 4 REQ ’ D - LENGTH = 600 ) DOWN SPOUT/ SECTION DETAILS ON STANDARD DRAWING 302-2 VIEW X TYP .
File : 302-1 DECK DRAIN ASSEMBLIES TO BE GALVANIZED BY HOT DIPPING IN ACCORDANCE WITH CAN/CSA G-164 , TO A MINIMUM THICKNESS OF 175 um AND/OR A MINIMUM APPLICATION RATE OF 1 kg/m [ .
STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS DEPARTMENT of TRANSPORTATION and INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARD DRAWINGS ITEM : 399 January , 2015 STRUCTURES Standard Drawing 302-2 Roadway Drain Details 125 400 40 TYP .
5 25 100 26.7 O.D .
x 2.87 mm PIPE ( TYPICAL ) 18 12x40 BAR 15M BAR THRU PIPE ( 2 REQ ’ D - LENGTH = 850 ) 125 400 40 TYP .
5 25 100 26.7 O.D .
x 2.87 mm PIPE ( TYPICAL ) 18 12x40 BAR 15M BAR THRU PIPE ( 2 REQ ’ D - LENGTH = 850 ) 125 25 100 140 600 TYP .
5 TYP .
5 TYP .
| DRAIN 26.7 O.D .
x 2.87 mm PIPE ( TYPICAL ) 60 60 100 100 100 100 9 - 12x40 BARS @ 60 = 480 80 15M BAR THRU PIPE ( 4 REQ ’ D - LENGTH = 600 ) OPENING 140 OPENING DOWN SPOUT DETAIL SECTION B-B SECTION A-A TYP .
5 PLAN / VIEW X ON STANDARD DRAWING 302-1 File : 302-2 HSS 152 x 152 x 6.4 DOWN SPOUT ( GALVANIZED ) STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS DEPARTMENT of TRANSPORTATION and INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARD DRAWINGS ITEM : 399 January , 2015 STRUCTURES Standard Drawing 302-3 Concrete Limits For Foundation Overexcavation File : 302-3 LIMITS OF WORKING SLAB CONCRETE ORIGINAL GROUND STRUCTURE AS DEFINED IN THE CONTRACT DOCUMENTS 0.5 1 1 1 SLAB VOLUME WILL BE PAID FOR AS WORKING SLAB > 150mm OVEREXCAVATION ORIGINAL GROUND STRUCTURE AS DEFINED IN THE CONTRACT DOCUMENTS 0.5 1 1 1 150mm OVEREXCAVATION SLAB VOLUME WILL BE PAID FOR AS FOOTING CONCRETE COMMON BEDROCK BEDROCK COMMON LIMITS OF FOOTING CONCRETE 1 1 300 300 1 1 STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS DEPARTMENT of TRANSPORTATION and INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARD DRAWINGS ITEM : 399 January , 2015 STRUCTURES Standard Drawing 311-1 Steel H Piles Pile Cap Details 410x410x25 PILE CAP 410 205 205 205 205 410 29 18 PILE CAP HP 310x132 10 150 10 180 10 75-225 HP 360x132 4 1 BATTERED PILE VERTICAL PILE 360 180 180 180 180 360 360 180 180 360 HP 310x132 PILE CAP VERTICAL PILE BATTERED PILE 23 23 10 75-175 10 150 10 180 360x360x25 PILE CAP PILE CAP PLATE SIZE BASED ON NOMINAL PILE DIMENSIONS HP 310x79 4 1 4 1 30 27 PILE CAP HP 310x79 VERTICAL PILE BATTERED PILE 8 150 8 75-175 8 150 360x360x25 PILE CAP File : 311-1 180 180 PILE CAP DETAILS FOR HP 360x132 PILE CAP DETAILS FOR HP 310x79 PILE CAP DETAILS FOR HP 310x132 STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS DEPARTMENT of TRANSPORTATION and INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARD DRAWINGS ITEM : 399 January , 2015 STRUCTURES Standard Drawing 311-2 Steel H Piles Pile Point Details 8 150 File : 311-2 IF PILE POINT IS NOT BEVELLED , PILE MUST BE BEVELLED 45^ PILE POINT PILE BUTT WELD DETAIL FOR FLANGES TITUS PILE POINT No .
HHP-S WEB PILE POINT 45 % % d FULL PENETRATION 8 150 WEB PILE STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS DEPARTMENT of TRANSPORTATION and INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARD DRAWINGS ITEM : 399 January , 2015 STRUCTURES Standard Drawing 311-3 Steel H Piles Splice Details 900 375 150 375 75 200 125 75 75 75 WEB RUN-OFF BLOCK 75x100x19 SEE DETAIL `` A '' COPING HOLE IN WEB H PILE FLANGE OF H PILE 50 100 450 450 8 TYP .
TYP .
6 MAY BE REDUCED TO 50 WHEN SPLICES ARE CHECKED BY NON-DESTRUCTIVE TEST METHOD .
VERTICAL ALIGNMENT FOR H PILE SPLICING DETAIL `` A '' 3 \ 2 TOLERANCE 3 MAX .
( TYP . )
36 \ 5 ^ 35 % % d 35 % % d \ 5 ^ 12.5mm PLATE REMOVE AFTER SPLICE IS FINISHED AND GRIND FLUSH .
File : 311-3 STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS DEPARTMENT of TRANSPORTATION and INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARD DRAWINGS ITEM : 399 January , 2015 STRUCTURES Standard Drawing 311-4 Steel H Piles Sequences for Welds for Horizontal Position File : 311-4 A B COPING HOLE COPING HOLE DETAIL WEB '' A '' APPROX .
4mm LARGER THAN EDGE OF GROOVE '' B '' LARGE ENOUGHT TO ALLOW THE WELD TO START BEYOND THE WEB WITH A MAX .
TIP OF 7^ OF THE ELECTRODE BACKCHIP 1 AND 2 TO SOUND METAL BEFORE DEPOSITION OF PASSES 3 AND 4 1 AND 2 3 AND 4 2 3 3 4 4 1 2 1 6 7 CORNER FILLED FIRST ON ALTERNATE SIDES WELD PASSES 1 AND 2 ARE AT THE CENTER LINE OF THE FLANGES AND WELD PSSES 3 AND 4 ARE ON THE INSIDE OF THE FLANGES BACKCHIP NOTE : SEQUENCE OF WELDING FLANGES SEQUENCE OF WELDING WEB STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS DEPARTMENT of TRANSPORTATION and INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARD DRAWINGS ITEM : 399 January , 2015 STRUCTURES Standard Drawing 311-5 Steel H Piles Sequences for Welds for Flat Position File : 311-5 GOUGE OR BACKCHIP ROOT BEFORE WELDING SECOND SIDE SUPPORTED EDGE SUPPORTED EDGE A A A A B B B B C C C C D D D D E E E E F F F F SUPPORTED EDGE CORNED FILLED FIRST CORNED FILLED FIRST GOUGE OR BACKCHIP ROOT BEFORE WELDING WELD TO BE COMPLETE AS SHOWN BY THE NUMBERED SEQUENCE NOTE : POSITION No .
3 POSITION No .
4 POSITION No .
1 POSITION No .
2 2 1 3 4 6 5 8 7 9 10 STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS DEPARTMENT of TRANSPORTATION and INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARD DRAWINGS ITEM : 399 January , 2015 STRUCTURES Standard Drawing 312-1 Steel Pipe Piles Pile Point Details File : 312-1 D/2 D/2 D 100 32 400 50 50 125 25 6 1 1 6 S 6 45 % % d 8 PIPE PILE 6mm x 25mm BACKING BAR 6mm x 25mm BACKING BAR 25mm { 32mm BASE { 32mm BASE { 25mm STIFFENER { C.P .
( TYP . )
PIPE PILE A A B B | PIPE PILE { 32 x 300 { 32 x 143 8 TYP .
| PIPE PILE 32mm BASE { 6mm x 25mm BACKING BAR | PIPE PILE 8 TYP .
25mm STIFFENER { | PIPE PILE | PIPE PILE SECTION A-A SECTION B-B PILE POINT DETAIL STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS DEPARTMENT of TRANSPORTATION and INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARD DRAWINGS ITEM : 399 January , 2015 STRUCTURES Standard Drawing 312-2 Steel Pipe Piles Splice Details File : 312-2 45^ S PIPE PILE SPLICE CENTER OF 45^ S MINIMUM SEE DETAIL `` A '' OR `` B '' FOR APPLICABLE POSITION SEE DETAIL `` A '' OR `` B '' FOR APPLICABLE POSITION PIPE PILE MAX .
WALL THICKNESS = 20mm 75 150 \ 75 BACKING PLATE ( MADE FROM SECTION OF PIPE PILE OR FORMED FROM 10mm THICK PLATE SECTION OF PILE CENTER OF SPLICE DETAIL `` A '' FLAT , VERTICAL OR OVERHEAD POSITION 6 ROOT OPENING ROOT OPENING 6 DETAIL `` B '' HORIZONTAL POSITION BACKING { PIPE PILE BACKING { PIPE PILE PIPE PILE 45^ +10^ -5^ 4 5 ^ + 1 0 ^ - 5 ^ STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS DEPARTMENT of TRANSPORTATION and INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARD DRAWINGS ITEM : 399 January , 2015 STRUCTURES Standard Drawing 331-1 Prestressed Beam Lifting Device Details Vertical Only 50 50 65 65 100 16mm THICK { G-40.21M GRADE 300W STEEL END OF BEAM 600 150 150 260 60 120 600 AASHTO TYPE II BEAM END OF BEAM 675 65 65 700 50 50 125 65 AASHTO TYPE III BEAM 150 150 150 210 75 70 70 57mm ‘ HOLES ( TYPICAL ) 25mm THICK { G-40.21M GRADE 300W STEEL 57mm ‘ HOLES ( TYPICAL ) END OF BEAM 150 150 150 310 750 200 90 25mm THICK { G-40.21M GRADE 300W STEEL 57mm ‘ HOLES ( TYPICAL ) 80 80 750 AASHTO TYPE IV BEAM NBDOT TYPE I BEAM 100 100 END OF BEAM 64mm ‘ HOLES ( TYPICAL ) 750 100 150 150 150 150 150 445 125 150 150 38mm THICK { G-40.21M GRADE 300W STEEL 100 TOP OF BEAM TOP OF BEAM TOP OF BEAM TOP OF BEAM File : 331-1 1 220 200 BULB-TEE BEAM STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS DEPARTMENT of TRANSPORTATION and INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARD DRAWINGS ITEM : 399 January , 2015 STRUCTURES Standard Drawing 342-1 Bridge Pot Bearing Nomenclature BOTTOM FLANGE TOP PLATE PISTON PINTLE BASE PLATE NON-SHRINK GROUT BEARING BLOCK BASE POT ELASTOMERIC DISC NUT & BOLT SEAL RINGS SEAL 8 FIXED BEARING SYMMETRICAL @ | GIRDER BASE PLATE BEARING BLOCK NON-SHRINK GROUT SEAL RINGS BASE POT ELASTOMERIC DISC PISTON 8 NUT & BOLT CONSTRAINED SLIDING BEARING BOTTOM FLANGE TOP PLATE DUST SEAL STAINLESS STEEL SYMMETRICAL @ | GIRDER LUBRICATED DIMPLED P.T.F.E .
BONDED AND RECESSED RECESSED P.T.F.E .
BONDED AND A BRONZE MATRIX OR LEAD FILLED TFE IN SHOE PLATE ANCHOR BOLT PIPE SLEEVE SHOE PLATE ANCHOR BOLT PIPE SLEEVE File : 342-1 STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS DEPARTMENT of TRANSPORTATION and INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARD DRAWINGS ITEM : 399 January , 2015 STRUCTURES Standard Drawing 345-1 Ballastwall Protection Details File : 345-1 DETAIL `` A '' 20mm ‘ x 200mm LONG STUDS STAGGERED at 225mm ON CENTER .
STUDS TO CONFORM TO ASTM GRADE 1015 AND AASHTO SPECIFICATIONS .
25 30 30 30 30 PLUMB | 5mm ‘ BLEEDER HOLE at 450mm ON CENTER 100mm x 100mm x 13mm ANGLE SET FLUSH WITH TOP OF CONCRETE FINISHED GRADE BALLASTWALL SECTION PAVEMENT STRUCTURE PLUMB COMPACTED FILL SEE DETAIL `` A '' STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS DEPARTMENT of TRANSPORTATION and INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARD DRAWINGS ITEM : 399 January , 2015 STRUCTURES Standard Drawing 351-1 Deck at Barrier Wall/Curb Waterproofing Details File : 351-1 MEMBRANE OVERLAP 65mm MINIMUM 65mm ASPHALT CONCRETE BARRIER WALL / CURB WATERPROOFING MEMBRANE DECK CONCRETE OVERLAP MEMBRANE IN PRINCIPLE DIRECTION OF WATER FLOW AND IN DIRECTION OF ASPHALT CONCRETE PLACEMENT .
FOR NORMAL CROWN - INSTALL STARTER STRIP FIRST .
FOR SUPERELEVATION - INSTALL STARTER STRIP ON HIGH SIDE LAST .
NOTES : MEMBRANE TO TURN UP VERTICAL FACE 50mm .
SECTION THROUGH DECK AT BARRIER WALL / CURB SHOWING WATERPROOFING SYSTEM 25mm x 25mm FILLET MATERIAL COMPATIBLE WITH SELECTED WATERPROOFING .
WHEN SPECIFIED IN THE CONTRACT DOCUMENTS , 8mm x 45mm DENSOBAND ( TOP TO BE APPROXIMATELY 5mm ABOVE SURFACE OF ASPHALT CONCRETE ) STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS DEPARTMENT of TRANSPORTATION and INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARD DRAWINGS ITEM : 399 January , 2015 STRUCTURES Standard Drawing 351-2 Ballast Wall Waterproofing System Details File : 351-2 MIN .
150 WATERPROOF MEMBRANE MASTIC PROTECTION BOARD FRONT FACE BACK FACE BALLAST WALL APPROACH SLAB MIN .
25 MASTIC SECTION THROUGH BALLAST WALL SHOWING WATERPROOFING SYSTEM ALL PROTECTION BOARD TO BE APPLIED ON TOP OF THE WATERPROOFING SYSTEM AND ADHERED TO THE MEMBRANE WITH THE SPECIFIED MASTIC PLACED AS GOBS ON 600mm CENTERS BETWEEN THE TWO SURFACES .
ALL PROTECTION BOARD TO BE BUTTED TIGHTLY .
ALL TERMINATIONS TO BE SEALED BY AN EDGE BEAD OF MASTIC .
ALL MEMBRANE SHALL BE PLACED VERTICALLY AND OVERLAPPED A MINIMUM OF 65mm WITH ADJACENT SHEETS .. NOTES : 50 x 150 EXPANDED POLYSTYRENE ( MINIMUM DENSITY OF 16 kg/m ] ) 13mm ASPHALT IMPREGNATED FIBREBOARD STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS DEPARTMENT of TRANSPORTATION and INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARD DRAWINGS ITEM : 399 Waterproofing Requirements on Box Culvert or Rigid Frame January , 2015 STRUCTURES Standard Drawing 351-3 SURFACE WATERPROOFING JOINT WATERPROOFING TO BE CONWRAP AND PRIMER OR EQUIVALENT ( EXTERIOR TOP & FULL DEPTH ON SIDES ) FINISHED GRADE NOTE : RUB ’ R-NEK REQUIRED FOR CULVERTS WITH TONGUE AND GROOVE JOINTS ONLY 1 2 3 4 0m to 150mm 1.5m to 3.5m 150mm to 1.5m OVER 3.5m TOP AND FULL DEPTH ON SIDES TOP AND FULL DEPTH ON SIDES TOP AND DOWN 450mm ON SIDES NO WATERPROOFING B B - A CASE MINIMUM COVER REQUIRED WATERPROOFING TYPE SURFACE WATERPROOFING CHART STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS DEPARTMENT of TRANSPORTATION and INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARD DRAWINGS ITEM : 399 Deck at Barrier Wall/Curb – Torch Applied Waterproofing Detail January , 2015 STRUCTURES Standard Drawing 351-4 | 12m m TO 25m m OVERLAP MEMBRANE 65mm MIN .
65m m CONCRETE ASPHALT 5mm ABOVE SURFACE OF ASPHALT CONCRETE ) 8mm x 45mm DENSOBAND ( TOP TO BE APPROXIMATELY WHEN SPECIFIED IN THE CONTRACT DOCUMENTS , FACE OF BARRIER W ALL MAX .
75 TORCH APPLIED WATERPROOFING MEMBRANE 35mm 25 DECK CONCRETE File : 351-4 OF ASPHALT CONCRETE PLACEMENT .
OVERLAP MEMBRANE IN PRINCIPLE DIRECTION OF WATER FLOW AND IN DIRECTION NOTE : SHOWING TORCH APPLIED WATERPROOFING SYSTEM SECTION THROUGH DECK AT BARRIER WALL / CURB / CURB FLUSH WITH TOP OF WATERPROOFING 20mm ‘ GREY PVC DRAIN PIPE TO BE WITH SELECTED WATERPROOFING FILLET MATERIAL COMPATIBLE STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS DEPARTMENT of TRANSPORTATION and INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARD DRAWINGS ITEM : 399 January , 2015 STRUCTURES Standard Drawing 366-1 Free Draining Backfill Placement Details File : 366-1 A A B B 600 600 600 600 600 600 GRADE TO DRAIN WHERE REQUIRED FREE DRAINING BACKFILL ( TO BE PLACED UNDER WINGWALL AS SHOWN ) WINGWALL GRADE TO DRAIN WHERE REQUIRED WINGWALL WINGWALL FREE DRAINING BACKFILL FREE DRAINING BACKFILL FREE DRAINING BACKFILL ( TO FOLLOW SLOPE OF WINGWALL ) BACK FACE OF BREASTWALL APPROACH SLAB SEAT BOTTOM OF WINGWALL APPROACH SLAB SEAT BACK FACE OF BREASTWALL WINGWALL WINGWALL BACK FACE OF BREASTWALL SECTION B-B SECTION A-A PLAN OF ABUTMENT AT APPROACH SLAB SEAT ELEVATION OF INSIDE FACE OF WINGWALL 600 600 600 600 DEPA TABLE Janua IT 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 ARTMENT E OF CONTE ary , 2015 TEM D 401 S 404 P 406 S 407 F 408 A 409 R 410 P 415 P 416 C 419 C 420 A 423 R 424 R 425 R 499 S STAN of TRANS ENTS DESCRIPTIO Storm Sewer Precast Catch Sluice Box .... Frame With G Adjustment of Relocation of Paving Catch Pipe Zone Ma Curb and Gutt Concrete Side Asphalt Sidew Removal of Cu Removal of Si Removal of Un Standard Draw 401 - 1 T 404 - 1 P 404 - 2 T 406 - 1 T 406 - 2 T 406 - 3 T 407 - 1 T 407 - 2 T 410 - 1 P 416 - 1 C 416 - 2 C 416 - 3 C 419 - 1 C 419 - 2 J 419 - 3 J 420 - 1 A NDARD SP PORTATIO N Pipe ............. h Basin ......... ..................... Grate or Cover f Catch Basins Catch Basin Basin Apron aterial ............ ter ................ ewalk ............ walk .............. urb and Gutte idewalk ........ nderground S wings Typical Trenc Precast Catch Typical Catch Typical Sluice Typical Sluice Typical Sluice Typical Frame Typical Frame Paving Catch Curb and Gut Curb and Gut Curb and Gut Concrete Side Joint Layout Joint and Isol Asphalt Sidew PECIFICAT ON and INF MUNICIPAL .................... ..................... .................... r .................. s and Manho ..................... .................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... er ................. ..................... Services ....... ch Cross Sect h Basin Detai h Basin Excav e Box and Pip e Box Installat e Box Installat e With Grate e With Cover Basin Apron tter Details tter Details tter Details ewalk Details ation Details walk Details TIONS FRASTRUC ..................... ..................... ..................... .................... les ............... .................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... .................... ..................... ..................... ..................... tions ls vation pe Detail tion Behind th tion Into the C - Square - Round s CTURE NUMBE PAGE .... 5 ... 2 .... 2 ... 1 ... 1 ... 2 .... 1 ... 2 ... 4 .... 4 ... 2 .... 1 ... 1 .... 2 he Curb and G Curb and Gut DI R OF ES Gutter tter VISION 400 Page 400-1 DEPA STOR Janua 401.1 401.2 401.2 401.2 401.2 401.2 401.2 ARTMENT M SEWER P ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite MATERIAL .1 All mate .2 Concre .1 All .2 All .3 Metal P .1 All .2 All .4 Plastic .1 All .2 PV .1 .2 .3 PE .1 .2 .4 Spe .1 .5 Pipe Zo .1 Pip ma .6 Backfill .1 Bac Eng .2 If a Wo Item STAN of TRANS IPE TION em consists o LS erials shall be ete Pipe pipe shall con pipe wrap for Pipe pipe shall be pipe wrap for Pipe plastic pipe s C pipe : Smooth wal F679 .
Profile/ribbe pipe : PE pipe sha Profile PE p ecialized Ben Specialized requirement one Materials pe zone mate anufacturer ’ s i ckfill materia gineer .
additional mat ork Area from m 167 .
NDARD SP PORTATIO f the supply a e supplied by nform to CAN r the pipe join corrugated s r the pipe join shall conform l PVC pipe sh ed PVC pipe s all conform to ipe and fitting nds : bends as i ts of the adjoi s erials shall co nstallation ins al shall be s terials are req m a source an ECIFICATI ON and INF MUNICIPAL and installatio the Contracto N/CSA-A257.2 ts shall be a g steel pipe , as ts shall be a g to CAN/CSA- hall conform t shall conform ASTM F405 gs shall confo indicated in ning pipe .
onform to the structions .
elected mate quired for bac nd of a type a IONS FRASTRUC on of storm se or .
2 , Class 65-D geotextile con specified by C geotextile con -B182.1 .
to CAN/CSA- to CAN/CSA and/or F667 .
orm to CAN/C the Contrac e limits estab erial , from th ckfilling , the C approved by t CTURE ewer pipe .
D. nforming to 6 CAN/CSA-G4 nforming to 6 -B182.2 , AST A-B182.4 and CSA-B182.6 .
ct Documents blished in 415 he excavation Contractor sha the Engineer 01.2 , Type N 401 .
01.2 , Type N TM D3034 , an ASTM F794 .
s shall confo 5.2 or as det n , as approv all import mate r and in accor ITEM : 401 Page 401-1 1 .
1. nd/or ASTM orm to the ailed in the ved by the erials to the rdance with STO Pag 401 401 401 401 ORM SEWER ge 401-2 1.3 SUBMIT .1 The certi Doc .2 The and prop .3 Sub 1.4 CONST 1.4 .1 Gen .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 1.4 .2 Exca .1 .2 .3 .4 D R PIPE TTALS Contractor s ification that th cuments .
Contractor sh pipe zone m posed .
mittals are req RUCTION neral The Contract specifically di The Engineer selected loca The Contract grades for the The Contracto The Contract Work is antici avation Trench excav the Contract D The Contract bracing and u The Contract to the proper .1 Any dam Contracto .2 Paved dr are show identified The Contract disturb the su DEPARTME shall submit , i he materials s hall notify the materials , at le quired in acco tor shall carry rected by the r shall provide tions or as ma tor shall be re e Work as sho or shall sched or shall notify ipated .
vation for pipe Documents an tor shall be re underpinning n tor shall , inso rty , rights-of-w mage resulting or , at her/his o riveways , Culv wn on the Plan as part of this tor shall neatl urface beyond STA ENT of TRA MUNICIP n advance of supplied meet Engineer , in w east 14 Days ordance with a y out the Wo Engineer .
e control point ay be required esponsible for own on the Pla dule all Work t the Engineer e laying shall b nd Standard D esponsible for necessary to c ofar as is prac way or easem g from the W own expense , verts , hedges , ns , and the C s Item .
ly cut Pavem the limits of t ANDARD S ANSPORTA PAL f the commen t the specified writing , for app s in advance any cross-refe rk as indicate s in the field to d. the layout an ans .
to minimize int at least 24 ho be carried out Drawing 401-1 r the design a complete the W ctical , confine ments provided Work on adja with reasona , lawns , etc .
w Contractor sha ent in a straig he excavation SPECIFICA ATION and ncement of th d requirement proval of the s of obtaining erenced Item f ed in the Con to provide vert nd maintenanc terruptions to ours before in t in accordanc 1. and constructi Work .
e the operatio d by the Own acent property able promptne which are likel all make the r ght line , so th n. ATIONS d INFRAST he Work , the ts as detailed source ( s ) of su material from forming part o ntract Docum tical and horiz ce of control f existing servi nspection of an ce with the lim ion of all temp ons and stora er for the Wo y shall be re ss .
y to be affecte repairs to the hat the excav TRUCTURE ITEM : 40 January , 20 manufacturer in the Contra upply of backf m the source ( f this Item .
ents and/or a zontal control for all lines an ces .
ny phase of th mits indicated porary shorin age of produc ork .
epaired by th ed by the Wo affected area vation does n E 01 15 r ’ s act fill s ) as at nd he in g , ts he rk as ot DEPA STOR Janua 401.4.2 401.4 ARTMENT M SEWER P ary , 2015 2.4 .1 .2 .5 All sto Eng .6 The in a .7 The of t .1 .2 .3 .4 .8 The with .9 The ope .10 If Ove acc .11 Ro Item .3 Pipe Zo .1 Pip with .2 Pip .3 All mm STAN of TRANS IPE The Contrac damage to , excavation a The Paveme other materia ckpiled mater gineer .
e Contractor s a manner not d e Contractor m the new pipe a The Contrac basins and approved for Any pipe de Owner and t undamaged .
.1 If the pi Enginee All pipe rem Maintenance All unsalvag and shall be e Contractor s hout the prior e Contractor s eration , withou Overexcavatio erexcavation cordance with ck encounter m 161. one Material pe zone mater h the pipe ma pe zone mater pipe zone ma m in thickness NDARD SP PORTATIO ctor shall be the Paveme and for the rep ent shall be ex als shall be e rial shall be re shall dispose o detrimental to may be requir alignment .
ctor shall not shall verify th r removal .
etermined to b the Contractor .
pe is damage er , the Contrac moved and sa e Depot .
geable pipe an disposed of o shall not exca approval of th shall not leav ut prior approv on occurs , and shall fill t Item 936 , and red within the rial shall be pla nufacturer ’ s in rial shall not be aterial shall be and compact ECIFICATI ON and INF MUNICIPAL responsible , a ent and othe pair or otherwi xcavated sepa excavated by eused to back of water result o public and pr red to excavat ify the Engin hat the existi be salvageabl r shall take al ed as a result ctor shall be re alvaged from nd/or catch b outside the Wo avate more th he Engineer .
ve open more val of the Eng the Contract the Overexca d compacted t limits of the aced as indica nstructions .
e placed in tre e placed , in ac ted to a minim IONS FRASTRUC at his/her ow er surfaces b ise restoration arately .
material type kfill the excav ting from the W rivate property te existing pip eer prior to b ng pipe and le by the Eng l precaution to t of the Contr esponsible to the Work sha basins shall b ork Site .
han 30 metres e than 15 met ineer .
tor shall , at avation with an to 95 % of the excavation s ated on Stand enches having ccordance with mum of 95 % of CTURE wn expense , f beyond the d n of the areas e and stockpi vation to Subg Work in accor y. pe and/or catc breaking into catch basins gineer shall re o preserve the ractor 's action replace the p all be transpo ecome the pr s in advance tres of trench t her/his ow n approved b maximum dry hall be excav dard Drawing g soft and uns h Item 936 , in f its maximum for all remova designated lim affected .
iled separatel grade , as dire rdance with Ite ch basin ( s ) in existing pipe s are out of s emain the pro e pipe section ns , as determ ipe .
orted to the n roperty of the of installation h at the end o wn expense , backfill materia y density .
vated in acco 401-1 and in stable bottom lifts of not mo m dry density .
ITEM : 401 Page 401-3 al of , and/or mits of the ly .
Selected ected by the em 948 and the location e and catch service and operty of the ns intact and mined by the nearest DTI e Contractor operations , of any day ’ s repair the al , placed in rdance with accordance conditions .
ore than 150 STO Pag 401 401 401 401 401 ORM SEWER ge 401-4 1.4.3 .4 .5 .6 1.4 .4 Pipe .1 1.4 .5 Join .1 .2 .3 1.4 .6 Bac .1 .2 .3 .4 1.4 .7 Deto .1 D R PIPE Compaction E or cause mov The Contrac continuous , u All placement on both sides e Laying All pipe shall accordance w .1 In all cas concrete .2 Connecti secure fit .1 Preca nts Joints for con .1 Joints fo minimum of 300 mm Gaskets shal Joints shall b kfilling Backfill mate Subgrade , as Documents .
All backfill m 300 mm in th Excavated m the Contracto Stockpiled m backfill , as d shall be dispo ours Detours requ DEPARTME Equipment for vement of the ctor shall sha uniform bearin t of pipe zone s at the same t be installed o with 401.4.2. ses the install and PVC pipe ons between t. ast inserts sha ncrete and me r concrete an m of 150 mm o m at the crow l be used in jo be maintained erial shall be s indicated on material shall hickness and material , suitab or as directed material not determined by osed of outsid ired for the W STA ENT of TRA MUNICIP r pipe bedding pipes due to i ape the pipe g surface for t e material sha time .
on a prepared ation shall pro e. catch basins all be accepta tal pipe storm nd metal pipe on each side wn of the pipe .
oints for plastic d free of mud , e placed from n the Standar be placed , in compacted to ble for and su d by the Engin reused per y the Enginee de the Work S Work shall be c ANDARD S ANSPORTA PAL g shall be size impact and/or bed true to the barrel of th all be carried o d bed as indic oceed upgrad s and pipe s able for PVC c m sewers shall e shall be w of the joint an c pipe .
silt , gravel an m the top of rd Drawing 40 n accordance o a minimum urplus to back neer .
401.4.2.5 an er , shall beco Site .
arried out in a SPECIFICA ATION and ed so as not t r vibration .
o grade and he pipe .
out such that cated on Stan de , with the b shall be morta connections .
be gasket-fre wrapped with nd the geotex nd other forei the pipe zo 01-1 , and/or a with Item 93 of 95 % of its kfilling , shall b nd excavated ome the prop accordance wi ATIONS d INFRAST to cause dam the grade s the pipe is ba ndard Drawin bell ends plac ared to provid ee .
Type - N1 g xtile shall over ign materials .
ne material t as indicated i 36 , in lifts of maximum dry be placed or d material no perty of the C ith Item 918 .
TRUCTURE ITEM : 40 January , 20 age to the pip shall provide ackfilled equal g 401-1 and ed upgrade fo de a tight an geotextile for rlap a minimu .
to the define in the Contra not more tha y density .
disposed of b ot suitable fo Contractor an E 01 15 pe a lly in or nd a m ed ct an by or nd DEPA STOR Janua 401.5 401.6 ARTMENT M SEWER P ary , 2015 MEASURE .1 The Qu supplied .2 The me starting interme BASIS OF .1 Paymen type of .2 The Ow Work S .1 Par STAN of TRANS IPE MENT FOR P uantity to be m d and installed easurement s and ending ediate precast PAYMENT nt for Work u pipe , as ident wner shall mak Site .
rtial payment s NDARD SP PORTATIO PAYMENT measured for p d in accordan hall be taken at the centre concrete Stru nder this Item tified under the ke partial paym shall be made ECIFICATI ON and INF MUNICIPAL payment shall ce with this Ite continuously of a precast uctures and fit m shall include e Contract .
ment in accor e for specialize IONS FRASTRUC be the numbe em .
, from end to t structure ( if ttings .
e a separate rdance with 90 ed storm sewe CTURE er of linear me end , along th any ) , and inc Unit Price for 08.7 for storm er pipe stored etres of storm he centreline cluding in the r each specifie m sewer pipe s d at the supplie ITEM : 401 Page 401-5 m sewer pipe of the pipe , e length any ed size and stored at the er 's yard .
DEPA PRECA Janua 404.1 404.2 404.3 404.4 ARTMENT AST CATCH ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite MATERIAL .1 All mate .2 All mate .3 Pipe zo .4 Backfill .1 If a Wo Item SUBMITTA .1 The Co manufa in the C .2 The Co basins , .1 Sta .2 Ge .3 Len .4 Join .5 Loc .6 Con .3 Submitt CONSTRU .1 The Co specific .2 The Co bracing .3 The Co .4 The he in the W .5 The Co 404-1 , ST of TRANS BASIN TION em consists of LS erials shall be erials shall co one materials material sha additional mat ork Area from m 167 .
ALS ontractor shall acturer ’ s certif Contract Docu ontractor shall containing bu ation of catch b neral layout s ngth and weig nt details ; cation of reinfo ncrete design tals are requir CTION ontractor sha cally directed b ontractor shal and underpin ontractor shal eight of the pr Work for each ontractor shal and all units s TANDARD PORTATIO f the supply an e supplied by onform to CSA shall conform all be selected terials are req m a source an l submit , upon ication that th ments .
l submit , in ac ut not limited to basin , DTI Co howing catch ght ( mass ) of in orcing steel ( in strength , age red in accorda all carry out t by the Engine ll be respons nning necessa l schedule all recast catch b h catch basin , l be responsi shall be cons D SPECIFIC ON and INF MUNICIPAL nd installation the Contracto A A257.4 , AS m to the limits d material from quired for bac nd of a type a n request , in e materials su ccordance wit o , the followin ontract numbe basin and ap ndividual sect ncluding addit e of test and s ance with any the Work as er .
sible for the d ary to complet Work so as t basins , the fin shall be as in ible to constr tructed plumb CATIONS FRASTRUC n of precast ca or .
STM C139 an s established m the excava ckfilling , the C approved by t advance of t upplied meet th Item 956 , s ng information er and descript ppurtenances ; tions ; tional reinforce hipping streng cross-referen indicated in design and c te the Work .
to minimize in nal grade of t ndicated in th ruct all units i b and true to CTURE atch basins .
d/or ASTM C in 415.2. tion , as appro Contractor sha the Engineer the commenc the specified shop drawing : tion ; ement around gth .
nced Item form the Contrac construction o nterruptions to the frame and he Contract D n accordance alignment an C478M .
oved by the E all import mate r and in accor cement of the requirements gs for each pr d large openin ming part of th ct Documents of all tempora o existing ser d grate , and t ocuments .
e with Standa d grade .
ITEM : 404 Page 404-1 Engineer .
erials to the rdance with e Work , the s as detailed recast catch ngs ) ; and is Item .
s and/or as ary shoring , rvices .
the location ard Drawing PR Pag 404 404 404 ECAST CAT ge 404-2 4.4 .6 All j cem .7 The prog .8 Hole Eng .1 .2 .9 Heig and/ .1 .10 Exc requ Draw 4.5 MEASU .1 The basi .1 4.6 BASIS O .1 Pay prec .2 The CH BASIN joints are to ment or cemen Contractor gresses .
es shall be cu ineer .
Holes shall n connecting p Holes may b shall be the r to make the p ght adjustmen /or metal or c Precast rise 300 mm .
avation , pipe uired , shall b wing 404-2 .
REMENT FO Quantity to b in , exclusive o The height o concrete bas OF PAYMENT ment for Wor cast catch bas Owner shall m DEPARTM be made wa nt mortar .
shall mainta ut in the preca not be more t ipe .
be made at th responsibility proper conne nts to meet th concrete grad r sections s zone materia be carried ou OR PAYMENT be measured of frames and of individual c se to the unde T rk under this I sin , as identifie make partial p STA MENT of TR MUNICIP atertight usin ain the interi ast sections b than 25 mm he time of the of the Contra ctions .
he required ele e rings as pe shall be use al , backfilling ut in accorda T for payment d grates , supp catch basins s erside of the f Item shall inc ed under the C payment for pr ANDARD S RANSPORT PAL ng rubber ring or of the un by means of d greater in dia e manufactur actor to make evation shall r Standard Dr d if the adj around the c ance with 40 shall be the n plied and insta shall be meas frame or grate clude a separa Contract .
recast catch b SPECIFICA TATION an gs , bituminou nit in a clea drilling or othe ameter than t ring of the pr e any adjustm only be made rawing 404-1 justment to catch basin i 01.4 and as number of lin alled in accor sured from th e seat .
ate Unit Price basins in acco ATIONS nd INFRAS us compound an condition er methods ap the outside d recast section ments in the f e with precas .
be made is nstallation an indicated on ear metres of rdance with th he underside e for each siz ordance with 9 TRUCTUR ITEM : 40 January , 20 d , epoxy res as the Wo pproved by th diameter of th ns ; however , field necessa st riser section s greater tha nd any detou the Standar f precast catc his Item .
of the preca e ( diameter ) 908.7 .
RE 04 15 in rk he he it ry ns an rs rd ch st of DEPA SLUIC Janua 406.1 406.2 406.3 406.4 ARTMENT CE BOX ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite the stor MATERIAL .1 All mate .2 The slu Standa pre-cut .3 The dra up to 4 .4 Pipe zo .5 Backfill .1 If a Wo Item SUBMITTA .1 The Co manufa in the C .2 Submitt CONSTRU .1 The Co specific .2 The slu .3 The dra .4 The dra placed to prov .5 Excava in acco .6 For ins at 50 m STAN of TRANS TION em consists o rm sewer pipe LS erials shall be uice box shall ard Drawing 4 opening for t ain pipe shall .0 m in length one materials material sha additional mat ork Area from m 167 .
ALS ontractor shal acturer ’ s certif Contract Docu tals are requir CTION ontractor sha cally directed b ice box and d ain pipe shall ain pipe from flush with the ide a tight and ation , pipe zon ordance with 4 tallations beh mm below the NDARD SP PORTATIO of the supply e , and/or catc e supplied by be precast c 406-1 , comple the drain pipe be 200 mm d h. shall conform all be selected terials are req m a source an l submit , upo ication that th ments .
red in accorda all carry out t by the Engine drain pipe shal be laid on a p m the sluice b e inside surfa d secure fit .
ne material , b 401.4. hind curb and surrounding ECIFICATI ON and INF MUNICIPAL and installati ch basin .
the Contracto concrete fabric ete with drain e. diameter PVC m to the limits d material from quired for bac nd of a type a on request , in e materials su ance with any the Work as er .
ll be construct prepared bed box shall be c ce of the Stru backfilling aro d gutter , the s ground level IONS FRASTRUC ion of a storm or .
cated and su n pipe , steel f C pipe meetin s established m the excava ckfilling , the C approved by t advance of upplied meet cross-referen indicated in ted as indicate d. connected to ucture and se ound the sluic sluice box sha as per Stand CTURE m sewer sluic pplied to the frame , a squa ng the require in 415.2. tion , as appro Contractor sha the Engineer the commenc the specified nced Item form the Contrac ed on Standar the drainage ecured with m ce box installa all be installe ard Drawing 4 ce box and d dimensions in are cast iron g ments of DR3 oved by the E all import mate r and in accor cement of the requirements ming part of th ct Documents rd Drawing 40 e Structure w mortar or a rub ation shall be ed with the to 406-2 .
ITEM : 406 Page 406-1 rain pipe to ndicated on grate and a 35 , typically Engineer .
erials to the rdance with e Work , the s as detailed is Item .
s and/or as 06-1. with the end bber gasket carried out p grade set SLU Pag 406 406 406 UICE BOX ge 406-2 6.4.6 .1 .7 For belo .1 6.5 MEASU .1 The insta 6.6 BASIS O .1 Pay The area def be sloped do installations ow the lowest The area def the sluice bo at a constant REMENT FO Quantity to b alled in accord OF PAYMENT ment for Wor DEPARTM fined by exte own from the s in the gutter , point of the g fined by exten x , shall be slo t Slope .
OR PAYMENT be measured dance with thi T rk under this I STA MENT of TR MUNICIP nding a dista surrounding g the sluice bo gutter as per S nding a dista oped down fro T for payment s Item .
tem shall be ANDARD S RANSPORT PAL ance of 600 m grade to the s ox shall be in Standard Dra nce of 300 m om the surrou shall be the at the Unit Pr SPECIFICA TATION an mm from all s sluice box top nstalled with t awing 406-3. mm from all si unding grade number of sl rice .
ATIONS nd INFRAS sides of the s p grade at a co the top grade ides ( excludin e to the sluice uice box units TRUCTUR ITEM : 40 January , 20 sluice box sha onstant Slope e set at 15 m ng curbside ) o e box top grad s supplied an RE 06 15 all e. m of de nd DEPA FRAM Janua 407.1 407.2 407.3 407.4 407.5 407.6 ARTMENT ME WITH GRA ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite MATERIAL .1 All mate .2 Frame Drawing SUBMITTA .1 The Co manufa on the C CONSTRU .1 The Co specific .2 Frames .3 Frames .4 Grates elevatio MEASURE .1 The Qu or cove BASIS OF .1 Paymen grate or STAN of TRANS ATE or COVE TION em consists of LS erials shall be with grat gs 407-1 and ALS ontractor shal acturer ’ s certif Contract Docu CTION ontractor sha cally directed b s shall be rigid s shall be plac or covers sh on .
MENT FOR P uantity to be m ers supplied a PAYMENT nt for Work u r cover , as ide NDARD SP PORTATIO ER f the supply an e supplied by t e or cove 407-2 respec l submit , upo ication that th uments .
all carry out t by the Engine dly fitted onto ced as shown hall be set to PAYMENT measured for and installed i nder this Item entified under ECIFICATI ON and INF MUNICIPAL nd installation the Contracto er shall b ctively .
on request , in e materials su the Work as er .
the drainage on Standard o a tolerance payment sha n accordance m shall include the Contract .
IONS FRASTRUC n of a catch ba or .
e supplied advance of upplied meet indicated in Structure .
Drawing 404- e of +0 mm all be the num e with this Item e a separate CTURE asin frame wit in accord the commenc the specified the Contrac -1. to -12 mm o mber of catch m. Unit Price for th grate or cov dance with cement of the requirements ct Documents of the adjace basin frames r each type of ITEM : 407 Page 407-1 ver .
Standard e Work , the s as detailed s and/or as ent finished with grates f frame with DEPA ADJUS Janua 408.1 408.2 408.3 408.4 408.5 408.6 ARTMENT STMENT OF ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite MATERIAL .1 All mate .2 All adj polyeth SUBMITTA .1 The Co manufa on the C CONSTRU .1 The Co specific .2 Existing grade r .3 Existing .4 The he .5 The gra elevatio MEASURE .1 The Qu adjuste BASIS OF .1 Payme STAN of TRANS CATCH BAS TION em covers the LS erials shall be usting rings ylene conform ALS ontractor shal acturer ’ s certif Contract Docu CTION ontractor sha cally directed b g catch basins ings and/or pr g cast iron fram ight of adjustm ates or cover on .
MENT FOR P uantity to be m d in accordan PAYMENT nt for Work un NDARD SP PORTATIO SINS AND MA adjustment o e supplied by t supplied sh ming to ASTM l submit , upo ication that th uments .
all carry out t by the Engine s and manhol recast riser se mes shall be ments require rs shall be se PAYMENT measured for nce with this It nder this Item ECIFICATI ON and INF ANHOLES MUNICIPAL of catch basins the Contracto hall be conc M D1248 or me on request , in e materials su the Work as er .
es shall be ad ections .
removed and d shall be set et to a toleran payment sha tem .
shall be at th IONS FRASTRUC s and manhol or .
crete conform etal .
advance of upplied meet indicated in djusted to suit cleaned , and t out in the Co nce of +0 mm all be the num he Unit Price .
CTURE les to the fina ming to AST the commenc the specified the Contrac t the final grad d prepared for ontract Docum m to -12 mm mber of catch l specified gra TM C478 , h cement of the requirements ct Documents de and cross r re-use in the ments .
of the adjace basins and/o ITEM : 408 Page 408-1 ade .
igh density e Work , the s as detailed s and/or as slope using e Work .
ent finished or manholes DEPA RELO Janua 409.1 409.2 409.3 409.4 ARTMENT CATION OF ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite MATERIAL .1 Existing .2 All mate .3 Pipe zo manufa .4 Backfill .1 If a Wo Item SUBMITTA .1 Submitt CONSTRU .1 The Co specific .2 The Co .1 The .2 If th Eng .3 Excava shall be .4 All othe .5 Drain p connec .6 Drain p secured .7 Reloca .8 Wall he addition STAN of TRANS CATCH BAS TION em consists o LS g catch basin erials shall be one materials acturer ’ s insta material sha additional mat ork Area from m 167 .
ALS tals are requir CTION ontractor sha cally directed b ontractor shal e Contractor s he catch bas gineer , the Co ation and bac e carried out i er Work shall pipe from the cting the catch pipe shall be d with cemen ted catch bas eights shall b n of new or re NDARD SP PORTATIO SIN f the relocatio shall be reus e supplied by s shall confo allation instruc all be selected terials are req m a source an red in accorda all carry out t by the Engine l relocate the shall take all p in is damage ontractor shall ckfilling of a t in accordance be carried ou e existing ca h basin and th e reconnected t mortar .
sins shall be a e adjusted so eplacement g ECIFICATI ON and INF MUNICIPAL on of catch ba sed .
the Contracto orm to the li ctions .
d material , fro quired for bac nd of a type a ance with any the Work as er .
existing struc precaution to p ed as a result be responsib trench from t e with 401.4. ut in accordan atch basin sh he storm sew d to the relo adjusted to su olely by the re rade rings an IONS FRASTRUC asin .
or .
imits establis m the excava ckfilling , the C approved by t cross-referen indicated in cture such tha preserve the c t of the Contr ble to replace t the catch bas nce with 404.4 hall be reloca wer system .
ocated catch uit the specifie removal of ex nd/or precast r CTURE shed in 415.2 ation , as appr Contractor sha the Engineer nced Item form the Contrac at it may be re catch basin int ractors action the catch bas sin location to 4. ated by addi basin and t ed final grade xisting spacer riser sections 2 or as deta roved by the E all import mate r and in accor ming part of th ct Documents eused in the W tact and unda ns , as determ in .
o the relocati tion or remo the connectio e. r materials an s. ITEM : 409 Page 409-1 ailed in the Engineer .
erials to the rdance with is Item .
s and/or as Work .
maged .
mined by the ion position oval of pipe on shall be nd/or by the RE Pag 409 409 LOCATION O ge 409-2 9.5 MEASU .1 The acco 9.6 BASIS O .1 Pay OF CATCH B REMENT FO Quantity to ordance with OF PAYMENT ment for Wor DEPARTM BASINS OR PAYMENT be measured this Item .
T rk under this I STA MENT of TR MUNICIP T d for paymen tem shall be ANDARD S RANSPORT PAL nt shall be th at the Unit Pr SPECIFICA TATION an he number of rice .
ATIONS nd INFRAS f catch basin TRUCTUR ITEM : 40 January , 20 ns relocated RE 09 15 in DEPA PAVIN Janua 410.1 410.2 410.3 410.4 410.5 410.6 ARTMENT NG CATCH B ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite constru MATERIAL .1 All mate .2 Aggreg .3 Asphalt SUBMITTA .1 Submitt CONSTRU .1 The Co specific .2 Aggreg .3 The Co basin , i .4 The ap MEASURE .1 The Q constru BASIS OF .1 Payme STAN of TRANS BASIN APRO TION em consists o ction of an ap LS erials shall be ate Base sha t Concrete C a ALS tals are requir CTION ontractor sha cally directed b gate Base sha ontractor sha n accordance ron shall be s MENT FOR P uantity to be ucted in accor PAYMENT nt for Work u NDARD SP PORTATIO N of the supply a pron around a supplied by t ll meet the req and D shall m red in accorda all carry out t by the Engine all be placed a all place Asph e with 260.4 o shaped as sho PAYMENT e measured rdance with th nder this Item ECIFICATI ON and INF MUNICIPAL and placemen catch basin g he Contractor quirements of eet the requir ance with any the Work as er .
and compacte halt Concrete or 261.4. own on Stand for paymen his Item .
m shall be at t IONS FRASTRUC nt of Aggrega grate .
r. f 201.2. rements of 260 cross-referen indicated in ed in accorda e , over the p dard Drawing nt shall be t the Unit Price CTURE ate Base and 0.2 and 261.2 nced Item form the Contrac ance with 203 prepared area 410-1. the number e. asphalt conc 2. ming part of th ct Documents 3.4. a surrounding of catch ba ITEM : 410 Page 410-1 crete for the is Item .
s and/or as g the catch asin aprons DEPA PIPE Z Janua 415.1 415.2 415.3 415.4 ARTMENT ZONE MATE ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite MATERIAL .1 Pipe zo of shale the g ASTM C SUBMITTA .1 The Co the ma materia CONSTRU .1 The Co specific STAN of TRANS RIAL TION em consists o LS one material s e , clay , friable rading limits C136 and AS AST sieve 37.5 31.5 25 19 12.5 9.5 4.75 2.36 300 75 Notes : 1 ) 2 ) ALS ontractor shal terial to the W al .
CTION ontractor sha cally directed b NDARD SP PORTATIO f the supply o shall be clean e materials , o s indicated STM C117 .
Grad TM e size mm mm mm mm mm mm 5 mm mm µm µm Use Type A m for all other p Use Type B f other pipe 45 l submit to the Work Site , the all carry out t by the Engine ECIFICATI ON and INF MUNICIPAL of pipe zone m n , hard , soun organic matter in Table Ta dation Limits Coarse Ma percen see 95 83 70 55 45 30 20 5 0 material for P pipe larger tha for PVC pipe 50 mm or sma e Engineer fo e proposed s the Work as er .
IONS FRASTRUC material for al nd , durable cr r and other d 415-1 , wh able 415-1 s for Pipe Zo aterial - Type nt passing e note 1 100 5 - 100 3 - 100 0 - 100 5 - 90 5 - 80 0 - 65 0 - 50 5 - 20 0 - 8 PVC pipe larg an 450 mm in 600 mm or s aller in diame or approval , a source of sup indicated in CTURE l underground rushed or pit eleterious su hen tested ne Materials A Fine pe er than 600 m n diameter .
smaller in diam eter .
t least 14 Day pply and certif the Contrac d services .
run gravel or bstances and in accord s material - Typ ercent passin see note 2 100 95 - 100 90 - 100 60 - 100 35 - 80 15 - 60 0 - 30 0 - 10 mm in diamete meter , and for ys prior to the fication of the ct Documents ITEM : 415 Page 415-1 r stone , free d shall meet ance with pe B g er , and r all e delivery of e pipe zone s and/or as PIP Pag 415 415 PE ZONE MA ge 415-2 5.5 MEASU .1 The supp 5.6 BASIS O .1 Pay mate ATERIAL REMENT FO Quantity to b plied in accor OF PAYMENT ment for Wor erial , as identi DEPARTM OR PAYMENT be measured rdance with th T rk under this I ified under the STA MENT of TR MUNICIP T for payment his Item .
Item shall inc e Contract .
ANDARD S RANSPORT PAL shall be the clude a separa SPECIFICA TATION an number of to ate Unit Price ATIONS nd INFRAS onnes of pipe e for each typ TRUCTUR ITEM : 4 January , 20 e zone materi pe of pipe zon RE 15 15 al ne DEPA CURB Janua 416.1 416.2 416.3 416.4 ARTMENT B AND GUTTE ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite MATERIAL .1 All mate .2 Concre .3 Joint fill cut to fit .1 Alte .4 Pigmen .5 Aggreg SUBMITTA .1 Submitt part of t CONSTRU .1 The Co specific .2 The En location .3 The Co in the C .4 Excava shown .1 The not .5 Materia determi to the p .6 Excava along th .1 Exc by STAN of TRANS ER TION m consists of LS erials shall be te shall be su ler shall consi t the required ernate materia nted membran ate Base sha ALS tals are requir this Item .
CTION ontractor sha cally directed b ngineer shall p ns or as may b ontractor shall Contract Docu ation for the fo in the Contrac e Contractor s t disturb the su al disturbed in ined by a test placement of th ated material m he limits of the cavated mate the Engineer NDARD SPE PORTATIO f the construct supplied by t pplied in acco ist of an appro cross section als shall be su ne curing com ll meet the req red in accorda all carry out t by the Engine provide contro be required .
be responsib ments .
undation prep ct Documents shall neatly cu urface beyond the bottom o t strip or other he backfill .
may be used e Work subjec erial , suitable .
ECIFICATI ON and INF MUNICIPAL tion of Portlan he Contractor ordance with 3 oved 12 mm t ns of the joints ubmitted to the pounds shall quirements of ance with 301 the Work as er .
ol points in the ble for the layo paration for th and/or on Sta ut the existing d the limits of e of the excavat r standard ind as backfill be ct to the appro for and surp ONS FRASTRUC d cement con r. 301.2 , and CS thick asphalt i s formed .
e Engineer for conform to AS f 201.2 .
.3 and with an indicated in e field for vert out for all lines e curb and gu andard Drawin g Pavement in excavation .
tion shall be c dustry method ehind and un oval of the Eng lus to backfil CTURE ncrete curb an SA A23.1 expo mpregnated f r approval .
STM C309 .
ny other cross the Contrac tical and horiz s and grades utter shall be t ng 416-1. n a straight lin compacted to ds , and approv der the new gineer .
ling , shall be nd gutter .
osure class C- fibreboard of g s-referenced It ct Documents zontal control , for the Work a to the depth a ne so that the the maximum ved by the En concrete curb disposed of ITEM : 416 Page 416-1 -2. good quality tem forming s and/or as at selected as indicated and width as e Work does m density as ngineer prior b and gutter as directed CU Pag 416 RB AND GU ge 416-2 6.4.6 .2 .7 Agg acco .1 .8 Curb Doc .1 .9 Con .1 .2 .10 Curb and/ .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 D TTER Excavated m the property regate Base ordance with 2 Water shall placement so b and gutter cuments and/o Joint layout a Drawings 419 .1 Control jo to control .2 Isolation movemen .3 Construc the place .4 Dummy j ncrete shall be The Contract concrete .
Concrete plac so that a mini b and gutter s /or where loca Curb and gut Curvatures i intersections constructed a Where the cu prefabricated an isolation jo .1 Spacing other box Curb and Gu spaced as in Joints shall b and 24 hours DEPARTME material not s of the Contra shall be plac 203.4. be uniformly o as to thorou shall be cons or Standard Dr and joint deta 9-2 and 419-3 oints are partia l the location o joints are fu nt .
ction joints are ement of concr oints are toole e placed in acc or shall notify ced in the Wo imum of voids shall be cast in al conditions d tter shall be fo in the alignm and transitio as indicated in urb and gutte d joint filler sh oint as indica of the contro x-outs .
utter shall hav dicated on St be cut before s after placem STA ENT of TRA MUNICIP uitable for ba ctor and shal ced as indica applied to t ughly wet the structed in ac rawings 416-2 ails shall be la 3. al depth and a of drying shrin ull depth and e full depth an rete is interrup ed partial dept cordance with the Engineer ork shall be co s remain in the n place in sec dictate otherwi ormed and pl ment of the ons for drivew n the Contrac er are formed hall be placed ted in the Sta ol joints shou ve a control jo tandard Draw e uncontrolled ment ) and the ANDARD S ANSPORTA PAL ackfill , as dete l be disposed ated on Stand he Aggregate Aggregate Ba ccordance wit 2 and 416-3. aid out and c are used to cr nkage cracks .
d are used nd are used at pted by more t th joints and a 301.4. at least 24 ho onsolidated to e placed conc ctions of 6 m in ise .
aced monolith curb and g ways , crossw ct Documents against a bu between the andard Drawin uld vary to c oint formed by wing 419-2. d shrinkage ta timing shall b SPECIFICA ATION and ermined by t d of outside th dard Drawing e Base imme ase surface w th the dimens constructed in reate a plane to prevent c t the end of a than 30 minut are positioned ours prior to th o ensure unifo crete .
n length , exce hically , withou gutter for pa walks and oth s and/or direct uilding or othe e curb and the ng 419-3. oincide with y cutting a slo akes place ( w be the respon ATIONS d INFRAST the Engineer , he Work Site .
gs 416-1 and ediately ahea without the po sions shown i n accordance of weakness cracking due a Day ’ s constr tes .
for aesthetics he planned pla rmity of the co ept in slipform ut kinks .
rking areas er transition ted by the En er fixed struc e adjacent str the centre o ot to a depth which can oc nsibility of the TRUCTURE ITEM : 4 January , 20 , shall becom 416-2 , and ad of concret ooling of wate in the Contra with Standar in the concret to differenti ruction or whe s. acement of an oncrete densi ming operation and at stree areas shall b ngineer .
cture , a 12 m ructure , to for of manholes o of 50 mm an ccur between Contractor .
E 16 15 me in te er .
act rd te al en ny ty s , et be m m or nd 4 DEPA CURB Janua 416.4 416.4 416.4 416.4 ARTMENT B AND GUTTE ary , 2015 .11 Metal F .1 The be Do .2 For per .3 For of a .4 Top wo .12 Slipform .1 Slip Dra .1 .13 Finishin .1 Fin me .2 Pig app .1 .3 Voi con .4 Edg pla .5 The com .14 Repair .1 Cu rep .2 If t ma adj STAN of TRANS ER Forms e Contractor securely po cuments .
rmwork shall rmit the ready rms shall rem any disturban p surfaces of oden or magn ming pform machin awings 416-1 After slipform ng , Curing an ished surface ethod , subject gmented mem proval of the E Pigmented m after the fina .1 One ap applicati ids or surfac ncrete load an ges of concre stic and shall e Contractor mpletion and and Replace rb and gutte placed as dire the repair an aterials adjace ustments at h NDARD SPE PORTATIO shall erect al ositioned to t be thorough y release of th main in place f nce to the plac the curb and nesium float f nes must be , 416-2 and 4 ming , joints sh d Protection es of the cur t to the approv mbrane curing Engineer .
membrane cu al finishing .
pplication sha ion .
ce irregulariti nd a float sha ete shall be ro leave a true shall be re acceptance o ment r which does ected by the E nd replaceme ent to the cu his/her own ex ECIFICATI ON and INF MUNICIPAL ll forms to the the required ly coated wit he forms and for a minimum ced and partia d gutter shall for finish .
e capable of 416-3. hall be saw c rb and gutter val of the Eng g compounds ring compoun all be placed ies shall be all be used on ounded with a smooth surfa sponsible for of the Work .
s not conform Engineer .
ent results in urb and gutte xpense and to ONS FRASTRUC e full depth o lines and g th a commerc will not disco m of 24 hours ally set concr be “ struck ” w placing the cut ; insert bars r shall be rou gineer .
s may be use nds shall be a d in a direc repaired us the repaired an approved ace .
r the mainte m to the Spe n the need er , the Contra o the satisfac CTURE of the curb an grade as ind cial quality fo olour the conc after concret rete exists .
with a straight concrete as s shall not be ughened by b ed , upon requ applied in two ction perpend sing concrete area prior to edging tool w enance of the ecifications s for repairs a actor shall ca ction of the En nd gutter and dicated in th orm coating , crete .
te is placed if edge and flo indicated o e permitted .
brooming ligh uest , subject applications i dicular to th e grout from texturing .
while the con e curb and shall be repa and adjustme arry out the r ngineer .
ITEM : 416 Page 416-3 these shall he Contract which shall f the danger oated with a n Standard htly or other to the prior immediately he previous the same crete is still gutter until aired and/or ents to the repairs and CU Pag 416 416 416 RB AND GU ge 416-4 6.4.14 .3 6.5 MEASU .1 The gutt 6.6 BASIS O .1 Pay gutt D TTER Materials rem outside the W REMENT FO Quantity to er constructe OF PAYMENT ment for Wor er , as identifie DEPARTME moved shall b Work Site .
OR PAYMENT be measured d in accordan T rk under this ed under the STA ENT of TRA MUNICIP become the T d for paymen nce with this I Item shall inc Contract .
ANDARD S ANSPORTA PAL property of th nt shall be th tem .
clude a separ SPECIFICA ATION and he Contracto he number of rate Unit Pric ATIONS d INFRAST or and shall b f linear metre ce for each ty TRUCTURE ITEM : 4 January , 20 be disposed o es of curb an pe of curb an E 16 15 of nd nd DEPA CONC Janua 419.1 419.2 419.3 419.4 ARTMENT CRETE SIDEW ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite MATERIAL .1 All mate .2 Concre .3 The join quality c .1 Alte .4 Pigmen .5 Aggreg SUBMITTA .1 Submitt CONSTRU .1 The Co specific .2 The En location .3 The Co in the C .4 Excava shown .5 Materia determi Enginee .6 Excava limits of .1 Exc Co .2 Exc the STAN of TRANS WALK TION m consists of LS erials shall be te shall be su nt filler shall c cut to fit the re ernate materia nted membran ate Base sha ALS tals are requir CTION ontractor sha cally directed b ngineer shall p ns or as may b ontractor shall Contract Docu ation for the f in the Contrac al disturbed in ined by a tes er prior to the ated material m f the Work sub cavated mate ntractor as di cavated mate e property of t NDARD SP PORTATIO f the construct supplied by t pplied in acco consist of an equired cross als shall be su ne curing com ll meet the req red in accorda all carry out t by the Engine provide contro be required .
be responsib ments .
foundation pre ct Documents the bottom o st strip or oth placement of may be used a bject to the ap erial , suitable rected by the erial not suita he Contracto ECIFICATI ON and INF MUNICIPAL tion of Portlan he Contractor ordance with 3 approved 12 sections of th ubmitted to the pounds shall quirements of ance with any the Work as er .
ol points in the ble for the layo eparation for and/or on Sta of the excavat her standard f the backfill .
as backfill beh pproval of the e for and sur e Engineer .
able for backf r and shall be IONS FRASTRUC d cement con r. 301.2 , and CS 2 mm thick as he joints forme e Engineer for conform to AS f 201.2. cross-referen indicated in e field for vert out for all lines the Sidewalk andard Drawin tion shall be c industry met hind and unde Engineer .
rplus to back fill , as determ e disposed of CTURE ncrete Sidewa SA A23.1 expo sphalt impregn ed .
r approval .
STM C309 .
nced Item form the Contrac rtical and horiz s and grades k shall be to ng 419-1. compacted to thods , and sh er the new con kfilling , shall mined by the f outside the W alk .
osure class C- nated fibreboa ming part of th ct Documents zontal control for the Work a the depth an the maximum hall be appro ncrete Sidewa be disposed Engineer , sh Work Site .
ITEM : 419 Page 419-1 -2. ard of good is Item .
s and/or as at selected as indicated nd width as m density as oved by the alk along the d of by the hall become CO Pag 419 ONCRETE SID ge 419-2 9.4 .7 Agg 203 .1 .8 A cr be to Con .9 Con Doc .1 .10 Con .1 .2 .11 Con and/ .1 .2 .3 .4 D DEWALK regate Base s .4 .
Water shall placement so ross Slope of owards the cu ntractor is to ad ncrete Sidewa cuments and/o Joint layout a and 419-3 .
.1 Control jo to control .2 Isolation movemen .3 Construc the place .4 Dummy j ncrete shall be The Contract any concrete Concrete pla density so th ncrete Sidewa /or where loca Sidewalk sha Curvatures i intersections constructed a Where the co mm prefabric form an isola .1 Spacing other box Concrete Sid and spaced a DEPARTME shall be place be uniformly o as to thorou 20 mm per m urb , however l dvise the Eng lk shall be co or Standard Dr and joint detail oints are partia l the location o joints are fu nt .
ction joints are ement of concr oints are toole e placed in acc tor shall notify e. aced in the W at a minimum lk shall be cas al conditions d all be formed n the alignm and depress as indicated in oncrete Sidew cated joint fille ation joint as in of the contro x-outs .
dewalk shall h as indicated o STA ENT of TRA MUNICIP ed as indicate applied to t ughly wet the metre shall be ocal condition ineer if this Sl onstructed in a rawing 419-1. ls shall be con al depth and a of drying shrin ull depth and e full depth an rete is interrup ed partial dept cordance with y the Enginee Work shall be m of voids sha st-in-place in 6 dictate otherwi and placed in ment of the c sions for drive n the Contrac walk is forme er shall be pla ndicated in th ol joints shou have a contro on Standard D ANDARD S ANSPORTA PAL ed on Standar he Aggregate Aggregate Ba formed and th ns may result lope condition accordance w nstructed in a are used to cr nkage cracks .
d are used nd are used at pted by more t th joints and a 301.4. er at least 24 e consolidate all remain in th 6 m sections i ise .
n a single ope concrete Sid eways , crossw ct Documents d adjacent to aced between he Standard D uld vary to c ol joint forme Drawings 419 SPECIFICA ATION and rd Drawing 41 e Base imme ase surface w he direction o in the necess n must be alte with the dimen accordance wi reate a plane to prevent c t the end of a than 30 minut are positioned hours prior t ed to ensure he placed con in length , exce eration .
ewalk for pa walks and oth s and/or as dir o a building o n the curb an Drawing 419-3 oincide with ed by cutting 9-2 and 419-3 ATIONS d INFRAST 19-1 and in ac ediately ahea without the po of the Slope sh sity to vary this red .
nsions shown th Standard D of weakness cracking due a Day ’ s constr tes .
for aesthetics to the planned uniformity o ncrete .
ept in slipform arking areas her transition rected by the r other fixed nd the adjace 3. the centre o a slot to a de 3 .
TRUCTURE ITEM : 4 January , 20 ccordance wit ad of concret ooling of wate hall , in genera s Slope and th in the Contra Drawings 419- in the concret to differenti ruction or whe s. d placement o of the concret ming operation and at stree areas shall b Engineer .
structure , a 1 nt structure , t of manholes o epth of 50 m E 19 15 th te er .
al , he act -2 te al en of te s , et be 12 to or m DEPA CONC Janua 419.4 .
419.4 419.4 419.4 ARTMENT CRETE SIDEW ary , 2015 11 .5 Du cut .6 Eve .7 Joi and .12 Metal F .1 The be .2 For per .3 For of a .13 Slipform .1 Slip Dra .1 .14 Finishin .1 The wo .2 Fin me .3 Pig app .1 .4 Voi con .5 A m eac too .6 The com STAN of TRANS WALK mmy joints sh tting a slot in t ery fourth join nts shall be c d 24 hours aft Forms e Contractor s securely posit rmwork shall rmit the ready rms shall rem any disturban ming pform machin awing 419-1 .
After slipform ng , Curing an e top surface oden or magn ished surface ethod , subject gmented mem proval of the E Pigmented m after the fina .1 One ap applicati ids or surfac ncrete load an margin of 50 ch slab and t ol .
e Contractor mpletion and NDARD SP PORTATIO hall be formed the slab 25 m nt shall be to t cut before un ter placement shall erect all tioned to the r be thorough y release of th main in place f nce to the plac nes must be ming , the join d Protection e of the Sidew nesium float f es of the conc t to the approv mbrane curing Engineer .
membrane cu al finishing .
pplication sha ion .
ce irregulariti nd a float sha mm in width the edges sh shall be res acceptance o ECIFICATI ON and INF MUNICIPAL d in concrete mm deep with the full depth ncontrolled sh t ) and the tim forms to the required lines ly coated wit he forms and for a minimum ced and partia capable of p ts shall be sa walk shall be for finish .
crete Sidewa val of the Eng g compounds ring compoun all be placed ies shall be all be used on h shall be def hall be rounde sponsible for of the Work .
IONS FRASTRUC e at intervals e a T-bar .
of the concre hrinkage take ming shall be t full depth of t and grade .
th a commerc will not disco m of 24 hours ally set concr lacing the co aw cut ; insert e “ struck ” wit alk shall be ro gineer .
s may be use nds shall be a d in a direc repaired us the repaired fined and fini ed to a radiu the mainten CTURE equal to the w ete .
es place ( whic the responsib the concrete S cial quality fo olour the conc after concret rete exists .
oncrete as ind bars shall no h a straight e oughened by ed , upon requ applied in two ction perpend sing concrete area prior to ished smooth us of 6 mm w ance of the width of the S ch can occur ility of the Co Sidewalk and orm coating , crete .
te is placed if dicated on th ot be permitted edge and flo brooming ligh uest , subject applications i dicular to th e grout from texturing .
h along the p with an appro concrete Sid ITEM : 419 Page 419-3 Sidewalk , by r between 4 ontractor .
these shall which shall f the danger he Standard d. ated with a htly or other to the prior mmediately he previous the same perimeter of oved edging dewalk until CO Pag 419 419 419 ONCRETE SID ge 419-4 9.4 .15 Rep .1 .2 9.5 MEASU .1 The cons .2 Mea 419 pole 9.6 BASIS O .1 Pay D DEWALK pair and Repla Concrete Sid replaced as d If the repair materials ad adjustments .1 Materials outside t REMENT FO Quantity to structed in ac asurements s -1 and no ded es or other sim OF PAYMENT ment for Wor DEPARTME acement dewalk which directed by th r and replace djacent to th at his/her ow s removed sh he Work Site OR PAYMENT be measured ccordance wit hall be taken ductions shal milar objects .
T rk under this I STA ENT of TRA MUNICIP does not co he Engineer .
ement results he Sidewalk , n expense an all become th .
T d for paymen th this Item .
as the dimen ll be made fo tem shall be ANDARD S ANSPORTA PAL onform to the s in the nee the Contra nd to the satis he property of t shall be the nsion of the W r areas occup at the Unit Pr SPECIFICA ATION and e Specification ed for repair actor shall c sfaction of the f the Contract e number of Work , as indic pied by light s rice .
ATIONS d INFRAST ns shall be re rs and adjus carry out the e Engineer .
tor and shall b square metre cated on Sta standards , ma TRUCTURE ITEM : 4 January , 20 epaired and/o stments to th e repairs an be disposed o es of Sidewa ndard Drawin anhole cover E 19 15 or he nd of alk ng rs , DEPA ASPHA Janua 420.1 420.2 420.3 420.4 ARTMENT ALT SIDEWA ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite MATERIAL .1 All mate .2 Aggreg .3 Asphalt SUBMITTA .1 The Co approva .2 Submitt CONSTRU .1 The Co specific .2 Asphalt .3 Materia density by the E .4 Surplus the prop .5 Aggreg with 20 .6 A cross genera Slope a .7 The Co .8 Asphalt relative .9 The Co Sidewa STAN of TRANS ALK TION m consists of LS erials shall be ate Base sha t Concrete D s ALS ontractor shal al by the Engi tals are requir CTION ontractor sha cally directed b t sidewalk sha al disturbed in as determine Engineer prior s excavated m perty of the Co gate Base sha 3.4. s slope of 20 l , be towards and the Contr ontractor shal t concrete sh e density , as d ontractor shal alk is protecte NDARD SP PORTATIO f the construct supplied by t ll meet to the shall conform ll submit the neer .
red in accorda all carry out t by the Engine all be constru n the bottom ed by a test s r to the placem material not re ontractor and all be placed to 30 mm pe s the curb , ho ractor is to ad l place the sid all be compac determined in l maintain ba ed from traffic ECIFICATI ON and INF MUNICIPAL tion of asphalt he Contractor requirements to the require asphalt conc ance with any the Work as er .
ucted as show of the excava strip , per 936 , ment of the ba equired for bac shall be dispo as indicated er metre shall owever local c vise the Engi dewalk using cted to a den accordance arricades or o until the heat IONS FRASTRUC t concrete Sid r. of 201.2. ements of 260 crete mix des cross-referen indicated in wn on Standa ation shall be or other stan ackfill .
ckfill , as deter osed of outsid d on Standard l be placed a conditions ma ineer if this Sl an asphalt sp nsity not less t with ASTM D ther suitable t of the aspha CTURE ewalk .
.2 or 261.2. sign as set o nced Item form the Contrac rd Drawing 42 e compacted ndard industry rmined by the de the Work S d Drawing 42 nd the directi ay result in th lope condition preader in acc than 91 % of t D2041 .
measures to alt concrete m out in 260.2 o ming part of th ct Documents 20-1. to 97 % of the y methods , an e Engineer , sh Site .
20-1 , and in a ion of the Slo he necessity n must be alte cordance with the theoretica ensure that t mixture has di ITEM : 420 Page 420-1 or 261.2 for is Item .
s and/or as e maximum nd approved hall become accordance ope shall , in to vary this ered .
h 260.4. al maximum the finished ssipated .
AS Pag 420 420 PHALT SIDE ge 420-2 0.5 MEASU .1 The Side .2 Mea 420 pole 0.6 BASIS O .1 Pay EWALK REMENT FO Quantity to ewalk constru asurements s -1 and no ded es or other sim OF PAYMENT ment for Wor DEPARTM OR PAYMENT be measured ucted in accor hall be taken ductions shal milar objects .
T rk under this I STA MENT of TR MUNICIP T d for paymen rdance with th as the dimen ll be made fo tem shall be ANDARD S RANSPORT PAL nt shall be th his Item .
nsion of the W r areas occup at the Unit Pr SPECIFICA TATION an he number of Work , as indic pied by light s rice .
ATIONS nd INFRAS f square met cated on Sta standards , ma TRUCTUR ITEM : 42 January , 20 tres of aspha ndard Drawin anhole cover RE 20 15 alt ng rs , DEPA REMO Janua 423.1 423.2 423.3 423.4 423.5 423.6 ARTMENT OVAL OF CUR ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite MATERIAL .1 None id SUBMITTA .1 None id CONSTRU .1 The Co specific .2 Excava dispose MEASURE .1 The Qu remove BASIS OF .1 Payme STAN of TRANS RB AND GUT TION em consists o LS dentified .
ALS dentified .
CTION ontractor sha cally directed b ated curb and ed of outside MENT FOR P uantity measu ed in accordan PAYMENT nt for Work u NDARD SP PORTATIO TTER f the removal all carry out t by the Engine d gutter mate the Work Site PAYMENT ured for paym nce with this It nder this Item ECIFICATI ON and INF MUNICIPAL of curb and g the Work as er .
rials shall be e. ment shall be tem .
m shall be at t IONS FRASTRUC gutter .
indicated in come the pro e the number the Unit Price CTURE the Contrac operty of the r of linear me e. ct Documents Contractor a etres of curb ITEM : 423 Page 423-1 s and/or as and shall be b and gutter DEPA REMO Janua 424.1 424.2 424.3 424.4 424.5 424.6 ARTMENT OVAL OF SID ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite MATERIAL .1 None id SUBMITTA .1 None id CONSTRU .1 The Co specific .2 Excava dispose MEASURE .1 The Qu in acco BASIS OF .1 Payme STAN of TRANS DEWALK TION em consists o LS dentified .
ALS dentified .
CTION ontractor sha cally directed b ated sidewalk ed of outside MENT FOR P uantity measu ordance with t PAYMENT nt for Work u NDARD SP PORTATIO f the removal all carry out t by the Engine k materials s the Work Site PAYMENT ured for paym his Item .
nder this Item ECIFICATI ON and INF MUNICIPAL of Sidewalk .
the Work as er .
shall become e. ment shall be t m shall be at t IONS FRASTRUC indicated in e the proper the number of the Unit Price CTURE the Contrac rty of the C f square metr e. ct Documents Contractor an res of Sidewa ITEM : 424 Page 424-1 s and/or as nd shall be alk removed DEPA REMO Janua 425.1 425.2 425.3 425.4 ARTMENT OVAL OF UND ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite MATERIAL .1 All mate .2 Backfill .1 If a site app SUBMITTA .1 Submitt CONSTRU .1 The Co specific .2 The Co and sha .3 The Co bracing .4 The Co connec .5 The Co way or .1 The the .2 Any Con .6 Excava .7 Materia the Ow .8 Materia the Con STAN of TRANS DERGROUN TION em consists o LS erials shall be material sha additional mat e from a sou propriate Item ALS tals are requir CTION ontractor sha cally directed b ontractor shall all verify that t ontractor shal and underpin ontractor shal ction flows into ontractor shall easements pr e Contractor s Owner to the y other dama ntractor at her ation shall be c als from the W ner .
als that are de ntractor and sh NDARD SP PORTATIO D SERVICES f the removal e supplied by all be selected terials are req rce and of a m. red in accorda all carry out t by the Engine l notify the En hey are out of ll be respons nning found ne l ensure , to t o the excavatio confine his/he rovided by the shall repair an e satisfaction o age to adjace r/his own expe carried out in a Work , unless ot etermined by hall be dispos ECIFICATI ON and INF S MUNICIPAL of undergrou the Contracto d material from quired for bac a type approv ance with any the Work as er .
ngineer prior f service and a sible for the d ecessary to co the extent pra on during the er operations e Owner for th nd restore the of the Enginee ent property , ense .
accordance w therwise deter the Engineer sed of outside IONS FRASTRUC und services .
or .
m the excava ckfilling , the C ved by the E cross-referen indicated in to breaking in approved for r design and c omplete the W acticable , tha Work .
and storage he Work .
properties , rig er .
resulting from with 401.4 and rmined by the r to be unsalv the Work Site CTURE tion as appro Contractor sha Engineer and nced Item form the Contrac nto the existin removal .
construction o Work .
at no contents of products to ghts-of-way o m the Work , s Standard Dra e Engineer , sh vageable shal e. oved by the En all import mate in accordan ming part of th ct Documents ng undergrou of all tempora s of any sewe o the propertie r easements shall be repa awings 401-1 hall remain the l become the ITEM : 425 Page 425-1 ngineer .
erials to the ce with the is Item .
s and/or as und services ary shoring , er or sewer es , rights-of- provided by aired by the and 404-2. e property of property of RE Pag 425 425 425 MOVAL OF U ge 425-2 5.4 .9 The und mate .10 Bac and 5.5 MEASU .1 The serv .2 If m com 5.6 BASIS O .1 Pay und UNDERGRO Contractor erground ser erial , and sha kfill shall be p compacted to REMENT FO Quantity to b vices removed ore than one mbination of se OF PAYMENT ment for Wo erground serv DEPARTM UND SERVIC shall comp rvices , with all finish the ba placed in acco o a minimum o OR PAYMENT be measured d in accordanc service exists ervices shall b T ork under th vice removed STA MENT of TR CES MUNICIP letely backfi an approved ackfilled area ordance with I of 95 % of its m T for payment ce with this Ite s in a given tr e treated as o his Item shal d , as identified ANDARD S RANSPORT PAL ll the excav d material of a to match the tem 936 in lift maximum dry shall be the em .
rench the leng one unit .
ll include a d under the C SPECIFICA TATION an vation result f the quality e surrounding fts of not more density .
number of lin gth shall only separate Un Contract .
ATIONS nd INFRAS ting from th matching th g grade .
e than 300 m near metres o y be measured nit Price for TRUCTUR ITEM : 42 January , 20 e removal o he surroundin m in thicknes of undergroun d once and th each type o RE 25 15 of ng ss , nd he of STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS DEPARTMENT of TRANSPORTATION and INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARD DRAWINGS ITEM : 499 Typical Trench Cross Sections January , 2015 MUNICIPAL Standard Drawing 401-1 STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS DEPARTMENT of TRANSPORTATION and INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARD DRAWINGS ITEM : 499 Precast Catch Basin Details January , 2015 MUNICIPAL Standard Drawing 404-1 SECTION A-A TOP VIEW FRAME WITH GRATE ECCENTRIC PRECAST COVER MORTAR AROUND PIPE BOTH SIDES OF C.B .
WALL ADDITIONAL RISER SECTIONS AS REQUIRED PIPE 300 ( MIN ) A A FINISHED GRADE ALL JOINTS TO BE MADE WATERTIGHT GRADE RINGS File : 404-1 STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS DEPARTMENT of TRANSPORTATION and INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARD DRAWINGS ITEM : 499 Typical Catch Basin Excavation January , 2015 MUNICIPAL Standard Drawing 404-2 STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS DEPARTMENT of TRANSPORTATION and INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARD DRAWINGS ITEM : 499 Typical Sluice Box And Pipe Detail January , 2015 MUNICIPAL Standard Drawing 406-1 STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS DEPARTMENT of TRANSPORTATION and INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARD DRAWINGS ITEM : 499 Typical Sluice Box Installation Behind the Curb and Gutter January , 2015 MUNICIPAL Standard Drawing 406-2 STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS DEPARTMENT of TRANSPORTATION and INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARD DRAWINGS ITEM : 499 Typical Sluice Box Installation Into the Curb and Gutter January , 2015 MUNICIPAL Standard Drawing 406-3 STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS DEPARTMENT of TRANSPORTATION and INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARD DRAWINGS ITEM : 499 Typical Frame With Grate Square January , 2015 MUNICIPAL Standard Drawing 407-1 STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS DEPARTMENT of TRANSPORTATION and INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARD DRAWINGS ITEM : 499 Typical Frame With Cover Round January , 2015 MUNICIPAL Standard Drawing 407-2 STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS DEPARTMENT of TRANSPORTATION and INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARD DRAWINGS ITEM : 499 Paving Catch Basin Apron January , 2015 MUNICIPAL Standard Drawing 410-1 SLOPE SLOPE SLOPE SLOPE 150mm OF 31.5mm AGGREGATE BASE CATCH BASIN 50mm OF ASPHALT FRAME WITH GRATE 1 1 1000 1000 A A SECTION A-A 25 CONCRETE C OR D File : 410-1 STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS DEPARTMENT of TRANSPORTATION and INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARD DRAWINGS ITEM : 499 Curb And Gutter Details January , 2015 MUNICIPAL Standard Drawing 416-1 STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS DEPARTMENT of TRANSPORTATION and INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARD DRAWINGS ITEM : 499 Curb And Gutter Details January , 2015 MUNICIPAL Standard Drawing 416-2 STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS DEPARTMENT of TRANSPORTATION and INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARD DRAWINGS ITEM : 499 Curb And Gutter Details January , 2015 MUNICIPAL Standard Drawing 416-3 ASPHALT CONCRETE SECTION A-A FRAME WITH GRATE GUTTER CURB CATCH BASIN SLOPE SLOPE SLOPE 500 500 300 50 A A File : 416-3 STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS DEPARTMENT of TRANSPORTATION and INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARD DRAWINGS ITEM : 499 Concrete Sidewalk Details January , 2015 MUNICIPAL Standard Drawing 419-1 STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS DEPARTMENT of TRANSPORTATION and INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARD DRAWINGS ITEM : 499 Joint Layout January , 2015 MUNICIPAL Standard Drawing 419-2 MEDIAN CURB/GUTTER WHEELCHAIR RAMP ( TYP . )
MEDIAN 30 D ( max . )
4500 ( max . )
CURB OR CURB/GUTTER COVER 30 D ( max . )
4500 ( max . )
POLE SEPARATE SIDEWALK AND CURB/GUTTER SIDEWALK WITH CURB/GUTTER A B B SECTION B-B SECTION A-A ISOLATION JOINT CONTROL JOINT DUMMY JOINT LEGEND D = SIDEWALK DEPTH ( SEE DWG-419-3 ) ( SEE DWG 419-3 ) File : 419-2 STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS DEPARTMENT of TRANSPORTATION and INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARD DRAWINGS ITEM : 499 Joint and Isolation Details January , 2015 MUNICIPAL Standard Drawing 419-3 STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS DEPARTMENT of TRANSPORTATION and INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARD DRAWINGS ITEM : 499 Asphalt Sidewalk Details January , 2015 MUNICIPAL Standard Drawing 420-1 DEPA TABLE Janua ITE 51 51 512 51 51 51 52 52 53 53 532 53 534 53 53 54 54 542 54 544 54 55 55 552 55 554 ARTMENT E OF CONTE ary , 2015 M 0 Guid 1 Rem 2 Guid 3 Rem 5 Ene 6 Rem 0 Cas 9 Con 0 Und 1 Und 2 Und 3 Pow 4 Rem 8 Scre 9 Rem 0 Sign 1 Rem 2 Ligh 3 Rem 4 Med 5 Rem 0 Sign 1 Rem 2 Roa 3 Rem 4 Ove STA of TRANS ENTS de Posts ....... moval of Guide de Rail ......... moval of Guide rgy-Absorbing moval of Energ t-in-Place Co ncrete-Encase der Roadbed D derground Duc derground Jun wer Point ....... moval of Powe ew Base ....... moval of Screw n or Light Bas moval of Sign ht Standard ... moval of Light dian Flashing moval of Medi n Post ........... moval of Sign adside Sign ... moval of Road erhead Sign S ANDARD S PORTATIO TRAFF DESCRIP ..................... e Posts ........ ..................... e Rail ........... g Guide Rail gy-Absorbing oncrete Barrie ed Duct Bank Duct ............. ct ................. nction Box .... ..................... er Point ........ ..................... w Base ........ se ................. or Light Base ..................... t Standard .... Light ............ an Flashing L ..................... Post ............ ..................... dside Sign ....
Structure Foun PECIFICAT ON and INF FIC CONTROL D PTION ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... Terminal ...... g Guide Rail T er .................. System ....... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... e ................... ..................... ..................... ..................... Light ............. ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ndation ......... TIONS FRASTRUC DEVICES ................... ................... ................... ................... ................... Terminal .... ................... .................... ................... ................... ................... ................... ................... ................... ................... ................... ................... .................... .................. .................. ................... ................... ................... ................... ................... ................... CTURE NUMBE PAGE 2 1 2 2 2 1 2 3 2 3 2 2 1 1 1 2 1 2 2 2 1 1 1 1 1 2 DI R OF ES VISION 500 Page 500-1 TA Pag I BLE OF CON ge 500-2 ITEM 555 O 556 R 557 O 558 R 571 P 576 C 599 S NTENTS Overhead Sig Removal of O Overhead Sig Removal of O Pavement Ma Construction T Standard Draw 510 - 1 G 510 - 2 G 512 - 1 B 512 - 2 G 512 - 3 G 520 - 1 C 529 - 1 C 530 - 1 U 531 - 1 U 532 - 1 U 533 - 1 P 533 - 2 P 538 - 1 S 540 - 1 T 540 - 2 T 540 - 3 T 540 - 4 S 540 - 5 A 542 - 1 L 542 - 2 L 542 - 3 L 542 - 4 L 544 - 1 M 550 - 1 R 552 - 1 R 552 - 2 R 552 - 3 R 552 - 4 R 552 - 5 R 552 - 6 R 554 - 1 O 554 - 2 O DEPARTM TR DESC n Structure .. verhead Sign n .................. verhead Sign arkings ........... Traffic Contro wings Guide Post De Guide Post an Beam Guide R Guide Rail / St Guide Rail / St Cast-in-Place Concrete Enca Under Roadbe Underground D Underground J Power Point D Power Point D Screw Base D ype “ E ” Sign ype “ F ” Sign ype “ G ” Sign Sign or Light B Angulation of S ight Standard ight Standard ight Standard ight Standard Median Flashin Roadside Sign Roadside Sign Roadside Sign Roadside Sign Roadside Sign Roadside Sign Roadside Sign Overhead Sign Overhead Sign STA MENT of TR RAFFIC CONTRO CRIPTION ..................... n Structure ... ..................... n ................... .................... ol .................... etails d Guide Rail Rail Details tructure Detai tructure Detai Concrete Bar ased Duct Ba ed Duct Detai Duct Details Junction Box Detail , Multiple Detail , single L etail or Light Base or Light Base or Light Base Base Detail - B Sign Foundat d Detail - Sing d Wiring Deta d Wiring Deta d Anchor Deta ng Light Deta n Post Anchor n Details n Strap Seque n Strap Seque n Strap Seque n Strap Seque n Strap Seque n Structure Fo n Structure Fo ANDARD S RANSPORT OL DEVICES ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ............. … .... .....................
Details ils ils rrier Details nk System ls Detail e Lights Light e Details - So e Details - Soi e Details Soil Bedrock Foun tions gle and Doubl ils - 120 volt ils - 240 volt ails ails r Details ence ence ence ence ence oundation - A oundation - B SPECIFICA TATION an NUM PA ... ... .... .... ... ... il Foundation il Foundation Foundation ndation le Davit Anchorage De Base Plate and ATIONS nd INFRAS BER OF AGES 2 1 1 1 9 3 etails d Template D TRUCTUR SECTION : 50 January , 20 Details RE 00 15 DEPA GUIDE Janua 510.1 510.2 510.3 ARTMENT E POSTS ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite MATERIAL .1 All mate .2 Guide p .3 The po Structu ( NLGA ) .4 Prepara America .5 Prior to point of .6 The pre for field .7 Preserv .8 Guide p .9 Backfill the Eng .1 If a Wo with .10 Offset b on Stan .1 Sal sho and SUBMITTA .1 The Co product cuts .
.2 The Co manufa on the C STAN of TRANS TION em consists of LS erial shall be s posts shall be osts shall be ral Posts and ) Standard Gr ation , handlin an Wood Pres o pressure trea f 25 to 30 % at eservative sha -cut surfaces vation and wo posts shall be materials use gineer .
additional mat ork Site from a h 167.2 - Clas blocks shall c ndard Drawing lvaged rail m own in the S d below the ra ALS ontractor shal t name and m ontractor shall acturer ’ s certif Contract Docu NDARD SP PORTATIO TRAFF f the supply an supplied by th of the maple sound and r d Timbers , gra rading Rules f g and treatme servers ' Asso ating , posts s t 25 mm depth all be as follow , Wolman End ood products s sized as indic ed shall be s terials are req a source and ss A. onform with 5 g 510-1. may require th tandard Draw ail .
ll submit , upo manufacturer ’ s submit , upon ication that th uments .
ECIFICATI ON and INF FIC CONTROL D nd installation he Contractor .
, birch or beec rot-free , and s aded in accor for Canadian ent of posts s ociation ( AWPA hall be incised h. ws : for pressu d Cut Preserv supplied shall cated on Stan elected mater quired for bac of a type app 510.2 and sha he length of wing 510-1 in on request , p s specification n request and e materials su IONS FRASTRUC DEVICES n of preservati .
ch species of shall meet or rdance with th Lumber .
shall be in ac A ) standards .
d on all four s ure treating , ch vative ( Green ) be in accorda ndard Drawing rial from the e ckfilling , the C proved by the all be sized in the offset blo n order to ac rior to incorp ns for the pres in advance o upplied meet CTURE ive treated ha f hardwood .
r exceed the he National L ccordance with .
sides and drie hromated cop ) or equivalen ance with CAN g 510-1. excavation , s Contractor sha Engineer and n accordance ock to be gr chieve the m porating the m servative to be of the commen the specified ardwood guide requirement umber Gradin h CAN/CSA-0 ed to their fibre pper arsenate t applied in tw N/CSA 080. subject to the all import mate d supplied in with the deta reater than th inimum 15.5 material in the e applied to th ncement of th requirements ITEM : 510 Page 510-1 e posts .
ts for No .
1 ng Authority 080 and the e saturation ( CCA ) ; and wo coats .
approval of erials to the accordance ils indicated he 342 mm mm above e Work , the he post field he Work , the s as detailed GU Pag 510 510 510 UIDE POSTS ge 510-2 0.4 CONST .1 The spec .2 Guid and .1 .3 Align .4 Insta surr .1 .5 Area and .6 Cut the m .7 Was Wor 0.5 MEASU .1 The acco 0.6 BASIS O .1 Pay as id RUCTION Contractor s cifically directe de posts sha 512-3 .
If Energy-Ab Documents , t shall be repla nment of guid allation shall rounding Road The Contrac resulting from as around gui shall be finish surfaces of a manufacturer ste materials s rk Site .
REMENT FO Quantity mea ordance with t OF PAYMENT ment for Wor dentified unde DEPARTM TR shall carry o ed by the Eng all be installe sorbing Guid the flared bur aced with EAG de posts shall be carried dway .
tor shall be r m the Work .
de posts shal hed to match all wood prod ’ s application shall become OR PAYMENT asured for pa this Item .
T rk under this I er the Contrac STA MENT of TR RAFFIC CONTRO ut the Work gineer .
ed in accord de Rail Termi ried end treat GRT systems be establishe out in a ma responsible , a ll be backfilled the surroundi ucts shall be instructions .
the property T ayment shall b Item shall inc t. ANDARD S RANSPORT OL DEVICES as indicated ance with S inal ( EAGRT ) tments shown installed in ac ed by the Engi anner so as at his/her ow d with approve ng grade .
treated with of the Contra be the numbe lude a separa SPECIFICA TATION an d in the Cont Standard Draw ) systems ar n in Standard ccordance wit ineer .
to avoid dam wn expense , t ed material , c an approved actor and shal er of guide po ate Unit Price ATIONS nd INFRAS tract Docume wings 510-1 , re specified in Drawings 51 th Item 515. mage to the to repair any compacted du preservative , ll be disposed osts supplied a for each size TRUCTUR ITEM : 5 January , 20 ents and/or a 510-2 , 512- n the Contra 10-2 and 512- adjacent an such damag uring placeme , as detailed d of outside th and installed e of guide pos RE 10 15 as -2 ct -2 nd ge nt in he in st , DEPA REMO Janua 511.1 511.2 511.3 511.4 511.5 511.6 ARTMENT OVAL OF GU ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite MATERIAL .1 None id SUBMITTA .1 None id CONSTRU .1 The Co specific .2 The re surroun .1 The res .3 All mat directed .1 Sal und .2 Sal Ma .3 All sha .4 The Co remova area to .5 The Co accumu matchin MEASURE .1 The Qu with thi BASIS OF .1 Payme STAN of TRANS IDE POSTS TION em consists o LS dentified .
ALS dentified .
CTION ontractor sha cally directed b moval shall nding Roadwa e Contractor sulting from th terials shall d for disposal lvageable gu der 512.2 , un lvageable gui aintenance De unsalvageab all be dispose ontractor shal al , with an ap match the su ontractor shal ulated over t ng the adjace MENT FOR P uantity measu s Item .
PAYMENT nt for Work u NDARD SP PORTATIO TRAFF f the removal all carry out t by the Engine be carried ou ay .
shall be resp he Work .
remain the p l. ide posts , as less otherwis ide posts not epot .
ble guide post ed of outside t l be responsi proved mater urrounding gra l shape and g time and sha ent surface .
PAYMENT ured for paym nder this Item ECIFICATI ON and INF FIC CONTROL D of guide pos the Work as er .
ut in a mann ponsible , at h property of th s determined e specified in t used for offs ts and waste the Work Site ble to comple rial , compacte ade .
grade the Sho all leave the ment shall be t m shall be at t IONS FRASTRUC DEVICES sts .
indicated in ner so as to his/her own e he Owner , u by the Engi n the Contract set blocks sh e shall becom e. etely backfill t ed during plac oulder by rem e Work Site the number o the Unit Price CTURE the Contrac avoid dama expense , to r until such tim neer , shall b t Documents .
hall be transpo me the proper the hole resu cement and s moving the ex in a uniform of guide posts e. ct Documents age to the ad repair any su me as the ma e used as of .
orted to the n rty of the Con lting from the shall finish th cess materia m and consis s removed in a ITEM : 511 Page 511-1 s and/or as djacent and ch damage aterials are ffset blocks nearest DTI ntractor and e guide post e backfilled ls that have stent grade accordance DEPA GUIDE Janua 512.1 512.2 512.3 512.4 ARTMENT E RAIL ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite MATERIAL .1 Delinea .2 If spec Owner .1 The .3 The Co .4 Guide r .1 Eac      SUBMITTA .1 The Co product .2 The Co manufa requirem CONSTRU .1 The Co specific .2 Guide 512-2 a .1 If E Doc sha .3 Guide r grade o .4 Salvage installat .1 The STAN of TRANS TION em consists of LS ators shall be ified for use under Item 51 e Contractor s ontractor shall rail shall be C ch section of g Name or bra Identification Number and AASHTO Sp Class and Ty ALS ontractor shal t name and m ontractor shal acturer ’ s certifi ments as deta CTION ontractor sha cally directed b rail shall be and 512-3 .
Energy-Absor cuments , the all be replaced rail sections s of the finished ed guide rail tion .
e Contractor s NDARD SP PORTATIO TRAFF f the supply an available from on the Contr 13 from DTI , F shall be respo supply all oth lass A , Type I guide rail , in a and of manufa n symbols or c d coating lot ; pec # ; and ype .
ll submit , upo manufacturer ’ s l submit , upo ication , for all ailed on the Co all carry out t by the Engine e installed in bing Guide R flared buried d with EAGRT shall be instal Highway surf l shall not b shall allow for ECIFICATI ON and INF FIC CONTROL D nd installation m the Owner f ract , salvaged Fredericton , N onsible to tran her materials .
II , W-section s accordance w acturer ; code for heat ; on request , p s specification on request , in galvanized m ontract Docum the Work as er .
n accordance Rail Terminal d end treatme T systems inst led to produc face .
e intermixed a two week tu IONS FRASTRUC DEVICES n of steel beam from stock at D d/straightened NB .
sport the salv steel beams c with AASHTO rior to incorp s for the guide advance of metals , that the ments .
indicated in e with Stand ( EAGRT ) sy ents shown in talled in acco ce a smooth c or alternate urn around fo CTURE m guide rail .
DTI , Frederict d rail shall be vaged rail to th conforming to M180 , require porating the m e rail .
the commenc e materials su the Contrac ard Drawing ystems are s Standard Dr rdance with It continuous rai ed with new or straightened ton , NB .
e made availa he Work Site .
AASHTO M1 es markings a material in the cement of the upplied meet th ct Documents s 510-1 , 51 specified in th rawings 510-2 tem 515. il , paralleling t guide rail in d rail .
ITEM : 512 Page 512-1 able by the 180. as follows : e Work , the e Work , the he specified s and/or as 0-2 , 512-1 , he Contract 2 and 512-2 the line and n the same GU Pag 512 512 512 UIDE RAIL ge 512-2 2.4 .5 Guid .1 .2 .6 Cut the m .7 Offs Stan .1 2.5 MEASU .1 The supp .1 2.6 BASIS O .1 Pay D de rail section Each section before disma Additional 63 AASHTO M1 surfaces of a manufacturer set blocks and ndard Drawing The colour of marking .
REMENT FO Quantity to plied and insta The Quantity by 3.81 m. OF PAYMENT ment for Wor DEPARTME TR ns shall be lap n of salvaged ntling is overl 3 mm x 19 m 80. all wood prod ’ s application d delineators g 510-1. f the delineato OR PAYMENT be measured alled in accord shall be calcu T rk under this I STA ENT of TRA RAFFIC CONTRO pped in directio rail shall be apped upon r mm slots requ ucts shall be instructions .
shall be inst or shall be co T d for paymen dance with this ulated by mult tem shall be ANDARD S ANSPORTA OL DEVICES on of the traffi installed such reinstallation .
uired in the g treated with talled on the onsistent with nt shall be th s Item .
tiplying the tot at the Unit Pr SPECIFICA ATION and ic .
h that the end guide rail sha an approved guide rail as the colour of e number of tal number of rice .
ATIONS d INFRAST d that had be ll meet the re preservative , specified an the adjacent f linear metre guide rail piec TRUCTURE ITEM : 5 January , 20 een overlappe equirements o , as detailed nd indicated o Pavement lin es of guide ra ces in the Wo E 12 15 ed of in on ne ail rk DEPA REMO Janua 513.1 513.2 513.3 513.4 ARTMENT OVAL OF GU ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite MATERIAL .1 None id SUBMITTA .1 When s straight delivere CONSTRU .1 The Co specific .2 Guide compon .3 The dis surroun .1 The res .4 Disman shall be .1 Any Co .2 Uns bec .5 Disman the Wo .1 Any Con .2 Uns Con STAN of TRANS IDE RAIL TION em consists o LS dentified .
ALS salvaged guid tening , the Co ed and the Co CTION ontractor sha cally directed b rail , offset nents .
smantling sha nding Roadwa e Contractor sulting from th ntled guide ra e transported y loss or da ntractor ’ s resp salvageable g come the prop ntled offset bl ork and shall b y loss or dam ntractor 's resp salvageable o ntractor and s NDARD SP PORTATIO TRAFF f the removal de rail is deli ontractor sha ontract numbe all carry out t by the Engine blocks , hard all be carried ay .
shall be resp he Work .
ail , hardware to DTI , Frede amage to ma ponsibility and guide rail , ha perty of the Co ocks shall be be the respon mage to mate ponsibility and offset blocks , a shall be dispos ECIFICATI ON and INF FIC CONTROL D of steel beam ivered to DTI ll submit a do er of the proje the Work as er .
dware and out in a ma ponsible , at h and delinea ericton , NB .
aterials during d he/she shall ardware and d ontractor and e stored at a l nsibility of the erials during d he shall repla as determined sed of outside IONS FRASTRUC DEVICES m guide rail .
I , Fredericton ocument iden ect under whi indicated in delineators nner so as to his/her own e ators shall rem g removal , t l replace any delineators , a shall be dispo ocation selec Contractor .
removal , tran ace any mate d by the Engi e the Work Site CTURE n , NB in acco ntifying the qu ich it was salv the Contrac shall be di o avoid dama expense , to r main the pro transporting a materials dam as determined osed of outsid cted by the C nsporting and erials damaged neer , shall be e. ordance with uantity of guid vaged .
ct Documents ismantled to age to the ad repair any su perty of the and/or storag maged or lost .
d by the Eng e the Work Si ontractor , unt d/or storage s d or lost .
ecome the pro ITEM : 513 Page 513-1 513.4.4 for de rail being s and/or as o individual djacent and ch damage Owner and ge shall be .
gineer , shall ite .
til reused in shall be the operty of the RE Pag 513 513 MOVAL OF G ge 513-2 3.5 MEASU .1 The rem .2 The 3.81 3.6 BASIS O .1 Pay GUIDE RAIL REMENT FO Quantity to oved in accor Quantity sha m. OF PAYMENT ment for Wor DEPARTM TR OR PAYMENT be measured rdance with th ll be calculate T rk under this I STA MENT of TR RAFFIC CONTRO T d for paymen his Item .
ed by multiplyi tem shall be ANDARD S RANSPORT OL DEVICES t shall be the ing the total n at the Unit Pr SPECIFICA TATION an e number of number of guid rice .
ATIONS nd INFRAS linear metres de rail pieces TRUCTUR ITEM : 5 January , 20 s of guide ra in the Work b RE 13 15 ail by DEPA ENER Janua 515.1 515.2 515.3 515.4 ARTMENT GY-ABSORB ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite ( EAGR MATERIAL .1 All mate .2 EAGRT ( NCHR .3 EAGRT .4 Only pr .1 Ene .2 Ro .3 Trin .5 A yellow reflectiv .6 Backfill EAGRT SUBMITTA .1 The Co system Drawin .2 Prior to certifica 350 Te as desi .3 Submit CONSTRU .1 The Co specific .2 Work s .3 The C supplie ensure STAN of TRANS BING GUIDE TION em consists o RT ) .
LS erial shall be Ts shall mee RP ) Report 35 Ts shall be the roprietary EAG ergy Absorpti ad System In nity Industries w and black h ve sheeting o material sha T , or the mate ALS ontractor sha proposed for gs clearly sho o delivery of ation that the st Level 3 ; ha gned .
tals shall be m CTION ontractor sha cally directed hall be carrie Contractor sh er/manufacture that correct p NDARD SP PORTATIO RAIL TERMI TRAFF of the supply supplied by t et the require 50 , Test Level e straight type GRTs will be on Systems I c. , Big Spring s Inc. , Dallas , hazard marke or equivalent , all be the ma erial otherwise all submit , at r the Work , th owing in deta the EAGRT e EAGRT has ave been fabr made as requ all carry out t by the Engine d out as indic hall be prep er of the EAG procedures ar ECIFICATI ON and INF INAL FIC CONTROL D y and installat he Contracto ements of Na 3. e. acceptable , i Inc. , Chicago g , Texas .
Texas .
er , minimum 3 shall be supp aterial excava e specified by least 14 Da he name of th il the compon systems to th s been desig ricated of mat uired for any c the Work as eer .
cated in the S pared to ar GRT to be on re established IONS FRASTRUC DEVICES tion of an En or .
ational Coop ncluding thos , Illinois .
300 mm x 600 plied with eac ated from the y the manufac ys in advanc he manufactu nents and inst he Work Site ned to meet terials consis cross-referen indicated in Shop Drawing rrange for n site for the d. CTURE nergy-Absorb erative Highw se made by th 0 mm and ma ch EAGRT .
e Roadbed fo cturer .
ce of the Wo rer , and at lea tallation of the e , the Contra the requirem stent with the ced Item form the Contrac s. a technical e initial install ing Guide Ra way Researc he following : ade from 3M or the installa ork , the type ast three cop e EAGRT .
ctor shall sub ments of NCH design ; and w ming part of th ct Documents representati ation on the ITEM : 515 Page 515-1 ail Terminal ch Program Hi-Intensity ation of the of EAGRT pies of Shop bmit written HRP Report will function his Item .
s and/or as ive of the Contract to EN Pag 515 515 515 ERGY-ABSO ge 515-2 5.4 .4 The man .5 Haz .6 Bac acco .7 Insta insta 5.5 MEASU .1 The acco 5.6 BASIS O .1 Pay D ORBING GUID impact hea nufacturer of t zard markers s kfilling of po ordance with allation of any allation to wh REMENT FO Quantity to ordance with OF PAYMENT ment for Wor DEPARTM DE RAIL TER TR ad of each E the reflective shall be secu osts and oth 510.4. y EAGRT sha ich it will be a OR PAYMENT o be measur this Item .
T rk under this I STA ENT of TR RMINAL RAFFIC CONTRO EAGRT shal sheeting haz red squarely her undergro all be perform attached .
T red for paym tem shall be ANDARD S RANSPORT OL DEVICES l be cleaned ard marker .
to the impact ound units o med concurre ment will be at the Unit Pr SPECIFICA TATION an d thoroughly t head .
of the EAGR ntly with the the numbe rice .
ATIONS d INFRAST as recomm RT shall be completion o er of EAGRT TRUCTURE ITEM : 5 January , 20 ended by th completed of the guide ra Ts installed E 15 15 he in ail in DEPA REMO Janua 516.1 516.2 516.3 516.4 516.5 516.6 ARTMENT OVAL OF ENE ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite MATERIAL .1 None id SUBMITTA .1 None id CONSTRU .1 The Co specific .2 Guide r hardwa .3 Disman surroun .1 The res .4 Disman Frederi .1 Any Co .2 Uns the MEASURE .1 The Q accorda BASIS OF .1 Payme STAN of TRANS ERGY-ABSO TION em consists o LS dentified .
ALS dentified .
CTION ontractor sha cally directed rail , offset blo are shall be sa ntling shall b nding Roadwa e Contractor sulting from th ntled compon cton , NB .
y loss or dam ntractor 's res salvageable c e Contractor a MENT FOR P uantity to be ance with this PAYMENT nt for Work u NDARD SP PORTATIO ORBING GUID TRAFF f the removal all carry out t by the Engine ocks , steel gu alvaged and d e carried ou ay .
shall be resp he Work .
ents shall rem mage to com ponsibility an components , and shall be d PAYMENT e measured s Item .
nder this Item ECIFICATI ON and INF DE RAIL TER FIC CONTROL D of an Energy the Work in a eer .
ide posts , be dismantled in t in a mann ponsible , at h main the prop mponents duri d she/he sha as determine isposed of ou for paymen m shall be at t IONS FRASTRUC RMINAL DEVICES y-Absorbing G accordance w earing plates , to individual c er so as to his/her own e perty of the Ow ing removal , all replace any ed by the En utside the Wo nt will be the the Unit Price CTURE Guide Rail Te with the Con anchors , imp components .
avoid damag expense , to r wner and sha transporting y components ngineer , shall ork Site .
e number o e. erminal ( EAGR tract Docume pact head and ge to the ad repair any su all be transpo and/or storag s damaged or become the f EAGRTs r ITEM : 516 Page 516-1 RT ) .
ents and/or d all related djacent and ch damage orted to DTI , ge shall be r lost .
property of removed in DEPA CAST- Janua 520.1 520.2 520.3 520.4 ARTMENT -IN-PLACE C ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite method MATERIAL .1 Delinea .2 All othe .3 Steel re .1 Dow .4 Concre .5 Membra loss of w SUBMITTA .1 Submitt CONSTRU .1 The Co specific .2 Concre .3 Concre .4 When accorda .1 Wa pla .5 When s line esta .1 Dow 520 .6 The Co concret .7 The Co Aggreg .1 Co sat STAN of TRANS CONCRETE B TION em consists d. LS ators shall be a er materials sh estraining dow wels shall be te shall be su ane curing co water to not m ALS tals are requir CTION ontractor sha cally directed b te barrier sha te shall be pla slipforming c ance with Item ater shall be cement so as slipforming co ablished by th wels shall be 0-1. ontractor shal te with a minim ontractor shall ate Base ) by t ncrete spilled tisfaction of th NDARD SP PORTATIO BARRIER TRAFF of the constr available from hall be supplie wels shall mee of the size an pplied in acco ompounds sh more than 0.31 red in accorda all carry out t by the Engine ll be construct aced in accord concrete barr m 205. uniformly ap s to thoroughl ncrete barrier he Engineer .
e embedded t ll schedule th mum of interru l take all prec the slipform p d on the Hig he Engineer .
ECIFICATI ON and INF FIC CONTROL D ruction of ca m the Owner fr ed by the Cont et the requirem d length , as p ordance with C all meet the 1 kg/m² .
ance with any the Work as er .
ted in accorda dance with 30 rier on Aggre pplied to the y wet the Agg r on Pavemen o the depth a he Work sequ uption .
caution to avo paver , truck mi ghway shall IONS FRASTRUC DEVICES ast-in-place co rom stock at D tractor .
ments of 304.2 per Standard D CSA A23.1 , cl requirements cross-referen indicated in ance with Stan 1.4. egate Base , Aggregate B gregate Base nt surfaces , th and at the sp uence so as oid damage to ixers or other be removed CTURE oncrete barrie DTI , Fredericto 2 .
Drawing 520-1 ass of exposu of ASTM C3 nced Item form the Contrac ndard Drawing the base s Base immedia e surface with he steel dowel acing indicate to ensure u o the Roadwa Equipment .
d and the H er using the on , NB .
1. ure C-XL .
309 and shall ming part of th ct Documents g 520-1. hall be fine ately ahead o out the poolin ls shall be ins ed on Standa niform placem ay surface ( P Highway clea ITEM : 520 Page 520-1 slipforming restrict the is Item .
s and/or as graded , in of concrete ng of water .
stalled to the ard Drawing ment of the Pavement or ned to the CA Pag 520 520 520 AST-IN-PLAC ge 520-2 0.4 .8 Han or w .1 .2 .9 Surf 3 m .10 Curi finis .11 Con saw .1 .12 Wor Con .1 .2 .13 Vert .14 The meth .1 .2 .15 Deli curv 0.5 MEASU .1 The conc .2 Mea 0.6 BASIS O .1 Pay E CONCRET nd finishing wil wood float .
Textured bro Air holes 15 m faces of the straight edge ing shall cons hing with the s ntraction joints wing without ex Contraction 50 mm and a rk which exp ntractor shall n For those pa of concrete o The Contract tical construct Contractor s hods can not b Formwork sh Form and sty neators shall ves .
REMENT FO Quantity to b crete barrier c asurement of t OF PAYMENT ment for Work DEPARTM TE BARRIER TR ll be permitted om or brush f mm in diamet median barr .
ist of two spra second applic s shall be saw xcessive ravel joints shall at a uniform s periences unc notify the Engi arts deemed n of not less tha tor may subm tion joints sha shall undertak be employed .
hall be in acco yle of the form be installed o OR PAYMENT be measured constructed in the barrier sha T k under this Ite STA MENT of TR RAFFIC CONTRO d only on a m finish shall be ter or larger s rier shall not ay application cation applied w cut , as soo ling and befor be cut nea pacing not ex controlled sh neer of the loc not acceptabl an 1 m surrou mit , for conside all include a v ke formwork ordance with 3 med barrier sh on the media T for payment accordance w all be along th em shall be at ANDARD S RANSPORT OL DEVICES inimal basis a e applied to th shall be repair vary by mo s of the mem in a direction on as the con re shrinkage c atly in a ve xceeding 6 m hrinkage crac cation and ext e , the Contra nding the cra eration , altern vertical key in and hand pla 301.4. hall match the n barrier eve shall be the with this Item .
he bottom of th t the Unit Pric SPECIFICA TATION an and shall be c he approved s red .
ore than 5 m brane curing c perpendicula ncrete has ha cracking takes ertical plane .
cking shall b tent of crackin actor shall rem ack .
nate repair me the joint surf acement of t e slipformed a ry 15 m on ta number of lin he barrier , bet ce .
ATIONS nd INFRAS conducted with surface .
mm when me compound im ar to the first .
rdened suffic s place .
to a minim e clearly ma ng for his/her r move and rep ethods .
face .
the Work whe abutting sectio angents and e near metres o tween the end TRUCTUR ITEM : 52 January , 20 h a magnesiu easured with mmediately afte iently to perm mum depth o arked and th review .
place a sectio ere slipformin on .
every 7.5 m o of cast-in-plac d section limits RE 20 15 m a er mit of he on ng on ce s. DEPA CONC Janua 529.1 529.2 529.3 529.4 ARTMENT CRETE-ENCA ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite duct un MATERIAL .1 All mate .2 Electric 84-165 .3 Duct a Standa .4 Backfill Engine .1 If a Wo .5 Beddin .6 All conc Docum .7 Each s metres .8 Concre .9 Rebar s .10 The Co SUBMITTA .1 The Co certifica requirem .2 When r installa .3 Submitt CONSTRU .1 The Co specific STAN of TRANS ASED DUCT TION em consists o nder the Road LS erials shall be cal equipmen under the Ele nd undergrou ard Drawing 5 material sha er .
additional mat ork Area from g material sh crete-encased ents .
section of PV , the manufac ete shall meet shall be 15M ontractor shal ALS ontractor shall ation , and/or m ments as deta requested , th tion and instr tals are requir CTION ontractor sha cally directed b NDARD SP PORTATIO BANK SYST TRAFF of the supply dbed .
e supplied by nt shall be ectrical Instal und service 29-1 and/or a all be selected terials are req a source and all be sand ha d PVC duct , b VC duct shal cturer ’ s name t the requirem bar meeting t l supply all ot l submit , in a mill certificate ailed on the Co e Contractor ructions for ha red in accorda all carry out t by the Engine PECIFICAT ON and INF EM FIC CONTROL D and installati the Contracto certified in lation and Ins warning tape as indicated in d materials fr quired for bac d of a type ap aving a Dust bends , coupli l have printe e and tradema ments of 301.2 the requireme her appurtena dvance of the es for the du ontract Docum shall submit andling of the ance with any the Work as er .
TIONS FRASTRUC DEVICES ion of concre or unless oth accordance spection Act .
e shall be of the Contract rom the exca ckfilling , the C pproved by the content not m ings and caps ed on its surf ark ; inside dia 2 , exposure c ents of 304.2 ances as req e commencem uct , that the m ments .
the manufac duct .
cross-referen indicated in CTURE ete-encased P erwise indica e with New f the type an Documents .
vation , subje Contractor sha e Engineer .
more than 15 % s shall be as rface , at inter ameter ( mm ) ; class C-2. . uired and as ment of the W materials sup cturer ’ s recom nced Item form the Contrac Polyvinyl Chlo ated on the Pl Brunswick nd size as in ct to the app all import mate % .
specified in th rvals not exc and type des indicated on Work , the ma pplied meet th mmended pro ming part of th ct Documents ITEM : 529 Page 529-1 oride ( PVC ) ans .
Regulation ndicated on roval of the erials to the he Contract ceeding 1.5 signation .
the Plans .
anufacturer ’ s he specified cedures for is Item .
s and/or as CO Pag 529 ONCRETE-EN ge 529-2 9.4 .2 Con Draw .1 .3 Bott soft .1 .4 The reco .1 .5 The the c .6 Form Exp spec .7 Duc .8 Tren .1 .2 .3 .4 .9 Bac Stru .10 Und Draw .11 Afte mm duct NCASED DUC nstruction of th wing 529-1 , an For excavatio schedule of th tom of the ex spots or distu If Overexcava of Overexcav accordance w Contractor s ommended pro Joints shall be Engineer sha concrete-enca mwork and co osed concret cified by the E ct installation s nches shall be Backfill shall b Backfill for th conduit shall dimension .
Backfill from surrounding m Bedding and surrounding m to a minimum kfill and mate cture .
derground serv wing 529-1. r the backfillin less than the t bank system DEPARTM CT BANK SY TR he trench and nd/or as indica on depths gre he Work .
xcavated tren urbed ground ation is carried vation and s with Item 936 , shall install the ocedures suc e watertight .
all be notified a ased duct ban oncrete placem e shall be m Engineer .
shall be inspec e completely b be placed in s he area imme be non-organ 75 mm above material .
d backfill sha material or , as m of 95 % of the erials above S vice warning ng is complete e duct ID shall m in the presen STA MENT of TR YSTEM RAFFIC CONTRO d the installat ated in the Co eater than 1. ches shall be prior to place d out , the Co shall fill this and compact e duct in the h that the duc at least 3 Day nk system can ment shall co moist-cured .
Fo cted and appr backfilled to Su such a manne ediately surrou nic and free o e the duct to S all be compa s a minimum , e maximum d Subgrade elev tape shall be e , a flexible st be passed th nce of the Eng ANDARD S RANSPORT OL DEVICES tion of the du ontract Docum .5 m , the Co e uniformly g ement of the ntractor shall , area with a ted to a minim formwork an ct is free of sha ys in advance n be carried ou onform to the orms shall be roved by the E ubgrade eleva er so as to min unding the du of lumps and s Subgrade sha acted to the in lieu of othe ry density .
vation shall m installed to c teel mandrel a hrough the len gineer and a re SPECIFICA TATION an uct shall be in ments .
ontractor shall graded and sh bedding mate , at his/her ow an approved mum of 95 % of nd in accordan arp bends , kin of the concre ut .
requirements e left in place Engineer prior ation .
nimize damage uct and to a stones larger all be materia degree of c er direction , in match the sur conform to the at least 230 m ngth of each d epresentative ATIONS nd INFRAS n accordance l notify the E hall be free o erial .
wn expense , backfill mate f the maximum nce with the nks and break te Work so th s of 301.2 , 30 e for at least to backfilling .
e to the instal height of 75 than 50 mm al of the qualit compaction o n accordance rrounding exis e details show mm long and o duct in the con e of each utility TRUCTUR ITEM : 52 January , 20 with Standar Engineer of th of sharp rock repair the are erial placed m dry density .
manufacturer ks .
at inspection 01.3 and 301.4 t 3 Days or a led duct .
mm above th in the greate ty matching th of the existin e with Item 93 sting Paveme wn on Standar of a diameter ncrete-encase y company .
RE 29 15 rd he s , ea in r ’ s of 4. as he est he ng 6 , nt rd 5 ed DEPA CONC Janua 529.4 .
529.5 529.6 ARTMENT CRETE-ENCA ary , 2015 11 .1 Eac eac pro .2 The ma .12 Immedi open en .13 The Co duct ba MEASURE .1 The Qu encase BASIS OF .1 Payme STAN of TRANS ASED DUCT ch duct shall b ch end in a “ s ovided at each e Contractor andrel test .
iately after th nds of the duc ontractor shall ank system .
MENT FOR P uantity to be d duct bank s PAYMENT nt for Work u NDARD SP PORTATIO BANK SYST TRAFF be threaded w screw-eye ” ins h end .
shall be resp e mandrel in ct with a water install a visibl PAYMENT measured fo system supplie nder this Item PECIFICAT ON and INF EM FIC CONTROL D with a polyprop sert in the end ponsible to cle spection and rtight plug .
e marker at e or payment s ed and installe m shall be at t TIONS FRASTRUC DEVICES pylene fish ro d cap or plug .
ear and/or rep approval , th each end ( term shall be the n ed in accordan the Unit Price CTURE pe ( minimum A surplus of place any du e Contractor mination point ) number of lin nce with this It e. 6 mm ) and te 1 m of fish ro cts that do n shall securel ) of the concre near metres o tem .
ITEM : 529 Page 529-3 erminated at ope shall be ot pass the ly block the ete-encased of concrete- DEPA UNDE Janua 530.1 530.2 530.3 530.4 ARTMENT R ROADBED ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite MATERIAL .1 All mate .2 Electric 84-165 .3 Duct a Standa .4 Backfill Engine .1 If a Wo SUBMITTA .1 The Co certifica requirem .2 When r installa .3 Submitt CONSTRU .1 The Co specific .2 Constru Drawing .1 For sch .3 Bottom disturbe .1 If O of acc STAN of TRANS D DUCT TION em consists o LS erials shall be cal equipmen under the Ele nd undergrou ard Drawing 5 material sha er .
additional mat ork Area from ALS ontractor shall ation , and/or m ments as deta requested , th tion and instr tals are requir CTION ontractor sha cally directed b uction of the t g 530-1 , and/o r excavation hedule of the W of the excav ed ground .
Overexcavatio Overexcavati cordance with NDARD SP PORTATIO TRAFF f the supply a e supplied by nt shall be ectrical Instal und service 30-1. all be selected terials are req a source and l submit , in a mill certificate ailed on the Co e Contractor ructions for ha red in accorda all carry out t by the Engine trench and th or as indicated depths greate Work .
vated trenche n is carried o on and shal Item 936 , and PECIFICAT ON and INF FIC CONTROL D and installatio the Contracto certified in lation and Ins warning tape d materials fr quired for bac d of a type ap dvance of the es for the du ontract Docum shall submit andling of the ance with any the Work as er .
he installation d in the Contra er than 1.5 m s shall be un ut , the Contra ll fill this are d compacted t TIONS FRASTRUC DEVICES on of duct und or .
accordance spection Act .
e shall be of rom the exca ckfilling , the C pproved by the e commencem uct , that the m ments .
the manufac duct .
cross-referen indicated in of the duct s ract Documen m , the Contra niformly grade actor shall , at ea with an a to a minimum CTURE der the Roadb e with New f the type an vation , subje Contractor sha e Engineer .
ment of the W materials sup cturer ’ s recom nced Item form the Contrac shall be in ac ts .
actor shall no ed and shall b his/her own approved ba m of 95 % of the bed .
Brunswick nd size as in ct to the app all import mate Work , the ma pplied meet th mmended pro ming part of th ct Documents ccordance wit otify the Engi be free of sha expense , rep ckfill materia e maximum d ITEM : 530 Page 530-1 Regulation ndicated on roval of the erials to the anufacturer ’ s he specified cedures for is Item .
s and/or as th Standard neer of the arp rocks or pair the area l placed in ry density .
UN Pag 530 530 530 DER ROADB ge 530-2 0.4 .4 The bend .1 .5 Duc .6 Tren .1 .2 .3 .4 .7 Bac Stru .8 Und Draw .9 Afte insta Eng .1 .10 Imm open .11 The duct 0.5 MEASU .1 The and 0.6 BASIS O .1 Pay BED DUCT Contractor s ds , kinks and Joints shall be ct installation s nches shall be Backfill shall b Backfill for th conduit shall dimension .
Backfill from surrounding m Backfill shall b as a minimum the maximum kfill and mate cture .
derground serv wing 530-1. r the backfillin alled duct sh ineer .
The Contract mandrel test .
mediately after n ends of the Contractor sh t crossing .
REMENT FO Quantity to b installed in ac OF PAYMENT ment for Wor DEPARTM TR shall install th breaks .
e watertight .
shall be inspec e completely b be placed in s he area imme be non-organ 75 mm above material .
be compacted m , in lieu of ot m dry density .
erials above S vice warning ng is complete all be passed tor shall be re r the mandre duct with a wa hall install a v OR PAYMENT be measured ccordance wit T rk under this I STA MENT of TR RAFFIC CONTRO e duct in the cted and appr backfilled to Su such a manne ediately surrou nic and free o e the duct to S d to the degre ther direction , Subgrade elev tape shall be e , a mandrel d through the esponsible to l inspection a atertight plug .
visible marker T for payment h this Item .
tem shall be ANDARD S RANSPORT OL DEVICES e prepared tre roved by the E ubgrade eleva er so as to min unding the du of lumps and s Subgrade sha e of compacti in accordanc vation shall m installed to c with a diamet e length of t o clear and/or and approval , at each end shall be the n at the Unit Pr SPECIFICA TATION an ench such tha Engineer prior ation .
nimize damage uct and to a stones larger all be materia ion of the exis ce with Item 9 match the sur conform to the ter of at least the duct syst r replace any , the Contrac ( termination p number of lin rice .
ATIONS nd INFRAS at the duct is to backfilling .
e to the instal height of 75 than 50 mm al of the qualit sting surround 936 , to a minim rrounding exis e details show t 90 % of the d tem in the pr ducts that do ctor shall secu point ) of the u near metres o TRUCTUR ITEM : 53 January , 20 s free of shar led duct .
mm above th in the greate ty matching th ding material o mum of 95 % sting Paveme wn on Standar diameter of th resence of th o not pass th urely block th under Roadbe of duct supplie RE 30 15 rp he est he or , of nt rd he he he he ed ed DEPA UNDE Janua 531.1 531.2 531.3 531.4 ARTMENT RGROUND D ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite MATERIAL .1 All mate .2 Electric 84-165 .3 Duct , s connec .4 Backfill Engine .1 If a Wo SUBMITTA .1 The Co certifica Docum .2 Prior to Engine .3 When r installa .4 Submitt CONSTRU .1 The Co specific .2 Electric .1 An New .3 On new placem STAN of TRANS DUCT TION em consists o LS erials shall be cal equipmen under the Ele secondary wi ctions shall be materials sh er .
additional mat ork Area from ALS ontractor shall ation that the m ents .
o commencin er .
requested , th tion and instr tals are requir CTION ontractor sha cally directed b cal Work shall electrical con w Brunswick s w construction ent .
NDARD SP PORTATIO TRAFF f the supply a e supplied by nt shall be ectrical Instal ires , ground e of the type a hall be selecte terials are req a source and l submit , in a materials supp g the Work , e Contractor ructions for ha red in accorda all carry out t by the Engine be in accorda ntractor holdin shall perform n the Work u PECIFICAT ON and INF FIC CONTROL D and installatio the Contracto certified in lation and Ins wires , groun and size as in ed material fr quired for bac d of a type ap dvance of the plied meet the the Contracto shall submit andling of the ance with any the Work as er .
ance with the C ng a valid elec all electrical W under this Ite TIONS FRASTRUC DEVICES on of duct and or .
accordance spection Act .
nd rods , und dicated on St rom the exca ckfilling , the C pproved by the e commencem e specified req or shall subm the manufac duct .
cross-referen indicated in Canadian Ele ctrical contrac Work .
m shall be c CTURE d wires .
e with New derground se tandard Drawi vation , subje Contractor sha e Engineer .
ment of the W quirements as mit a copy of cturer ’ s recom nced Item form the Contrac ectrical Code .
ctor 's licence is completed bef Brunswick rvice warning ing 531-1. ct to the app all import mate Work , the ma s detailed on t the wiring pe mmended pro ming part of th ct Documents ssued by the fore Aggrega ITEM : 531 Page 531-1 Regulation g tape and roval of the erials to the anufacturer ’ s the Contract ermit to the cedures for is Item .
s and/or as Province of te Subbase UN Pag 531 DERGROUN ge 531-2 1.4 .4 Con Stan .1 .2 .5 Duc .6 The bend .7 Duc .8 Bac .9 Tren .1 .2 .10 Und Draw .11 Afte insta Eng .1 ND DUCT nstruction of th ndard Drawing Bottom of the grade , free of If Overexcava Overexcavati with Item 936 ct placed unde Contractor s ds , kinks and ct shall be insp kfill shall be p nches shall be For trenches .1 Backfill in conduit , a and stone For trenches .1 Backfill fo conduit s dimensio .2 Backfill fr the surro .3 Backfill s material o Item 936 .4 Backfill a Structure derground serv wing 531-1. r the backfillin alled duct sh ineer .
The Contract mandrel test .
DEPARTM TR he trench and g 531-1. e excavated f sharp rocks .
ation is carrie on and shall f 6 , and compac er a Roadbed shall install th breaks .
pected and ap laced in such e completely b outside the R n the area imm and also in th es larger than within the Roa or the area im shall be in-orga on .
rom 75 mm a unding materi shall be com or , as a minim , to a minimum and materials e. vice warning ng is complete all be passed tor shall be re STAN MENT of TR RAFFIC CONTRO the installatio trenches sha ed out , the Co fill this area w cted to a minim shall be encas e duct in the pproved by the a manner so backfilled and Roadbed , back mediately surr he top 300 m 50 mm in the adbed , backfi mmediately sur anic and free bove the duct ial .
pacted to the mum , unless o m of 95 % of th above Subg tape shall be e , a mandrel d through the esponsible , to DARD SPE RANSPORT OL DEVICES n of the duct a ll be undistur ontractor shal with an approv mum of 95 % o sed in Under e prepared tre e Engineer prio as to minimiz finished level kfill shall be ta rounding the d m of the tren e greatest dim lling shall be c rrounding the of lumps and t to Subgrade e degree of otherwise dire he maximum d grade shall m installed to c with a diamet e length of t o clear and/or ECIFICATIO TATION an and the wiring rbed insitu so l , at his own ved backfill m of the maximu Roadbed Duc ench such tha or to backfillin ze damage to with the surro mped during p duct , and to a ch , shall be i mension .
carried out as duct and to a d stones larger e shall be mat compaction ected by the E dry density .
match the surr conform to the ter of at least the duct syst r replace any ONS nd INFRAS g shall be in a oil and shall h expense , rep aterial placed um dry density ct. at the duct is ng .
the installed d ounding adjac placement .
a height of 75 n-organic and follows : a height of 75 r than 50 mm terial of the q of the existin Engineer , in a rounding exis e details show t 90 % of the d tem in the pr y ducts that d TRUCTUR ITEM : 53 January , 20 ccordance wit have a unifor pair the area d in accordanc y. s free of shar duct .
cent surface .
mm above th d free of lump mm above th in the greate uality matchin ng surroundin ccordance wit sting Paveme wn on Standar diameter of th resence of th o not pass th RE 31 15 th m of ce rp he ps he est ng ng th nt rd he he he DEPA UNDE Janua 531.4 531.5 531.6 ARTMENT RGROUND D ary , 2015 .12 Immedi open en .13 Second .1 The occ .14 A minim boxes a .15 Splicing .16 Electric tests sh .17 The Co portion MEASURE .1 The Qu supplied .2 Linear m direct ru .1 Du BASIS OF .1 Paymen as iden STAN of TRANS DUCT iately after th nds of the duc dary wires sha e Contractor cur to the wire mum of 1 m o and power poi g of wire will o cal Work shall hall be submitt ontractor shall of the electric MENT FOR P uantity to be m d and installed measurement un of the duct ct encased in PAYMENT nt for Work u tified under th NDARD SP PORTATIO TRAFF e mandrel in ct with a water all be of a size shall pull the as a result of of secondary ints in order to only be permitt l be tested fo ted to the Eng perform meg cal system .
PAYMENT measured for d in accordan t shall be take .
n Under Road nder this Item he Contract .
PECIFICAT ON and INF FIC CONTROL D spection and rtight plug .
and number wires throug f installation .
and ground o accommoda ted in junction r satisfactory gineer .
ger tests on a payment sha ce with this Ite en from end to bed Duct sha m shall include TIONS FRASTRUC DEVICES approval , th indicated on t gh the duct in wire shall be ate the making n boxes .
operation by all feeders and all be the num em .
o end on the all be measur e a separate U CTURE e Contractor the Plans .
n such a man e left coiled at g of connectio y the Contract d branch circu mber of linear duct and sha red as one un Unit Price for shall securel nner that no d t all pole bas ons .
tor and the re uits before ene metres of duc ll be measure nit of length .
each type of ITEM : 531 Page 531-3 ly block the damage will ses , junction esults of the ergizing any ct and wires ed along the f installation , DEPA UNDE Janua 532.1 532.2 532.3 532.4 ARTMENT RGROUND J ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite MATERIAL .1 All mate .2 The un Drawin .3 All ele 84-165 .4 Free-dr .5 Backfill Engine .1 If a Wo 167 SUBMITTA .1 The Co certifica Docum .2 Submitt CONSTRU .1 The Co specific .2 All elec .1 An New .3 The jun .1 All spl .4 The W surroun .1 The res STAN of TRANS JUNCTION B TION em consists o LS erials shall be derground el g 532-1. ctrical equipm under the Ele raining backfi material sha er .
additional mat ork Site from 7.2 .
ALS ontractor shall ation that the m ents .
tals are requir CTION ontractor sha cally directed b trical Work sh electrical con w Brunswick s nction box sha wire splices ice kit .
Work shall be nding Roadwa e Contractor sulting from th NDARD SP PORTATIO BOX TRAFF f the supply a e supplied by ectrical juncti ment shall b ectrical Installa ll shall be sup all be selected terials are req a source and l submit , in a materials supp red in accorda all carry out t by the Engine hall be in acco ntractor holdin shall perform all be installed inside the ju e carried out ay .
shall be resp he Work .
PECIFICAT ON and INF FIC CONTROL D and installatio the Contracto ion box shall be certified ation and Insp pplied in acco d materials fro quired for bac d of a type a dvance of the plied meet the ance with any the Work as er .
rdance with th ng a valid elec all electrical W d in accordan unction box s in a manne ponsible , at h TIONS FRASTRUC DEVICES on of an under or .
be of the typ in accordanc pection Act .
ordance with 3 om the excava ckfilling , the C approved by t e commencem e specified req cross-referen indicated in he Canadian E ctrical contrac Work .
nce with Stand hall be made er so as to his/her own e CTURE rground elect pe and size a ce with New 366.2. ation , subject Contractor sha the Engineer ment of the W quirements as nced Item form the Contrac Electrical Cod ctor 's licence is dard Drawing e with a CSA avoid damag expense , to r trical junction as indicated o w Brunswick t to the appro all import mate and in accor Work , the ma s detailed on t ming part of th ct Documents de .
ssued by the g 532-1 .
A-approved d ge to the ad repair any su ITEM : 532 Page 532-1 box .
on Standard Regulation oval of the erials to the rdance with anufacturer ’ s the Contract is Item .
s and/or as Province of irect buried djacent and ch damage UN Pag 532 532 532 DERGROUN ge 532-2 2.4 .5 The free .1 .6 The adju .7 All b 2.5 MEASU .1 The supp 2.6 BASIS O .1 Pay ND JUNCTION junction box draining bac The foundatio the area of t that water ca top of the ju usted to accom backfill shall b REMENT FO Quantity to plied and insta OF PAYMENT ment for Wor DEPARTM N BOX TR shall be insta kfill .
on layer shall he junction b annot pond or unction box sh mmodate 532 be placed in a OR PAYMENT be measured alled in accord T rk under this I STA MENT of TR RAFFIC CONTRO alled above t l be construct box installatio saturate the hall be place 2.4.5. accordance w T d for payment dance with this tem shall be ANDARD S RANSPORT OL DEVICES he water tabl ted such that n shall be pr foundation zo d flush with t ith 166.4. t shall be the s Item .
at the Unit Pr SPECIFICA TATION an le on a 400 m the area is m rovided with p one .
the surroundi e number of u rice .
ATIONS nd INFRAS mm thick foun maintained fre positive drain ng grade , eit underground TRUCTUR ITEM : 53 January , 20 ndation layer o ee-draining an nage to ensur ther existing o junction boxe RE 32 15 of nd re or es DEPA POWE Janua 533.1 533.2 533.3 533.4 ARTMENT ER POINT ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite MATERIAL .1 The con .2 All othe .3 All ele 84-165 SUBMITTA .1 Prior to Engine CONSTRU .1 The Co specific .2 All elec .1 An New .3 The po .4 The Co from DT .5 The Co receipt .6 All elec .1 All the .2 The ene .7 The co be deliv STAN of TRANS TION m consists of LS ntrol box and s er materials sh ctrical equipm under the Ele ALS o commencin er .
CTION ontractor sha cally directed b trical Work sh electrical con w Brunswick s wer point sha ontractor shall TI , Fredericton ontractor shall of the materia ctrical wiring s portions of th e tests shall be e Contractor ergizing any p ntrol box and vered to the E NDARD SP PORTATIO TRAFF f the installatio service box sh hall be supplie ment shall b ectrical Installa g the Work , all carry out t by the Engine hall be in acco ntractor holdin shall perform all be installed l be responsib n , NB , to the W be responsib als until such t shall be conne he electrical W e submitted to shall perfor portion of the service box Engineer .
ECIFICATI ON and INF FIC CONTROL D on of a power hall be supplie ed by the Cont be certified ation and Insp the Contracto the Work as er .
rdance with th ng a valid elec all electrical W d in accordan ble for transp Work Area ( s ) .
ble for all mat time that the m ected as show Work shall be o the Enginee rm megger t electrical sys shall be locke IONS FRASTRUC DEVICES point .
ed by the Own tractor .
in accordanc pection Act .
or shall subm indicated in he Canadian E ctrical contrac Work .
ce with Stand porting , unload .
terials and for materials have wn on the Pla tested for sa er .
tests on all stem .
ed immediate CTURE ner from stock ce with New mit a copy of the Contrac Electrical Cod ctor 's licence is dard Drawing ding , storing a r any damage e been accept ans .
atisfactory ope feeders and ely after instal k at DTI Frede w Brunswick the wiring pe ct Documents de .
ssued by the 533-1. and distributin e or loss from ted in the Wor eration and th branch circ llation and the ITEM : 533 Page 533-1 ericton , NB .
Regulation ermit to the s and/or as Province of ng materials m the time of rk .
he results of cuits before e keys shall PO Pag 533 533 OWER POINT ge 533-2 3.5 MEASU .1 The acco 3.6 BASIS O .1 Pay REMENT FO Quantity to ordance with t OF PAYMENT ment for Wor DEPARTM TR OR PAYMENT be measured this Item .
T rk under this I STA MENT of TR RAFFIC CONTRO T d for paymen tem shall be ANDARD S RANSPORT OL DEVICES nt shall be th at the Unit Pr SPECIFICA TATION an he number o rice .
ATIONS nd INFRAS of power poin TRUCTUR ITEM : 53 January , 20 nts installed RE 33 15 in DEPA REMO Janua 534.1 534.2 534.3 534.4 534.5 534.6 ARTMENT OVAL OF POW ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite MATERIAL .1 None id SUBMITTA .1 Prior to Engine CONSTRU .1 The Co specific .2 All elec .1 An Pro .2 All 165 .3 A pow Drawing .4 The Co control .1 The .5 Power p DTI , Fre .1 Any Co MEASURE .1 The Qu accorda BASIS OF .1 Payme STAN of TRANS WER POINT TION m consists of LS dentified .
ALS o commencin er .
CTION ontractor sha cally directed b ctrical Work sh electrical c ovince of New electrical equ 5 of the Electr wer point sha g 533-1. ontractor shall unit from the e Utility pole s point and all c edericton , NB y loss or da ntractor ’ s resp MENT FOR P uantity to be ance with this PAYMENT nt for Work u NDARD SP PORTATIO TRAFF f the removal o g the Work , all carry out t by the Engine hall be in acc contractor ho w Brunswick s uipment shall rical installatio all consist o l remove the Utility pole an shall only be re components s . amage to ma ponsibility and PAYMENT measured fo Item .
nder this Item PECIFICAT ON and INF FIC CONTROL D of a power po the Contracto the Work as er .
ordance with olding a valid shall perform a be removed on and Inspe of all compo above ground d the wire from emoved if the hall remain th aterials during d he shall repl or payment s m shall be at t TIONS FRASTRUC DEVICES int .
or shall subm indicated in the Canadian d electrical all electrical W in accordanc ction Act for t onents as id d conduit , wir m the Utility p electrical sup he property of g removal , t lace any mate shall be the the Unit Price CTURE mit a copy of the Contrac n Electrical C contractor 's Work .
e with New B the Province dentified and re , control box ole to the nex pply feeds only the Owner an transporting a erials damage number of p e. the wiring pe ct Documents Code .
licence issu Brunswick Reg of New Bruns d detailed on x , service box xt junction poin y the DTI cont nd shall be tra and/or storag ed or lost .
power points ITEM : 534 Page 534-1 ermit to the s and/or as ued by the gulation 84- swick .
n Standard x and photo nt ( s ) .
trol box .
ansported to ge shall be removed in DEPA SCREW Janua 538.1 538.2 538.3 538.4 538.5 538.6 ARTMENT W BASE ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite MATERIAL .1 Screw Frederi .2 All othe SUBMITTA .1 None id CONSTRU .1 The Co specific .2 Screw .3 Screw shown .4 The top .1  3 .2  2 MEASURE .1 The Qu accorda BASIS OF .1 Payme STAND of TRANS TION em consists o LS bases , bolts cton , NB .
er materials s ALS dentified .
CTION ontractor sha cally directed bases shall b bases shall b on Standard p surface of th 3 mm of a leve 25 mm of the e MENT FOR P uantity to be ance with this PAYMENT nt for work un DARD SPEC PORTATIO TRAFF f the installati s and washe hall be suppli all carry out t by the Engine be installed at be aligned to Drawing 538- he screw base el line when m elevation prov PAYMENT measured fo s Item .
nder this Item CIFICATIO ON and INF FIC CONTROL D ion of a screw ers shall be ed by the Co the Work as eer .
the locations be within  2 -1. es shall be w measured acr vided by the E or payment s m shall be at th ONS FRASTRUC DEVICES w base .
available fr ontractor .
indicated in s indicated on 25 mm in hor within the follow ross the top s Engineer .
shall be the he Unit Price .
CTURE rom the Own the Contrac n the Plans .
rizontal offset wing toleranc urface of the number of s . ner from sto ct Documents t from the cen ces : base .
screw bases ITEM : 538 Page 538-1 ock at DTI , s and/or as ntrelines as installed in DEPA REMO Janua 539.1 539.2 539.3 539.4 539.5 539.6 ARTMENT OVAL OF SCR ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite MATERIAL .1 All mate .2 The ba the Eng .1 If a Wo SUBMITTA .1 None id CONSTRU .1 The Co specific .2 The Wo its com .3 Screw to DTI , .1 Any Co .2 All bas .4 The Co the scre the sur MEASURE .1 The Qu accorda BASIS OF .1 Payme STAND of TRANS REW BASE TION em consists o LS erials shall be ckfill material gineer .
additional mat ork Area from ALS dentified .
CTION ontractor sha cally directed ork shall be c ponents .
base , bolts a Fredericton , y loss or dam ntractor ’ s res material that se .
ontractor shal ew base with rounding grad MENT FOR P uantity to be ance with this PAYMENT nt for work un DARD SPEC PORTATIO TRAFF f the removal e supplied by ls shall be se terials are re a source and all carry out t by the Engine carried out in nd washers s NB .
mage to mate ponsibility an t is not a com l be responsi an approved de .
PAYMENT measured fo s Item .
nder this Item CIFICATIO ON and INF FIC CONTROL D of a screw b the Contracto elected mater quired for ba d of a type ap the Work as eer .
such a mann shall remain th erials during d he shall rep mponent of th ble to comple d material , co or payment s m shall be at th ONS FRASTRUC DEVICES ase .
or .
rials from the ackfill , the Co pproved by the indicated in ner so as to a he property o removal , tran place any ma he screw bas etely backfill t ompacted dur shall be the he Unit Price .
CTURE Work Site , s ontractor shal e Engineer .
the Contrac avoid damage of the Owner nsporting and aterials lost or se shall be r the hole resu ring placemen number of s . ubject to the l import mate ct Documents e to the screw and shall be d/or storage s r damaged .
removed from lting from the nt , and finishe crew bases ITEM : 539 Page 539-1 approval of erials to the s and/or as w base and transported shall be the m the screw e removal of ed to match removed in DEPA SIGN O Janua 540.1 540.2 540.3 540.4 ARTMENT OR LIGHT BA ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite MATERIAL .1 All mate .2 Electric 84-165 .3 Concre 301.4 .
.1 Co .4 Reinfor .5 Other m .6 Backfill Enginee .1 If a Wo with SUBMITTA .1 Submitt CONSTRU .1 The Co specific .2 All elec .1 An New .3 Constru Standa .4 Bases s .5 The an centreli .6 Concre and 304 STAN of TRANS ASE TION em consists of LS erials shall be cal equipmen under the Ele ete shall be de ncrete shall m rcing steel sha materials are d material sha er .
additional mat ork Area from h 167.2 .
ALS tals are requir CTION ontractor sha cally directed b trical Work sh electrical Con w Brunswick s uction of all s rd Drawings 5 shall not have nchor bolt ass nes as shown ete and rein 4.4 , respective NDARD SP PORTATIO TRAFF f the construct e supplied by t nt shall be ectrical Installa esigned , prod meet the requi all meet the re detailed on St all be selected terials are req a source and red in accorda all carry out t by the Engine hall be in acco ntractor holdin shall perform sign and ligh 540-1 , 540-2 , e a diameter v sembly shall n on Standard nforcing stee ely .
ECIFICATI ON and INF FIC CONTROL D tion of a cast- the Contracto certified in ation and Insp uced , supplie rements of CS equirements o tandard Draw d materials fr quired for bac d of a type app ance with any the Work as er .
rdance with th ng a valid elec all electrical W ht bases shal 540-3 and 54 variation great be aligned to d Drawing 540 el shall be IONS FRASTRUC DEVICES -in-place reinfo or .
accordance pection Act .
ed and placed SA A23.1 exp of 304.2. ings 540-1 , 54 rom the excav ckfilling , the C proved by the cross-referen indicated in he Canadian E ctrical contrac Work .
ll be in acco 40-4. ter than 20 mm o be within 1 0-5. placed to CTURE forced concret e with New d in accordanc posure class C 40-2 , 540-3 a vation , subjec Contractor sha e Engineer and nced Item form the Contrac Electrical Cod ctor 's license i ordance with m in the cross 2.5 mm in h meet the te sign or ligh Brunswick ce with 301.2 C-1 .
nd 540-4. ct to the app all import mate d supplied in ming part of th ct Documents de , ssued by the the details in s sectional dim horizontal offs requirements ITEM : 540 Page 540-1 t base .
Regulation 2 , 301.3 and roval of the erials to the accordance is Item .
s and/or as Province of ndicated on mensions .
set from the of 301.4 SIG Pag 540 540 540 GN OR LIGHT ge 540-2 0.4 .7 Bac .8 Bas .1 .2 .9 The tops 0.5 MEASU .1 The with 0.6 BASIS O .1 Pay iden T BASE kfilling shall b es shall have  3 mm of a l .1 Areas in the minim .1 It wil base .2 If the tolera the repla  25 mm of th Contractor s soiling , and/or REMENT FO Quantity to b this Item .
OF PAYMENT ment for Wor ntified under th DEPARTM TR e carried out the top surfac evel line whe excess of th mum cover re ll not be acc e concrete tha e concrete su ance , is not t Engineer , en ace with new he elevation p shall restore t r hydroseeding OR PAYMENT be measured f T rk under this he Contract .
STA MENT of TR RAFFIC CONTRO in accordance ce finished lev n measured a e 3 mm toler equirements s ceptable to ac at has harden urface , upon to the Engine ntirely remove concrete .
provided by th the Work Are g to the satisfa T for payment sh Item shall inc ANDARD S RANSPORT OL DEVICES e with 166.4. vel , smooth a across the ba rance may be specified in the chieve this re ed .
removal are eer ’ s satisfact e designated e Engineer .
ea to its origin action of the E hall be the nu clude a separ SPECIFICA TATION an and within the ase ; e removed by e Contract Do epair by plac eas in excess tion , the Cont d portions or nal condition .
Engineer .
umber of base rate Unit Pric ATIONS nd INFRAS following tole y abrasive me ocuments are cing grout or s of the 3 m tractor shall , r all of the This may in es constructed e for each ty TRUCTUR ITEM : 54 January , 20 rances : eans , provide e met .
concrete ove mm permissib as directed b concrete , an clude shapin d in accordanc ype of base , a RE 40 15 ed er le by nd g , ce as DEPA REMO Janua 541.1 541.2 541.3 541.4 541.5 541.6 ARTMENT OVAL OF SIG ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite MATERIAL .1 All mate .2 Backfill Enginee .1 If a Wo SUBMITTA .1 None id CONSTRU .1 The Co specific .2 The Wo and its .1 Any Dis .2 Uns out .3 The Co the bas surroun MEASURE .1 The Qu with this BASIS OF .1 Paymen identifie STAN of TRANS GN OR LIGHT TION em consists of LS erials shall be materials sh er .
additional mat ork Area from ALS dentified .
CTION ontractor sha cally directed b ork shall be c components .
y salvageable strict Maintena salvageable b tside the Wor ontractor shal se with an ap nding grade .
MENT FOR P uantity to be m s Item .
PAYMENT nt for Work u ed under the C NDARD SP PORTATIO T BASE TRAFF f the removal e supplied by t all be selecte terials are re a source and all carry out t by the Engine carried out in .
e bases not r ance Depot .
bases shall b k Site .
l be responsi pproved mate PAYMENT measured for under this Item Contract .
ECIFICATI ON and INF FIC CONTROL D of a concrete the Contracto ed materials f quired for ba of a type app the Work as er .
such a mann reused on the become the p ble to comple erial , compac payment sha m shall includ IONS FRASTRUC DEVICES sign or light b or .
from the exca ackfill , the Co proved by the indicated in ner so as to av e Contract sh roperty of the etely backfill t cted during p all be the num de a separate CTURE base .
avation , subje ontractor shal Engineer .
the Contrac void damage hall be transp e Contractor a the hole resu placement , an mber of bases e Unit Price fo ect to the app l import mate ct Documents to the sign o orted to the n and shall be d lting from the nd finished to s removed in or each type ITEM : 541 Page 541-1 proval of the erials to the s and/or as or light base nearest DTI disposed of e removal of o match the accordance of base , as DEPA LIGHT Janua 542.1 542.2 542.3 542.4 ARTMENT T STANDARD ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite MATERIAL .1 Light st kits and Frederic .2 All othe .3 All ele 84-165 SUBMITTA .1 Prior to Engine CONSTRU .1 The Co specific .2 All elec .1 An New .3 The Co from DT .4 The Co receipt .5 The wir undergr .1 Wir .6 The Co portion .7 Lumina operatio .8 The lum Enginee .9 All port submitt STAN of TRANS D TION m consists of LS tandard ( pole d pole hardw cton , NB .
er materials re ctrical equipm under the Ele ALS o commencin er .
CTION ontractor sha cally directed b trical installati electrical Con w Brunswick s ontractor shall TI , Fredericton ontractor shall of any materia ring shall be round wiring , re splices will ontractor shall of the electric aires with lam onal .
minaires once er .
ions of the ele ted to the Eng NDARD SP PORTATIO TRAFF f the installatio and davit ) , fr ware and fran quired shall b ment shall b ectrical Installa g the Work , all carry out t by the Engine ons shall be in ntractor holdin shall perform l be responsib n , NB , to the W be responsib als until such installed and in accordance not be permitt perform meg cal system .
mps shall be e operable s ectrical Work ineer .
ECIFICATI ON and INF FIC CONTROL D on and/or reins rangible base ngible bases , e supplied by be certified ation and Insp the Contracto the Work as er .
n accordance ng a valid elec all electrical W ble for transp Work Area ( s ) ble for all mat time that the m the complete e with Standar ted between t ger tests on a attached to hall be adjus shall be teste IONS FRASTRUC DEVICES stallation of a es , luminaires will be avail y the Contracto in accordanc pection Act .
or shall subm indicated in e with the Can ctrical contrac Work .
porting , unload .
terials and for materials have e structure ere rd Drawings 5 the handhole c all feeders and the light sta sted by the C ed for satisfac CTURE light standard s , lamps , com able from the or .
ce with New mit a copy of the Contrac adian Electric ctor 's licence i ding , storing a r any damage e been accep ected , plumbe 542-1 , 542-2 , 5 connections a d branch circu andard and Contractor un ctory operation d and luminair mplete panel b e Owner ’ s sto w Brunswick the wiring pe ct Documents cal Code .
ssued by the and distributin e or loss from pted in the Wo ed and conne 542-3 and 542 and the lumina uits before ene the unit sha nder the direc n and the resu ITEM : 542 Page 542-1 es .
boards , fuse ock at DTI , Regulation ermit to the s and/or as Province of ng materials m the time of ork .
ected to the 2-4. aire .
ergizing any ll be made ction of the ults shall be LIG Pag 542 542 GHT STANDA ge 542-2 2.5 MEASU .1 The reins 2.6 BASIS O .1 Pay ARD REMENT FO Quantity me stalled in acco OF PAYMENT ment for Work DEPARTM TR OR PAYMENT easured for p ordance with t T k under this Ite STA MENT of TR RAFFIC CONTRO T payment shal this Item .
em shall be at ANDARD S RANSPORT OL DEVICES ll be the num t the Unit Pric SPECIFICA TATION an mber of light ce .
ATIONS nd INFRAS t standards in TRUCTUR ITEM : 54 January , 20 nstalled and/o RE 42 15 or DEPA REMO Janua 543.1 543.2 543.3 543.4 ARTMENT OVAL OF LIG ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This ite MATERIAL .1 None id SUBMITTA .1 Prior to Engine CONSTRU .1 The Co specific .2 Electric .1 Ele 165 .2 An of N .3 Work s compon .1 The res .4 Light st .5 Light st luminai .6 Wire sh .7 Light s transpo .1 Any Co STAN of TRANS GHT STANDA TION em consists of LS dentified .
ALS o commencin er .
CTION ontractor sha cally directed b cal Work shal ectrical equipm 5 ( Electrical In electrical con New Brunswic hall be carrie nents .
e Contractor s sulting from th andards and c tandards shal re ( s ) .
hall be rolled a standards , lum orted to DTI , F y loss or da ntractor ’ s resp NDARD SP PORTATIO ARD TRAFF f disconnectin g the Work , all carry out t by the Engine l be in accord ment shall be nstallation an ntractor holdin ck shall perfo ed out in such shall be respo his Work .
components s l be removed and labelled by minaires and Fredericton , N amage to ma ponsibility and ECIFICATI ON and INF FIC CONTROL D ng and remov the Contracto the Work as er .
dance with the e removed in d Inspection A ng a valid ele orm all electric h a manner so onsible , at his shall be handl d from the con y length .
d wire shall r NB .
aterials during d he shall repl IONS FRASTRUC DEVICES ving light stan or shall subm indicated in e Canadian E n accordance Act ) .
ectrical contra cal Work .
o as to avoid s/her own exp ed with a non ncrete base a remain the p g removal , t lace any mate CTURE ndard ( s ) and l mit a copy of the Contrac Electrical Code with New Br actor 's licence d damage to t pense , for an n-metallic sling and disassem property of th transporting a erials damage uminaires .
the wiring pe ct Documents e. runswick Reg e issued by th the light stand y repair of su g. mbled into dav he Owner an and/or storag ed or lost .
ITEM : 543 Page 543-1 ermit to the s and/or as gulation 84- he Province dard and its uch damage vit , pole and nd shall be ge shall be REMO Page 5 543.5 543.6 OVAL OF LIG 543-2 MEASURE .1 The Qu accorda BASIS OF .1 Paymen DE GHT STANDA MENT FOR P uantity to be ance with this PAYMENT nt for Work un EPARTMEN ARD TRAFF PAYMENT measured fo Item .
nder this Item NT of TRAN FIC CONTROL D or payment sh shall be at the SPECIFIC NSPORTAT DEVICES hall be the n e Unit Price .
CATIONS TION and I number of ligh INFRASTR Jan ht standards RUCTURE ITEM : 543 nuary , 2015 removed in 3 DEPA MEDIA Janua 544.1 544.2 544.3 544.4 ARTMENT AN FLASHIN ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite MATERIAL .1 The me Owner .2 All othe .3 All ele 84-165 SUBMITTA .1 Prior to Engine CONSTRU .1 The Co specific .2 All elec .1 An Pro .3 The me foundat .4 The Co from DT .5 The Co receipt .6 All wirin .1 Wir .7 All port the res .8 The Co any por STAN of TRANS G LIGHT TION m consists of LS edian flashing from stock at er materials sh ctrical equipm under the Ele ALS o commencin er .
CTION ontractor sha cally directed b ctrical installat electrical c ovince of New edian flashing tion as shown ontractor shall TI , Fredericton ontractor shall of the materia ng connections re splices will ions of the ele ults shall be s ontractor shal rtion of the ele NDARD SP PORTATIO TRAFF f the installatio light , post , fra DTI , Frederic hall be supplie ment shall b ectrical Installa g the Work , all carry out t by the Engine tions shall be contractor ho w Brunswick s g light and po on Standard l be responsib n , NB , to the W be responsib als until such t s shall be carr not be permi ectrical Work submitted to t l perform me ectrical syste ECIFICATI ON and INF FIC CONTROL D on of a median angible base ton , NB .
ed by the Cont be certified ation and Insp the Contracto the Work as er .
in accordanc olding a valid shall perform a ost shall be i Drawing 544- ble for transp Work Area ( s ) .
ble for all mat time that the m ried out , by th itted .
k shall be teste the Engineer .
egger tests on m. IONS FRASTRUC DEVICES n flashing light and mounting tractor .
in accordanc pection Act .
or shall subm indicated in ce with the Ca d electrical all electrical w installed on t -1. porting , unload .
terials and for materials have he Contractor , ed for satisfa n all feeders a CTURE t with post .
g hardware sh ce with New mit a copy of the Contrac anadian Elect contractor 's work .
the concrete ding , storing a r any damage e been accept to make the l ctory operatio and branch c hall be availab w Brunswick the wiring pe ct Documents trical Code .
licence issu median barrie and distributin e or loss from ted in the Wor ight operation on by the Con circuits before ITEM : 544 Page 544-1 ble from the Regulation ermit to the s and/or as ued by the er or screw ng materials m the time of rk .
nal .
ntractor and e energizing ME Pag 544 544 EDIAN FLASH ge 544-2 4.5 MEASU .1 The insta 4.6 BASIS O .1 Pay as id HING LIGHT REMENT FO Quantity to b alled in accord OF PAYMENT ment for Wor dentified unde DEPARTM TR OR PAYMENT be measured f dance with this T rk under this I er the Contrac STA MENT of TR RAFFIC CONTRO T for payment s s Item .
tem shall incl t. ANDARD S RANSPORT OL DEVICES shall be the nu ude a separa SPECIFICA TATION an umber of med ate Unit Price ATIONS nd INFRAS dian flashing li for each type TRUCTUR ITEM : 54 January , 20 ghts with pos e of installatio RE 44 15 sts n , DEPA REMO Janua 545.1 545.2 545.3 545.4 545.5 545.6 ARTMENT OVAL OF ME ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite MATERIAL .1 None Id SUBMITTA .1 Prior to Engine CONSTRU .1 The Co specific .2 Electric .1 Ele ( Ele .2 An Pro .3 Median screw fo .4 Median .5 Wire sh power p .1 Wir .6 Materia NB .
.1 Los res MEASURE .1 The Qu accorda BASIS OF .1 Payme STAN of TRANS DIAN FLASH TION m consists of LS dentified .
ALS o commencin er .
CTION ontractor sha cally directed b cal Work shall ectrical equipm ectrical Installa electrical c ovince of New n flashing ligh oundation , in n flashing light hall be disconn point .
re shall be roll als shall rema ss or damage sponsibility and MENT FOR P uantity measu ance with this PAYMENT nt for Work u NDARD SP PORTATIO HING LIGHT TRAFF f the removal o g the Work , all carry out t by the Engine be in accorda ment shall be ation and Insp contractor ho w Brunswick s t , post and h such a manne and post sha nected and re led and labelle ain the prope to materials d d he shall rep PAYMENT ured for paym Item .
nder this Item PECIFICAT ON and INF FIC CONTROL D of a median fla the Contracto the Work as er .
ance with the C removed in a pection Act ) .
olding a valid shall perform a ardware shal er so as to min all be handled emoved from t ed to indicate erty of the Ow during remova place any mate ment shall be m shall be at t TIONS FRASTRUC DEVICES ashing light w or shall subm indicated in Canadian Ele accordance w d electrical all electrical W l be removed nimize damag with a non-me the undergrou the length .
wner and sha al , transportin erials damage the number the Unit Price CTURE with post and w mit a copy of the Contrac ectrical Code .
with New Brun contractor 's Work .
d from the co ge to the unit .
etallic sling .
und duct betw all be transpo ng and/or stora ed or lost .
of median fla e. wire .
the wiring pe ct Documents nswick Regula licence issu oncrete media ween the medi orted to DTI , age shall be C ashing lights ITEM : 545 Page 545-1 ermit to the s and/or as ation 84-165 ued by the an barrier or an light and Fredericton , Contractor ’ s removed in DEPA SIGN Janua 550.1 550.2 550.3 550.4 550.5 550.6 ARTMENT POST ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite MATERIAL .1 The sig Frederic SUBMITTA .1 None id CONSTRU .1 The Co specific .2 The Co from DT .3 The Co receipt .4 The sig .5 The sig minimu .6 After ins .7 The ins under It MEASURE .1 The Qu with this BASIS OF .1 Paymen STAN of TRANS TION m consists of LS gn post , frang cton , NB .
ALS dentified .
CTION ontractor sha cally directed b ontractor shall TI , Fredericton ontractor shall of the materia n post shall b n post shall b m torque of 4 stallation , the stallation of sig tem 552 .
MENT FOR P uantity to be m s Item .
PAYMENT nt for Work un NDARD SP PORTATIO TRAFF f the installatio ible base and all carry out t by the Engine l be responsib n , NB , to the W be responsib als until such t e handled by e plumbed an 00 N•m and in sign posts sh gn posts shal PAYMENT measured for p nder this Item ECIFICATI ON and INF FIC CONTROL D on of a sign po d hardware sh the Work as er .
ble for transp Work Area ( s ) .
ble for all mat time that the m a non-metallic nd fastened to n accordance all be clean .
l be immedia payment shall shall be at the IONS FRASTRUC DEVICES ost .
hall be availab indicated in porting , unload terials and for materials have c sling .
o the sign base with Standard tely followed be the numbe e Unit Price .
CTURE ble from the O the Contrac ding , storing a r any damage e been accept e with the anc d Drawing 550 by the installa er of sign post Owner from s ct Documents and distributin e or loss from ted in the Wor chor bolts prov 0-1. ation of the si ts installed in ITEM : 550 Page 550-1 tock at DTI , s and/or as ng materials m the time of rk .
vided with a ign installed accordance DEPA REMO Janua 551.1 551.2 551.3 551.4 551.5 551.6 ARTMENT OVAL OF SIG ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite MATERIAL .1 None id SUBMITTA .1 None id CONSTRU .1 The Co specific .2 The Wo .3 The po .4 All mate NB .
.1 Any Co .2 The per MEASURE .1 The Qu accorda BASIS OF .1 Paymen STAN of TRANS GN POST TION em consists o LS dentified .
ALS dentified .
CTION ontractor sha cally directed b ork shall be c st shall be ha erials shall re y loss or da ntractor ’ s resp e Contractor rmanent black MENT FOR P uantity to be ance with this PAYMENT nt for Work un NDARD SP PORTATIO TRAFF f the removal all carry out t by the Engine arried out in s andled with a emain the pro amage to ma ponsibility and shall identify k marker .
PAYMENT e measured f s Item .
nder this Item ECIFICATI ON and INF FIC CONTROL D of a sign pos the Work as er .
such a manne non-metallic perty of the O aterials during d he/she shall all sign post for payment shall be at the IONS FRASTRUC DEVICES st. indicated in er so as to av sling .
Owner and sh g removal , t l replace any ts by marking shall be the e Unit Price .
CTURE the Contrac void damage t hall be transpo transporting a materials dam g the sign nu e number of ct Documents to the post .
orted to DTI , and/or storag maged or lost .
umber on the sign posts r ITEM : 551 Page 551-1 s and/or as Fredericton , ge shall be .
cap with a removed in DEPA ROAD Janua 552.1 552.2 552.3 552.4 552.5 552.6 ARTMENT DSIDE SIGN ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite aluminu MATERIAL .1 Roads SUBMITTA .1 None id CONSTRU .1 The Co specific .2 The Wo and the .1 The pos .2 The his/ .3 Sign pa no more .4 Direct c .5 Sign pa .6 Sign p Drawing .7 Sign pa .8 After ins MEASURE .1 The Qu installed BASIS OF .1 Paymen STAN of TRANS TION em shall con um roadside s LS side sign mate ALS dentified .
CTION ontractor sha cally directed b ork shall be ca e adjacent and e Contractor ssession of the e repair of an /her own expe anels shall be e than ten sig contact with th anels shall be panels shall g 552-1 throug anels shall be stallation , the MENT FOR P uantity to be m d and/or reins PAYMENT nt for Work un NDARD SP PORTATIO TRAFF nsist of the a sign on one or erials shall be all carry out t by the Engine arried out in s d surrounding shall be resp ese materials ny damage re ense .
transported a n sections in o he sign faces s handled with be installed gh 552-6. immediately i signs shall be PAYMENT measured for stalled in acco nder this Item ECIFICATI ON and INF FIC CONTROL D assembly and r more sign po available from the Work as er .
such a manne Roadway .
ponsible for a is taken until esulting from t and stored in a one row .
shall be avoid a non-metallic d as shown nstalled follow e clean .
payment sha rdance with th shall be at the IONS FRASTRUC DEVICES d installation osts .
m the Owner fr indicated in er so as to av ny damage t such time as this Work sha a vertical posi ed at all times c sling .
n in the C wing the instal all be the num his Item .
e Unit Price .
CTURE and/or reins from stock at D the Contrac void damage t to , or loss of they have be all be carried ition with the s s. Contract Doc llation of the s mber of roadsi stallation of a DTI , Fredericto ct Documents to the roadsid materials , fro en accepted i out by the C sign faces pro cuments and sign post .
ide signs asse ITEM : 552 Page 552-1 an extruded on , NB .
s and/or as e sign , post om the time n the Work .
Contractor at otected , with d Standard embled and DEPA REMO Janua 553.1 553.2 553.3 553.4 553.5 553.6 ARTMENT OVAL OF ROA ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite MATERIAL .1 None id SUBMITTA .1 None id CONSTRU .1 The Co specific .2 Work s and the .1 The res .3 Signs s .4 Signs s .5 Panels numbe .6 Materia NB .
.1 Any Co MEASURE .1 The Qu with thi BASIS OF .1 Payme STAN of TRANS ADSIDE SIG TION em consists o LS dentified .
ALS dentified .
CTION ontractor sha cally directed b shall be carrie e adjacent and e Contractor s sulting from th shall be handl shall be remov for each sig r as specified als shall rema y loss or da ntractor ’ s resp MENT FOR P uantity to be m s Item .
PAYMENT nt for Work u NDARD SP PORTATIO N TRAFF f the removal all carry out t by the Engine ed out in suc d surrounding shall be respo his Work .
led with a non ved from the gn shall be pa d on the Plans ain the prope amage to ma ponsibility and PAYMENT measured for nder this Item PECIFICAT ON and INF FIC CONTROL D of an extrude the Work as er .
h a manner s g Roadway .
onsible , at his n-metallic slin sign post ( s ) a ackaged and s. rty of the Ow aterials during d he/she shall r payment sha m shall be at t TIONS FRASTRUC DEVICES ed aluminum indicated in so as to avoi s/her own exp ng .
and disassem labelled , wit wner and sha g removal , t l replace any all be the num the Unit Price CTURE sign mounted the Contrac id damage to pense , for an mbled into 300 th permanent ll be transpor transporting a materials dam mber of signs e. d on one or m ct Documents o the roadside y repair of su 0 mm sign pa t ink , indicati rted to DTI , F and/or storag maged or lost .
s removed in a ITEM : 553 Page 553-1 more posts .
s and/or as e sign , post uch damage nels .
ng the sign Fredericton , ge shall be .
accordance DEPA OVER Janua 554.1 554.2 554.3 ARTMENT RHEAD SIGN ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite concret MATERIAL .1 All mate .2 Concre concret .3 Reinfor as indic .4 Materia .1 Anc .5 Backfill SUBMITTA .1 Submit forming .2 Submit .1 Ce Re .1 .2 .2 Pro writ .1 .3 The pro and sig product .4 All subm STAN of TRANS STRUCTUR TION em consists te foundation LS erials shall be te shall be de te shall meet t rcing steel sh cated on the P al for anchor b chor bolts , nu shall be sup ALS tals are requ g part of this I tals are requi rtification tha ady Mix Conc The concret production o Only concre plant certific oposed sourc ting , a minimu This notifica proposed fo oposed desig gned by a Pr tion is due to mittals for sho NDARD SP PORTATIO E FOUNDAT TRAFF of the exca for an overhe e supplied by esigned , prod the requireme all be supplie Plans .
bolts shall con uts and washe plied in accor uired in acco tem .
red in accord at the concre crete Associa te supplier sh of the concret ete supplied fr cation shall be ces of aggreg um of 14 Day ation period s r use have no n mix proport rofessional E commence .
oring shall be ECIFICATI ON and INF TION FIC CONTROL D avation , shori ead sign Stru the Contracto duced and su ents of Table 2 ed in accorda nform to the r ers shall be h rdance with 1 ordance with dance with 30 te supplier is ation , Plant Ce hall submit p te in accordan rom such cer e maintained f gates and tes ys prior to the shall be incre ot been previo tions , certified ngineer , shal e in accordanc IONS FRASTRUC DEVICES ing , construc cture .
or .
upplied in acc 2 , Exposure C nce with 304 requirements ot-dip galvan 67.2. any cross 2.3 and 302.4 s certified in ertification Pro proof of confo nce with CSA rtified plants s for the duratio st results sh proposed us eased to a mi ously approve d by the Cont ll be submitte ce with 361.3 CTURE ction and ba cordance with Class C-XL .
.2 and shall b of ASTM Spe nized to ASTM referenced It 4. accordance ogram or the ormance to t A A23.1 .
shall be acce on of the Wor all be submi se of such ma inimum of 35 ed for use in t tractor or his/ ed at least 1 . ckfilling of a CSA A23.1-0 be of the size ecification A3 M A153 Class tem and refe with Atlantic equivalent as he requireme ptable to the rk .
tted to the E aterials .
5 Days if the the Owner 's p /her agent , an 4 Days befo ITEM : 554 Page 554-1 a reinforced 04 , and the e and shape 325 Type 1. s C. erred to as c Provinces s follows : ents for the Owner and Engineer , in aggregates projects .
nd stamped re concrete OV Pag 554 554 554 VERHEAD SIG ge 554-2 4.4 CONST .1 The spec .1 .2 Con .3 Exc .1 .4 Plac .5 Con .6 Anc Stan .7 The .1 .2 .8 The toler .9 Top .10 Ove foun .11 Bac .12 The tops 4.5 MEASU .1 The foun 4.6 BASIS O .1 Pay D GN STRUCTU RUCTION Contractor s cifically directe Concrete con nstruction of th avation shall Shoring shall cement of rein ncrete constru hor bolts sh ndard Drawin Contractor m Anchor Syste Anchor Syste .1 The Con .2 Systems factor of included Contractor s rances specif surfaces of t erhead sign S ndation .
kfilling shall b Contractor s soiling , seedin REMENT FO Quantity to ndations for o OF PAYMENT ment for Wor DEPARTME URE FOUND TR shall carry o ed by the Eng nstruction meth he foundation conform to th l be installed nforcing steel uction method all be install gs 554-1 and may supply eit em `` A '' - Emb em `` B '' - Struc tractor shall s shall be des safety agains on the subm shall supply a fied for each g he foundation Structures sha be carried out shall restore t ng and/or mul OR PAYMENT o be measur verhead sign T rk under this I STA ENT of TRA DATION RAFFIC CONTRO ut the Work gineer .
hods shall be n shall be as i he requiremen in accordanc shall conform ds shall be in led to confo d 554-2 , and I ther : edded Ancho ctural Inserts submit shop d igned for a sa st failure equa itted shop dra a plywood tem group of anch n shall have a all not be erec t in accordanc the Work Are lching to the s T red for paym Structures co tem shall be ANDARD S ANSPORTA OL DEVICES as indicated in accordance ndicated in th nts of 161.4. e with 361.4 m to the requi accordance w rm with the tem 555. or Bolts drawings in ac afe working lo al to at least 3 awings .
mplate , made hor bolts .
a level , smoot cted until at le ce with 166.4 ea to its origin satisfaction of ment shall b onstructed in at the Unit Pr SPECIFICA ATION and d in the Cont e with CSA A2 he Contract D irements of 30 with 302.4. requirements ccordance wi oad of 139 kN 3 , and a state to suit the b th , trowelled f east 7 Days a . nal condition .
f the Enginee be the numb accordance w rice .
ATIONS d INFRAST tract Docume A23.1 .
Documents .
04.4. s noted on th Item 956 .
N per anchor ement to this olt size and s finish .
after placing o This may in er .
ber of reinfo with this Item TRUCTURE ITEM : 55 January , 20 ents and/or a the Plans , o rod/bolt , with effect shall b spacing , to th of the concret clude shaping orced concret m. E 54 15 as on a be he te g , te DEPA OVER Janua 555.1 555.2 555.3 555.4 555.4 555.4 555.4 555.4 ARTMENT RHEAD SIGN ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite MATERIAL .1 All mat stock a SUBMITTA .1 The Co Engine CONSTRU .1 Genera .1 The Do .2 The com 557 .2 Surface .1 Afte ma .3 Dimens .1 Prio pla .4 Inspect .1 A v we .1 .2 The .3 Fau .4 Co STAN of TRANS STRUCTUR TION em consists o LS terials , includ at DTI , Freder ALS ontractor sha er , a minimum CTION al e Contractor cuments .
e Contractor mpatible and 7. e Finishing er erection , t atch the fabric sional Toleran or to tightenin tes in diamete tion and Testi visual inspec lds as a resul The inspect with CAN/CS e inspector ’ s ulty welds sha rrected welds NDARD SP PORTATIO E TRAFF f the erection ding the over ricton , NB .
all submit the m of 14 Days shall erect shall ensure congruent w he Structure cation finish .
nces ng bolts , any er and hole lo ing ction shall be lt of the trans ion shall be c SA W178.2 .
report shall b all be correcte s shall be re-in ECIFICATI ON and INF FIC CONTROL D of an overhe rhead sign S e erection pro before the sc the overhea e that dimen with aspects o shall have a gaps betwee ocation .
carried out portation of th carried out by be submitted t ed as specifie nspected .
IONS FRASTRUC DEVICES ead sign Struc Structure shal ocedure , stam cheduled star ad sign Struc nsional tolera of the Work s any blemishes en plates are before erect he overhead s y an independ to the Engine ed in CAN/CS CTURE cture .
l be availabl mped and si rt of erection .
cture as des ances and in supplied unde s or marks re e to be filled w tion to ensur sign Structure dent inspecto er before ere SA W59.2 , cla e from the O gned by a P scribed in th dicated dime er Item 554 a emoved and with shims m re there are e to the Work or certified in a ection of the S ause 5.12 .
ITEM : 555 Page 555-1 Owner from Professional he Contract ensions are and/or Item restored to matching the no cracked k Site .
accordance Structure .
OV Pag 555 555 555 VERHEAD SIG ge 555-2 5.4 .5 Erec .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 5.5 MEASU .1 The erec 5.6 BASIS O .1 Pay sign D GN STRUCTU ction The Contract storage facili .1 Storage with the blocking .
The Contrac support , inclu distorted , ove Following ere plate to be g manufacturer .1 Central h A minimum o equivalent , w installed upo Structures sh before final in If the galvan the bolts hav and washed with a zinc-r system as ide The Contrac overhead sig REMENT FO Quantity to cted in accord OF PAYMENT ment for Wor n Structure , as DEPARTME URE TR tor shall deliv ty for the ove areas shall b overhead s . ctor shall be uding sufficie erstressed or ection and p routed , a non r ’ s instruction holes in the ba of 20 m2 of s which must b n the Structur hall be clean nspection .
ized coating ve rusted , the clean using rich paint in entified in CG ctor shall not gn Structure .
OR PAYMENT be measured dance with thi T rk under this s identified und STA ENT of TRA RAFFIC CONTRO ver the overhe rhead sign St be at least 10 sign Structure responsible f ent and satisf otherwise da plumbing of th n-shrink , non- ns , under the b ase plate sha sign panel ( o e securely a re on the sam ned to a brigh on the bolts e bolts shall b a non-organic accordance GSB 85-GP-16 tify the Engi T d for paymen s Item .
Item shall inc der the Contra ANDARD S ANSPORTA OL DEVICES ead sign Struc tructure if it ca 0 m from the e raised a m for the safe factory blocki amaged .
he Structure , metallic grout base plate .
all be blocked or equivalent ttached until me Day it is er ht new condi is damaged be wire brush c solvent .
Wh with CGSB 6M .
ineer , 14 Da nt shall be the clude a separ act .
SPECIFICA ATION and cture to the W annot be inst edge of the minimum of storage of th ng to ensure , where draw t , shall be pla to prevent es weight in sa the sign pan rected .
ition to the s during install hed to remov hen the surfa Specification ays in advan e number of rate Unit Price ATIONS d INFRAST Work Site and alled immedia travel Lane o 300 mm ab he Structure e that the me wings indicate aced in accor scape of grou and filled bag nels are insta satisfaction of lation of the ve the loose c ace is dry it s 1-GP-178M nce of the e overhead sig e for each typ TRUCTURE ITEM : 55 January , 20 d shall supply ately .
of the Highwa ove grade o and adequat embers are no e for the bas rdance with th ut .
gs or approve alled ) , shall b f the Enginee Structure , or coating or ru shall be coate or equivale erection of th gn Structure ( s pe of overhea E 55 15 a ay on te ot se he ed be er if st ed nt he s ) ad DEPA REMO Janua 556.1 556.2 556.3 556.4 556.5 556.6 ARTMENT OVAL OF OVE ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite MATERIAL .1 None id SUBMITTA .1 None id CONSTRU .1 The Co specific .2 The re Structu .1 The res .3 The ove .4 The ove .5 All ma Frederi .1 Any Co MEASURE .1 The Qu disman BASIS OF .1 Paymen sign Str STAN of TRANS ERHEAD SIG TION em consists o LS dentified .
ALS dentified .
CTION ontractor sha cally directed b moval shall b re and the ad e Contractor sulting from th erhead sign S erhead sign S terials shall cton , NB .
y loss or da ntractor ’ s resp MENT FOR P uantity to be ntled and remo PAYMENT nt for Work u ructure , as ide NDARD SP PORTATIO GN STRUCTU TRAFF f dismantling all carry out t by the Engine be carried ou djacent and su shall be resp he Work .
Structure sha Structure sha remain the amage to ma ponsibility and PAYMENT measured fo oved in accor under this Item entified under ECIFICATI ON and INF URE FIC CONTROL D and removing the Work as er .
ut in a mann urrounding Ro ponsible , at h ll be handled ll be dismantl property of aterials during d she/he shall or payment s rdance with th m shall includ the Contract .
IONS FRASTRUC DEVICES g an overhea indicated in ner so as to oadway .
his/her own e with a non-m led in one Da the Owner g removal , t l replace any shall be the n his Item .
e a separate CTURE ad sign Struct the Contrac avoid damag expense , to r metallic sling .
ay .
and shall b transporting a materials dam number of ov Unit Price fo ure .
ct Documents ge to the ove repair any su be transporte and/or storag maged or lost .
verhead sign or each type o ITEM : 556 Page 556-1 s and/or as erhead sign ch damage ed to DTI , ge shall be .
n Structures of overhead DEPA OVER Janua 557.1 557.2 557.3 557.4 557.5 557.6 ARTMENT RHEAD SIGN ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite sign Str MATERIAL .1 All mate SUBMITTA .1 None id CONSTRU .1 The Co specific .2 The Co from DT .3 The Co receipt .4 Sign pa and wit .5 Direct c .6 Sign pa .7 Sign pa .8 After in MEASURE .1 The Qu installed BASIS OF P .1 Payme STAN of TRANS TION em consists of ructure .
S erials shall be ALS dentified .
CTION ontractor sha cally directed b ontractor shall TI , Fredericton ontractor shall of the materia anels shall be h no more tha contact with th anels shall be anels shall be stallation , the MENT FOR P uantity to be m d in accordan PAYMENT nt for Work un NDARD SP PORTATIO TRAFF f the assembl e available from all carry out t by the Engine l be responsib n , NB , to the W be responsib als until such t e transported an ten signs in he sign faces handled with secured to th signs shall be PAYMENT measured for nce with this It nder this Item ECIFICATI ON and INF FIC CONTROL D ly and installa m the Owner f the Work as er .
ble for transp Work Area ( s ) .
ble for all mat time that the m and stored in n one row .
shall be avoid a non-metalli he Structure in e clean .
payment sha em .
shall be at th IONS FRASTRUC DEVICES ation of an ext from stock at indicated in porting , unload terials and for materials have n a vertical p ded at all time ic sling .
n accordance ll be the num he Unit Price .
CTURE truded alumin DTI , Frederic the Contrac ding , storing a r any damage e been accept position with t es .
with the Plan ber of overhe num sign on a cton , NB .
ct Documents and distributin e or loss from ted in the Wor the sign faces s. ead signs asse ITEM : 557 Page 557-1 an overhead s and/or as ng materials m the time of rk .
s protected , embled and DEPA REMO Janua 558.1 558.2 558.3 558.4 558.5 558.6 ARTMENT OVAL OF OVE ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite MATERIAL .1 None id SUBMITTA .1 None id CONSTRU .1 The Co specific .2 Work s overhea .1 The res .3 Signs s .4 Signs s .5 Panels number .6 Materia NB .
.1 Any Co MEASURE .1 The Qu remove BASIS OF .1 Payme STAN of TRANS ERHEAD SIG TION em consists of LS dentified .
ALS dentified .
CTION ontractor sha cally directed b hall be carried ad sign Struct e Contractor sulting from th shall be handle shall be remov for each sig r as specified als shall rema y loss or da ntractor ’ s resp MENT FOR P uantity to be m ed in accordan PAYMENT nt for Work u NDARD SP PORTATIO GN TRAFF f the dismantli all carry out t by the Engine d out in such ture and the a shall be resp he Work .
ed with a non ved from the s gn shall be p on the Plans .
ain the prope amage to ma ponsibility and PAYMENT measured for nce with this It nder this Item ECIFICATI ON and INF FIC CONTROL D ing and remov the Work as er .
a manner so adjacent and ponsible , at h -metallic sling sign Structure packaged and .
rty of the Ow aterials during d he shall repl payment sha tem .
m shall be at t IONS FRASTRUC DEVICES val of a sign fr indicated in o as to avoid d surrounding R her/his own e g. e and disassem d labelled wit wner and sha g removal , t lace any mate ll be the num the Unit Price CTURE rom an overh the Contrac damage to th Roadway .
expense , to r mbled into 30 th permanent ll be transpor transporting a erials damage ber of overhe e. P ead sign Stru ct Documents he overhead s repair any su 0 mm sign pa t ink , indicatin rted to DTI , F and/or storag ed or lost .
ead signs dism ITEM : 558 Page 558-1 cture .
s and/or as sign and the ch damage anels .
ng the sign Fredericton , ge shall be mantled and DEPA PAVE Janua 571.1 571.2 571.2 571.2 .
ARTMENT MENT MARK ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite marking .1 Eith MATERIAL .1 All mate .2 Traffic 2 .1 Oil- .1 Par 3.3 4.1 4.2 4.3 4.7 4.10 4.14 4.15 6.2 .
6.2 .
NOT STAN of TRANS KINGS TION em consists gs on roadwa her oil-based LS erials shall be Paint -Based Traffic The paint specification ra .
`` ... and s ( para .
4 Minimum Maximu Maximu Minimum 0 Pigment Pigment Silicon d Titanium 4 Change 5 Paint co 1 Change 2 Add : SiO portion o TE : Lead Co NDARD SP PORTATIO TRAFF of supply an ay Pavement .
or waterborn e supplied by c Paint shall meet C n modified as M shall meet the .2 ) : m changed fro m changed fr m changed fr m changed fro t composition t Description dioxide ( as Si m dioxide ASTM E97 to olours to matc 60 seconds t O2 shall be de of paint ntent ( if prese ECIFICATI ON and INF FIC CONTROL D nd applicatio ne paint may b the Contracto CGSB Spec shown in Tab Tab Modifications Modifi e requiremen om 80 to 85 rom 6 to 8 rom 60 to 90 om 34 to 37 ( minimums i O2 ) o ASTM E134 ch samples pr to 90 seconds etermined usi ent ) not to exc IONS FRASTRUC DEVICES n of yellow be used in the or .
cification 1.20 ble 571-1. ble 571-1 s to CGSB 1. ications for t ts for consiste n kg/L ) : 47 .
Add : yello rovided by DT s ng classical g ceed 600 mg CTURE and white pa e Work .
06-M , but w 206-M-89 this Item ency ( para .
4 Yellow 0.20 0.075 ow not less th TI gravimetric m /kg aint materials with paragrap 4.1 ) and no-pi White 0.20 0.15 han 60 % ethod on inso ITEM : 571 Page 571-1 s for traffic phs of that ck-up time oluble PAV Pag 571 VEMENT MA ge 571-2 1.2.2 .2 Pigment Volatile m Non-Vola Coalescin 1,3 penta ( % by ma Type of B White Pa Titanium Yellow P Titanium NOTES : D ARKINGS Waterborne T .1 The pain uniform s sprayed applied to .2 The pain .3 Handling uniformit shall be stripe wit equipme .4 The pain not chan in finish .
after the .5 The colo supplied .6 The che comply w .7 The phys Propert Content ( % b matter ( % by m atile Vehicle ( % ng Agent ( 2,2 anediol monoi ass of solid po Binder aint Dioxide ( g/L ) Paint Dioxide ( g/L ) 1 ) To be 20 of 90 % m 2 ) Titanium 3 ) Lead Co DEPARTME TR Traffic Paint nt shall be a smooth consi evenly and s o the Paveme t shall be sup g and storag y , consistenc capable of b thout side sp nt .
nt materials sh ge in service White and ye addition of ov our of the pa by the Owne mical compo with the requir sical propertie Chemica ty by mass ) 1 mass ) % by mass ) 2,4-trimethyl  isobutyrate ) olymer ) ) 2 ) 2 0 % talc that m minimum Dioxide pigm ntent ( if prese STA ENT of TRA RAFFIC CONTRO homogeneou stency , free o smoothly at ent .
pplied ready-m ge qualities cy , and absen being sufficie platter and ov hall be of a qu e to impair the ellow marking verlay glass b aint shall con er upon reque osition shall b rements of Ta es shall comp Table l Properties Min 56 16.75  10 Rohm & Chemica equivale 150 75 meets ASTM D ment shall me ent ) not to exc ANDARD S ANSPORTA OL DEVICES us water-base of skin , dirt an its intended mixed for use shall provid nce of skinnin ently atomize erspray withi uality and con e visibility of t gs shall be vi beads .
nform to the st. be determine able 571-2. ply with Table 571-2 of Waterbor Max 62 24 & Haas Rhople al DT-250NA ent D605 with a p et ASTM D47 ceed 600 mg/ SPECIFICA ATION and ed mixture of nd other forei temperature without addin de an accep ng and thixot d to produce n the limitatio nsistency suc the markings sible in Dayli colour of wh ed by the pa 571-3. ne Traffic Pa Tes AST AST CGSB 1-GP ex Fastrack 3 Emulsion , or photovolt gree 76 type II /kg ATIONS d INFRAST f particles we gn matter , ca and covering ng water .
ptable degre tropic propert e a uniformly ons of conve ch that the pa .
The paint fil ght and unde hite and yello aint manufact aint st Method TM D3723 TM D2369 P-71 , Method 3427 Emulsio r Engineer-ap en filter reflect TRUCTURE ITEM : 57 January , 20 ell ground to apable of bein g solidly whe ee of settling ties .
The pai y applied pai ntional stripin aint 's colour w lm shall be fla er artificial lig ow paint chip turer but sha d 19.1 n , Dow pproved tance E 71 15 a ng en g , nt nt ng will at ht ps all DEPA PAVE Janua Prope No-Pic Non-tr Volatile Conten Freeze Viscos Viscos Stabilit Skinni Coarse 250 m 150 m Settlin Bleedi Hiding Reflec Yellow White NOTE 571.2 571.2 .
ARTMENT MENT MARK ary , 2015 erty ckup Time , m acking Time , e Organic Co nt excluding w e-Thaw Resis sity , Krebs Un sity Change ( K ty Test @ 25 ng Properties e Particles ( % m m g Rate ( Up to ng Power ( m2/L ctance ( colour w : Non-trackin thickness a .3 Overlay 3 .1 Ge .1 .2 .3 .4 STAN of TRANS KINGS inutes seconds1 ompound ( VO water , g/L stance nit ( KU ) @ 25 KU ) after hea C s % by mass ) : o 6 months ) L ) r difference ) % ng time for Re applied on dry y Glass Bead neral Beads shall designed to material sha Glass bead accordance Glass beads the paint .
The refracti accordance NDARD SP PORTATIO TRAFF Physical Pro C ) C t-shear % egular Water y pavement ha s be true smoo o be resistan all be containe s shall meet with ASTM D AST s shall be colo on index of with CGSB S ECIFICATI ON and INF FIC CONTROL D Table 571 operties of W Min Pass 80 Nil Nil 8.0 6.0 4 8.4 4.0 50 80 Based stripin aving tempera oth , lustrous s nt to the effe ed in or amon t the gradatio D1214 on sam Ta Grading Lim TM Sieve Size 850 600 300 150 75 ourless to the the glass be Specification 1 IONS FRASTRUC DEVICES 1-3 Waterborne T Max Te 8 AS 60 150 AS AS 100 AS 10 Ca Nil CG Nil 0.01 AS AS AS AS Pf CG AS g paint based ature > 10 C spheres manu ects of traffic ng the beads .
on requireme mple sizes of able 571-4 mits for Glass e ( m ) Perc e extent that t eads shall no 1-GP-71 , Met CTURE Traffic Paint est Method STM D711 STM D3960 STM D2243 STM D562 altrans 8010- GSB 1-GP-71 STM D185 & STM D869 STM D1309 STM D868 & fund cryptome GSB 1-GP-71 STM E1347 d on 375 m ( C , under humi ufactured from c wear and ents of Table 50 to 100g .
s Beads cent Passing 100 80 - 100 20 - 35 0 - 8 0 - 2 they do not im ot be less tha thod 49.1 .
-61G-30 1 , Method 10 D2205 D969 eter w/ # 3.5 w 1 Method 14.2 ( 15 mils ) wet dity condition m glass of a c weathering .
e 571-4 whe g mpart a notice an 1.50 whe ITEM : 571 Page 571-3 .1 wedge 2 film ns ≥ 80 % .
composition No foreign n tested in eable hue to en tested in PAV Pag 571 571 571 571 VEMENT MA ge 571-4 1.2.3 .2 1.2.3 .3 1.2.3 .4 1.2.3 .5 D ARKINGS Roundness .1 A minimu .2 The perc of approx under ref  Reta  Pass .3 Failure to Imperfections .1 The surf scratches of milkine .2 Testing f GP-71 , M Moisture Res .1 Beads sh beads be .2 Beads sh dispensin painting .
.3 Moisture beaker , t for 5 min dry beak .1 After stand .2 The start Chemical Sta .1 Exposure diluted a adversely .2 Glass be 10 g sam chloride s distilled w .1 The samp cons DEPARTME TR um of 75 % by centage of tru ximately 1000 flected light a ained on the 3 sing the 300 u o meet round s face of the b s. Not more t ess , air inclus for imperfecti Method 149.1 sistance hall be treate efore the bead hall not agglo ng equipment resistance w to which an e nutes the wat er .
r standing for dard stem of beads shall f the flow at th ability e of glass be acid or alkali y affect reflec eads shall be mple of beads solution ( 1.0 water three tim beads will be ple .
Dulling o stitute failure o STA ENT of TRA RAFFIC CONTRO y mass of the ue spheres sh 0 beads in a and magnifica 300 um sieve um sieve size ness requirem eads shall be than 25 % of t sions , dark sp ons will be p . ed so as to ov ds are added omerate durin t whenever su will be tested equivalent vol ter shall be d r 5 minutes t 125 mm leng flow through he beginning o ads to paint f solutions sh ctive propertie resistant to d s placed in a normal solutio mes , and air d e examined u of the surfac of this test .
ANDARD S ANSPORTA OL DEVICES glass beads hall be determ culture dish , tion as follow size , under 5 , under 100x ments will be e smooth , lus the true sphe pecks and inc performed in vercome the to the painte ng storage an urface and at d on a 100g lume of distill decanted and he beads sha th and 10 mm the stem wit of the test is p film constitue hall not resu es of the bead deterioration b 1000 mL be on ) , left to soa dried .
under a micro ce of the be SPECIFICA ATION and shall be true mined by AST by counting t ws : 50x magnifica magnification cause for reje strous and fr eres shall hav ipient fracture accordance w effect of wat ed marking .
nd application mospheric co sample of b led water sha d the glass be all be poured m inside diam thout stoppag permissible .
ents , humidity ult in dulling ds .
by calcium ch aker , covered ak for three h oscope and c eads or othe ATIONS d INFRAST spheres .
TM D 1155 , o the number o tion ; n. ection .
ree of film , c ve imperfectio es .
with CGSB S ter ( vapour or n , and shall fl onditions are beads placed all be added .
eads transfer d slowly via a meter .
ge .
Slight init y , atmospheric of the surfa hloride , as de d with 500 m hours , rinsed w compared with er detrimenta TRUCTURE ITEM : 57 January , 20 or , on a samp of true sphere cavities , pits o ons in the for Specification r liquid ) on th low freely fro satisfactory fo d in a 500 m After standin rred to a clea a funnel into tial agitation t c conditions o ace that wou etermined on mL of a calciu with 100 mL o h an untreate al effects sha E 71 15 le es or m 1- he m or mL ng an a to or ld a m of ed all DEPA PAVE Janua 571.2 .
571.3 571.4 571.4 ARTMENT MENT MARK ary , 2015 3 .6 Du .1 .2 .3 .4 SUBMITTA .1 The Co paint an .2 The Co supplie use of t .3 The Co capable CONSTRU .1 Genera .1 The spe .2 The ( TA Ow STAN of TRANS KINGS al Coating of The beads promoting s 571.2.3.4 ) , a The adhere dissolved in day if kept r be made da The adheren • Weigh 1 • Saturate • Dry the agglome • Rinse th over the • Remove • Over-dry • Place th dark roo present .
If all beads h and the be fluorescence yellow-green cause for rej ALS ontractor shal nd glass bead ontractor sha ed conform to the materials .
ontractor shal e of applying CTION al e Contractor ecifically direc e Work shall AC ) Manual o wner 's Work A NDARD SP PORTATIO TRAFF Glass Beads shall have b silane coating and the adher ence coating n 25 mL of ac refrigerated in ily .
nce coating te 10 grams of b e the beads w beads in an o erated . )
he beads in a em .
Use suctio e the beads fr y the beads u he glass bead om .
A yellow-g . have a yellow eads are acc e , the beads n fluorescenc jection .
ll submit , in w ds .
all submit , as o the requirem .
l submit , in w the Pavemen shall carry ou cted by the En be performed of Uniform Tr Area Traffic Co ECIFICATI ON and INF FIC CONTROL D s both a moist g. The bead rence coating test shall u cetone .
This s n a closed da est shall be p beads and pla with dansyl ch oven at 60 °C funnel lined w on during this rom the funne until free flowi ds on filter pap green fluores w-green fluore ceptable .
If are not prop ce is seen a writing before s received fro ments of this writing , certific nt markings as ut the Work a ngineer .
d in accordan raffic Control ontrol Manua IONS FRASTRUC DEVICES ture-resistant ds shall pass g test .
use a solutio solution may ark container erformed as f ace in alumini hloride solutio C for 15 minut with new filte s step .
el and place in ing .
per and inspe scence will be escence , the a only some o erly coated a adherence co e work comme om each sup Item ; and ins cation that the s outlined in t as indicated i nce with the T Devices for al ( WATCM ) .
CTURE silicone coa s the moistu on of 0.2 gra be used for between use follows : um trays .
on using an ey tes .
( Beads w r paper and p n aluminium t ect colour und e observed if a adherence co of the bead and this is a c oating was no ences , the na pplier , certific structions on e Equipment p the Contract D in the Contra Transportation Canada ( MU ating , and an ure resistanc ams of dans several tests es .
A fresh so yedropper .
will be yellow a pour 100 mL o trays .
der ultra-viole adherence co oating is prop s have a ye cause for reje ot applied an ames of the s cation that th the proper s proposed for Documents .
ct Document n Association UTDC ) , Part ITEM : 571 Page 571-5 n adhesion- e test ( per syl chloride s during the olution shall and of acetone et light in a oating is erly applied ellow-green ection .
If no nd this is a suppliers of e materials storage and the Work is ts and/or as n of Canada C ; and the PAV Pag 57 571 571 571 571 571 VEMENT MA ge 571-6 71.4.1 .3 1.4 .2 Equ 1.4.2 .1 1.4.2 .2 1.4.2 .3 1.4.2 .4 D ARKINGS Traffic paint Goods Act .
D traffic paint u permit are ad ipment General .1 The Con recomme shall not to the Pa Line Painting .1 Line pai markings with shar .2 The Equ beads to pressuriz .3 The Equ to 80°C a .4 The Equ applied .
.5 The Con and sign vehicle a Equipment fo .1 Equipme the requ required .2 Equipme islands a and `` Sto .3 Equipme with dime C1 .
Paint Remov .1 Equipme the Engi per 571. damage DEPARTME TR shall be tra Drivers certifie under the aut dhered to .
tractor shall s ended by the contaminate avement .
g Equipment nting Equipm s to the requir rp edges .
ipment shall o the wet pa zed overlay g ipment shall and maintaini ipment shall tractor shall s s to adequate and wet Pavem or Other Pave ent for applyin ired thicknes rates .
ent shall be c at a width of 1 p '' bars at a w ent shall be c ensions as pe val Equipment ent shall be m neer , or as r 4.6.10 .
The to the Pavem STA ENT of TRA RAFFIC CONTRO ansported in ed under the thority of the supply all Equ manufacture the paint or ment shall be red thickness have a glass ainted line un lass bead gun have a heate ng a constan have a mete supply one or ely warn and ment marking ement Markin ng other Pave ss and dispen capable of pa 00 mm or 20 width of 600 m capable of pa er the Manua t made availab required to co Equipment s ment surface .
ANDARD S ANSPORTA OL DEVICES accordance Act may be e Owner 's per uipment need r of the Pavem other Pavem e capable of s and at width bead dispen niformly at th n. er capable of t temperature ering device t r more shadow advise the d g paint ahead gs ement markin nsing glass b ainting the lo 00 mm , and c mm .
ainting arrows al of Uniform T le for remova orrect markin hall be capa SPECIFICA ATION and with the Tra employed by rmit , provided ded for apply ment marking ment marking f applying ce hs of 100 or 2 ser and shall he recomme heating the p e during the s to measure th w vehicles m driving public .
ngs shall be c beads to the ongitudinal lin ross-hatching s and similar Traffic Contro al of Paveme gs applied in able of remov ATIONS d INFRAST ansportation y the Contract d that the co ing Pavemen g paint produc materials or c entre , lane a 200 mm , as a l be capable o ended rate by paint to any te spraying opera he number of ounted with a of the slow m capable of ap wet paint un nes outlining g bars at a wi markings , us ol Devices for ent markings n error or non ving markings TRUCTURE ITEM : 57 January , 20 of Dangerou tor to transpo nditions of th nt markings , a cts .
Equipme cause damag and edge lin a uniform strip of applying th y means of emperature u ation .
f litres of pai an arrow boar moving stripin pplying paint a niformly at th cross-hatche dth of 450 m sing template r Canada , Pa as ordered b n-conformanc s with minim E 71 15 us ort he as nt ge ne pe he a up nt rd ng at he ed m es art by ce al DEPA PAVE Janua 571.4 571.4 571.4 571.4 ARTMENT MENT MARK ary , 2015 .3 Timing .1 Pav pav .1 .2 .4 Pre-ma .1 The est .1 .2 .3 .4 .2 The Item .3 Sho the oth .5 Surface .1 Pav suc .6 Applica .1 All pre .2 The thic dim .3 The doe Co and .4 Lon STAN of TRANS KINGS of the Work vement mark ving under the No sooner t lines no soo No later than arking e Engineer s tablish the pos Painted sym 571-5 , and p Painted dot auxiliary lan painted cent Outline of ea Location of e e Contractor m , to allow the ould the Cont e centerline a erwise ensur e Preparation vement mark ch as dirt , loos ation Pavement m esent a crisp , e applied ma ckness , retro mensions and e Contractor s es not get o ntractor shall d the repair of ngitudinal line NDARD SP PORTATIO TRAFF kings shall be e Contract : than 7 Days ( oner than com n 14 Days for shall provide sition of Pave mbols at the b painted dots a ts to mark e nes ; otherwise treline as the ach cross-hat each type of a shall notify t e Engineer to tractor 's line- as control per re they are pa kings shall be se particles a markings sha uniform appe arkings shall o-reflectivity , positioning o shall be respo on vehicles o be responsi f any damage es shall be of ECIFICATI ON and INF FIC CONTROL D e applied with ( to allow the n mpletion of Item r arterial highw the measur ement markin beginning of e along the cen dgelines that e the Contrac control line ; tched island ; arrow .
the Engineer o schedule the painting Equi r 571.4.4.1.2 ainted parallel e applied onl and oily residu all be accura earance in Da be to the sa the straight of other marki onsible for co or other priva ble for the co e that occurs the types and IONS FRASTRUC DEVICES hin the follow new asphalt c m 204 ; and ways and 21 rements and gs , as follows each type of ntreline ; t are not pa ctor shall pain and at least two e pre-marking ipment be un , the Contrac l to the center ly on clean a ue shall be re ately placed aylight and da atisfaction of tness and s ngs , and abs ontrol of the p ate property .
osts of remov as a result of d widths show CTURE wing time fram concrete to c Days for othe pre-marking s : centreline ma arallel to cent nt edgelines weeks prior g crew .
nable to paint ctor shall pre rline .
and dry surfa emoved before based on p arkness .
f the Enginee spacing of l ence of overs aint spray du .
In the even ving the paint f the paint or i wn in Table 57 mes after co cure ) , and for er classes of gs on the Pa arking identifi treline , as on using the pre r to the Work parallel edge emark the ed aces .
Any co e painting .
pre-markings , er with respe lines , the a spray and trac ring applicatio nt that this o t off the priva its removal .
71-5 .
ITEM : 571 Page 571-7 ompletion of white edge highway .
avement to ed in Table n tapers to e-marked or k under this elines using dge lines or ontaminants , and shall ect to paint accuracy of cking .
on so that it occurs , the ate property PAV Pag 571 VEMENT MA ge 571-8 1.4.6.4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9 .10 D ARKINGS .1 Single br ( 3 m line .2 Single br auxiliary Cross-hatchi in the directi and/or as dire Stop bars sh lane ( s ) as ind Pavement m follows :  For Oil-b  For Wate .1 Paint sha 25 m .
.2 Overlay and 0.8 k Retroreflectiv weeks and n  Yellow P  White Pa Pavement m vehicles that .1 Tracking as determ Pavement m as specified b DEPARTME TR Types Single So Single Bro Combinat Broken ) Double So roken 100 mm and 9 m spa roken 200 mm lane or inters ng lines shall on of travel ( ected by the all be 600 mm dicated in the arking shall b based Paint , 5 erborne Paint all be applied glass beads kg/L of paint f vity shall me o later than fo Paint 200 mc aint 250 mc markings shall cross over th of longitudin mined by the arkings that d by the Engine STA ENT of TRA RAFFIC CONTRO s and Widths Line Type olid oken tion ( Solid Be olid m-wide lines b ace ) .
m-wide lines section shall h l be 450 mm ( 2 units along Engineer .
m wide , appli Contract Doc be applied on 5ºC and rising , 10ºC and ris to the Pavem shall be appl for Water Bas et the follow our weeks aft cd/m²/lx cd/m²/lx l be applied he painted ma nal centre , lan Engineer .
do not confor eer shall be re ANDARD S ANSPORTA OL DEVICES Table 571-5 s of Longitud C Y W Y W eside Y Y between traffi that mark the have a skip pa wide , uniform g the directio ed at 90˚ to t cuments or a nly on dry Pav g ; or sing .
ment surface lied at a rate sed paint .
wing requirem ter application in a manner arkings .
ne and edge m to the requ emoved and/o SPECIFICA ATION and 5 dinal Painted Colour W Yellow White 1 1 Yellow White 1 1 Yellow 1 Yellow 2 ic lanes shall e edge of trav attern of 1:1 ( mly spaced at n of travel to the edge of th s directed by vement havin to a minimum of 0.7 kg/L o ments when t n of markings that reduces lines shall no uirements of t or replaced a ATIONS d INFRAST d Lines Width ( mm ) 00 00/200 00 00/200 00 2 lines x 100 have a `` skip '' velled lane th ( 3 m line and t 6 m and at a o 1 unit perpe he travelled la the Engineer ng a surface t m dry thicknes of paint for O tested no so s. s tracking by ot exceed 3 % this Item Doc as directed by TRUCTURE ITEM : 57 January , 20 '' pattern of 1 hrough a tape 3 m space ) .
an angle of 2 endicular to it ane across th r. temperature a ss of 255 m Oil Based pai oner than tw the wheels o % of line lengt cuments and/o the Engineer E 71 15 :3 er , :1 t ) , he as  nt wo of th or r. DEPA PAVE Janua 571.4 571.5 571.6 ARTMENT MENT MARK ary , 2015 .7 Sampli .1 The eac .2 The .3 Tes Co gla .4 Sho and .1 .2 MEASURE .1 The Qu in acco .1 For Tab line .2 For def line the .3 For .4 For BASIS OF .1 Payme marking STAN of TRANS KINGS ng and Testin e Contractor ch colour , from e Engineer sh sting costs s ntractor if tes ss beads sha ould the Cont d in writing wi The Contrac the appeal Contractor .
Testing cost and by the C MENT FOR P uantity to be m ordance with t r longitudinal ble 571-5 , me e types ; r cross-hatch fined as the es ( which sha e island ) ; r painted arro r painted stop PAYMENT nt for Work u g as identified NDARD SP PORTATIO TRAFF ng of Material shall arrange m the paint tr hall take on-s shall be born st results fail .
all be taken fo tractor wish to thin 48 hours ctor shall ma testing , the r ts from the ap Contractor if t PAYMENT measured for his Item : lines , the num easured from ing , the num area enclose all not be mea ows , the total p bars , the nu nder this Item d under the C ECIFICATI ON and INF FIC CONTROL D s e for the Eng uck on site .
ite random sa ne by the Ow In the latter or new tests .
o appeal any s of his receip ke provision results of wh ppeal shall be est results fa payment sha mber of linea beginning to mber of squar ed by edge o asured as line number of all mber of stop m shall include Contract .
IONS FRASTRUC DEVICES gineer to take amples of gla wner if test case , sample test results , pt of test resul for the Engin hich shall be e borne by the il .
all be for Pave r metres of e o end of each re metres of of Pavement , es under 571. types of arro bars in each e a separate CTURE e samples of ss beads , 15 results are s es from anoth such appeal lts .
neer to obtain binding on b e Owner if tes ement markin ach type , col h line type , inc yellow or wh curb and gu 5.1 but shall ows painted ; a lane .
Unit Price for f paint , 1 L m kg minimum satisfactory , a her batch of p may be made n additional s both the Own st results are ngs supplied a our and width cluding the ga hite crosshatc utter , and/or be considere and r each type o ITEM : 571 Page 571-9 minimum for .
and by the paint and/or e only once samples for ner and the satisfactory and applied h of line per ap between ched island , longitudinal ed as part of f Pavement DEPA CONS Janua 576.1 576.2 576.2 576.2 576.2 576.2 .
ARTMENT STRUCTION T ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite Work A in acco MATERIAL .1 Genera .1 All and .2 Ref fab .3 De .2 Traffic C .1 Sig Sig in t .1 .2 A g Ow .3 Let scr .4 Sig for .5 Sig and .3 Tempo 3 .1 Pav .1 .2 STAN of TRANS TRAFFIC CO TION em consists o Area Traffic C ordance with t LS al materials sh d all required ferences to s brication .
lineation TCD Control Signs gn letters , sym gn Catalogue the Contract D The Owner's 506-453-393 guide for sign wner 's Sign Sh tters and bor reen-processi gn substrates the sign shee gn sheeting s d the sign me rary Paveme vement Mark Marking tap glass beads adhesive ba Marking tap retroreflectiv m viewing d  Entr  Obs  Retr tape NDARD SP PORTATIO ONTROL TRAFF f the supply , Control Device he Work Area all be supplie safety equipm signs shall in D 's shall be as s mbols and co and/or Work Documents or s Sign Catalo 39. n letter sizes hop upon req rders shall b ng ink .
shall be eith eting .
hall be secur essage or sym nt Markings ing Tape pe shall be c s , and shall b acking .
pe shall ensu vity requireme istance : rance angle o servation ang roreflected Lu e , respectively ECIFICATI ON and INF FIC CONTROL D installation , o es ( TCDs ) an a Traffic Cont ed by the Co ment and app clude barrica s shown in St olours shall c k Traffic Contr r as approved ogue can be p based upon uest .
e constructed er aluminium rely adhered mbol is legible composed of be manufactu re reflectivity ents as follow of 88.76º ( yell le of 1.05º ( ye uminance of y. IONS FRASTRUC DEVICES operation , ma d the provisio trol Manual ( W ontractor , incl parel for TCPs ades with res tandard Draw conform to re rol Manual ( W d by the Engin purchased fro posted spee d of black n m alloy or plyw to the sign s e to motorists .
f high quality ured in rolls 1 y for at least ws , when me ow and white ellow and wh 200 and 250 CTURE aintenance , re on of Traffic C WATCM ) .
uding all TCD s. spect to the m wing 576-1 atta equirements WATCM ) , or t neer .
om the Owner ed and locati on-reflective wood that pro substrate so t . y polymeric m 10.2 cm wide 6 months , a asured per A e tape ) ite tape ) 0 millicandela elocation , and Control Perso Ds and sign materials use ached .
outlined in th to custom de r 's Sign Shop on is availab vinyl sheetin ovides a smo that the finish materials , pig e with pressur and shall hav ASTM E1710 as for yellow ITEM : 576 Page 576-1 d removal of ons ( TCPs ) , supports , ed in their he Owner 's etails shown p , telephone ble from the ng or black ooth surface h is smooth gments and re sensitive ve minimum using a 30 and white CO Pag 576 576 576 576 576 576 576 ONSTRUCTIO ge 576-2 6.2.3.1 6.2.3 .2 6.3 SUBMIT .1 With that Item .2 Sub 6.4 CONST .1 The spec .2 The Equ type 6.4 .3 Traf .1 .2 .3 6.4 .4 Traf .1 6.4 .5 Traf .1 .2 D ON TRAFFIC .3 Minimum Pavement M .1 When pa Full Dep retrorefle  Y  W TTALS hin 7 Days of all retro-refle m. bmittals are re RUCTION Contractor s cifically direct Contractor s ipment on the es of Work an ffic Control Pl The Contrac apply to the t Any of the C shall be stam The Contract the Engineer ffic Control Pe Further to C required bas Area , and oth ffic Control Ag The Contrac operational d Work Area tr The Contrac Contract .
DEPARTME CONTROL TR m skid resistan arking Paint avement is tre th Recycling , ectivity of tem Yellow Paint White Paint f the commen ective materia equired in acc shall carry o ted by the En shall be resp e Contract , in d conditions a ans tor shall dete type ( s ) of Wo Contractor ’ s s mped by a Pro tor shall prese r. ersons Chapter 5 of ed on roadwa her pertinent f gent ctor shall pro decisions on affic control o ctor shall ide STA ENT of TRA RAFFIC CONTRO nce of tape sh eated by cold traffic paint porary traffic 200 m 250 m ncement of W als to be used cordance with ut the Work gineer .
onsible for a n accordance at the Work S ermine , from rk under the C signing plans ofessional Eng ent the Traffic the WATCM ay geometry , factors .
ovide a Tra behalf of the on the Contra ntify the Tra ANDARD S ANSPORTA OL DEVICES hall be 45 BP d milling , mic and associat markings as mcd/m²/lx mcd/m²/lx Work the Cont d on the Con any cross-re as indicated ll Work assoc with the requ Site .
Section 1.3 Contract .
s that are diff gineer .
c Control Plan M , the Contra traffic patter ffic Control e Contractor a ct. affic Control A SPECIFICA ATION and N per ASTM crosurfacing , ted reflectoriz follows : tractor shall s tract shall me eferenced Item d in the Cont ciated with T uirements of t of the WATC ferent from th n ( s ) at the firs actor shall p rns and volum Agent with and other su Agent at the ATIONS d INFRAST E 303 .
Partial Depth zation materia submit a decl eet the requir ms forming pa tract Docume TCDs , TCPs the WATCM CM , the typic he WATCM st Job Meetin provide as m mes , size or l overall auth bcontractors e first Job M TRUCTURE ITEM : 57 January , 20 h Recycling , o al shall ensur laration statin rements of th art of this Item ents and/or a and all relate for the variou cal layouts tha typical layou g for review b many TCPs a length of Wo ority to mak with regard t Meeting for th E 76 15 or re ng is m. as ed us at ts by as rk ke to he DEPA CONS Janua 576.4 .
576.4 576.4 576.5 576.6 ARTMENT STRUCTION T ary , 2015 5 .3 The day .4 The pre .6 Applica .1 Tem as .1 .2 .3 .4 .2 Tem dire .3 Da .7 Work S .1 Up wh Item to b .2 Wo of t .3 Any and adj bas MEASURE .1 The su Devices lump su BASIS OF .1 Payme .2 Notwith the Eng .1 For and .2 Ext und STAN of TRANS TRAFFIC CO e Traffic Con y and two lan e Traffic Con escribed in Se ation of Temp mporary Pave per Section 3 Paving ; Milling ( Pain Partial or Fu Microsurfaci mporary Pave ected by the E maged or mis toppage on written or ich the Engin m or the WAT be corrected .
ork shall not r the Engineer .
y Work time d the time tak ustment of th sis of claim .
MENT FOR P upply , installa s and the pro um basis .
PAYMENT nt for Work u hstanding 576 gineer for the rce Account W d/or tra Work ( Wo der Item 812 .
NDARD SP PORTATIO ONTROL TRAFF trol Agent sh es at night .
trol Agent sh ection 4.3 of th orary Paveme ement markin 3.8 of WATCM nted markings ull Depth Recy ing .
ement markin Engineer .
ssing marking rder of the E neer has iden TCM , and the resume until t lost due to W ken by the C he Specified PAYMENT ation , operati ovision of Traf nder this Item 6.6.1 , separat following typ Work perform ork of a natur ECIFICATI ON and INF FIC CONTROL D all ensure tha hall perform in he WATCM .
ent Marking ngs shall be p M , for operatio s only ) ; ycling ; and ngs shall not b gs shall be rep ngineer the C ntified that TC e deficiencies the Contracto Work stoppag ontractor to b Work / Limit ion , maintena ffic Control Pe m shall be at t te payment sh es of Work : med as identi e or style not IONS FRASTRUC DEVICES at at least on nspections an placed on the ons as follows be placed on placed at the Contractor sh CDs and/or T are of a seri or has correct ge per 576.4 be in complia ted Funds / C ance , relocat ersons , in acc the Lump Sum hall be made ified under It t identified in CTURE ne traffic lane nd prepare re same Day as s : a chip seal s end of each hall stop Wor TCPs are not ous nature a ted all deficie .7.1 and GC ance , shall no Completion D tion and rem cordance with m Price .
e by the Owne tem 811 in th the Contract e is kept open elated docum s the Work is surface unles Day .
rk in any Wo in accordanc nd/or previou encies to the 18 for non-c ot be conside Date , and sha moval of Tra h this Item , sh er for TCPs a he Contract D t Documents ) ITEM : 576 Page 576-3 n during the mentation as carried out , s otherwise ork Area for ce with this usly ordered satisfaction compliance , ered for any all not be a ffic Control hall be on a approved by Documents ; ) performed STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS DEPARTMENT of TRANSPORTATION and INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARD DRAWINGS ITEM : 599 Guide Post Details January , 2015 TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES Standard Drawing 510-1 2130 2130 2130 200 200 250 250 150 150 TYPICAL GUIDE POST GUIDE POST ADJACENT TO STRUCTURE GUIDE POST AT INTERMEDIATE LOCATIONS OFFSET BLOCK & RAIL TO BE SPACING OF GUIDE RAIL DELINEATOR INSTALLED BEFORE POST IS CUT OFF ON TANGENTS NOTE : 342 16mm GALV .
STEEL WASHER 44 x 3.175 GUIDE RAIL DELINEATOR 16mm SPLICE BOLTS 16mm 0 POST BOLT 350mm TO 450mm LONG OFFSET BLOCK POST DETAIL 75 150 150 171 50 16mm GALV .
STEEL NUT RECTANGULAR WASHER RECTANGULAR WASHER SLOTTED HOLE 25mm x 17mm ( AT EACH POST LOCATION ) 15.5 15.5 38 76 38 22 44 22 File : 510-1 15 m 7.5 m ON CURVES STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS DEPARTMENT of TRANSPORTATION and INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARD DRAWINGS ITEM : 599 Guide Post and Guide Rail Details January , 2015 TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES Standard Drawing 510-2 STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS DEPARTMENT of TRANSPORTATION and INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARD DRAWINGS ITEM : 599 Beam Guide Rail Details January , 2015 TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES Standard Drawing 512-1 STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS DEPARTMENT of TRANSPORTATION and INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARD DRAWINGS ITEM : 599 Guide Rail / Structure Details January , 2015 TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES Standard Drawing 512-2 STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS DEPARTMENT of TRANSPORTATION and INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARD DRAWINGS ITEM : 599 Guide Rail / Structure Details January , 2015 TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES Standard Drawing 512-3 | INSERTS & | GUIDE RAIL 833 3 - 250 x 250 GUIDE POSTS TRAFFIC FLOW 1 060 530 ( SEE SPLICE CONNECTION DETAIL ) 75 x 23 SLOTS IN END SHOE 1 060 1 060 ~ W HERE APPLICABLE TOP OF CURB OR ASPHALT ~ POST 200 x 200 530 FOR FURTHER PLACEMENT INFORMATION GUIDE RAIL 3810 LONG BEAM 102 125 102 B B POST | 250 x 250 BARRIER W ALL AT FACE OF FINISHED GRADE CURB & GUTTER GUIDE RAIL TO BARRIER W ALL CONNECTION DETAIL GUIDE RAIL SPLICE CONNECTION DETAIL EXPANSION ( TYPICAL ) MOVEMENT DUE TO BRIDGE ( LOCKNUT ) CLOCKW ISE TO ALLOW W HILE TORQUEING OUTSIDE NUT CLOCKW ISE FROM SNUG TIGHT TORQUE INSIDE NUT COUNTER- EQUIVALENT ENGINEER APPROVED SPECIAL END SHOE OR 765 LONG `` ARMTEC '' N O T E S : ( 1 ) SPECIAL END SHOE TO BE HOT-DIPPED GALVANIZED , W ITH 75 x 23 m m SLOTS AS SHOW N. 16 m m ‘ GALVANIZED SPLICE BOLTS TO BE CENTERED IN SLOTS BEFORE TIGHTENING .
ALL MATERIALS SUPPLIED & INSTALLED BY CONTRACTOR .
SEE SPLICE CONNECTION DETAIL FOR MORE INFORMATION .
16m m ‘ GALV .
SPLICE BOLT W ITH GALV .
FLAT W ASHER & 2 GALV .
SPLICE NUTS ( 8 BOLTS , 8 W ASHERS , & 16 NUTS REQUIRED FOR EACH END SHOE ) 765 LONG `` ARMTEC '' SPECIAL END SHOE SPLICED TO FIRST SECTION OF GUIDE RAIL ( LAP IN DIRECTION OF TRAFFIC ) SEE NOTE ( 1 ) 89 89 GUIDE RAIL | INSERTS & SECTION B-B GRADE FINISHED File : 512-3 PL2 / PL3 BARRIER W ALL SEE STANDARD DW G. 512-2 OR ENGINEER-APPROVED EQUIVALENT 530 W ITH NC THREADS .
PLATED HEX HEAD BOLTS x 30m m LONG CADMIUM M16x121 W ITH 16m m ‘ NCA INSERT TYPE LF-W STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS DEPARTMENT of TRANSPORTATION and INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARD DRAWINGS ITEM : 599 Cast-in-Place Concrete Barrier Details January , 2015 TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES Standard Drawing 520-1 STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS DEPARTMENT of TRANSPORTATION and INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARD DRAWINGS ITEM : 599 Concrete Encased Duct Bank System January , 2015 TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES Standard Drawing 529-1 File : 529-1 15M REBAR 15M REBAR 15M REBAR 15M REBAR FISH ROPE ASPHALT KLEIN Cat .
No.58002 SURFACE .
300mm BELOW ASPHALT WARNING TAPE PLACED UNDERGROUND SERVICE ENCASEMENT CONCRETE CONTRACT DOCUMENTS ) AS INDICATED IN CONCRETE ENCASEMENT DUCT ( NUMBER OF DUCTS IN BEDDING SAND DIMENSIONS SHOWN ON CONTRACT DOCUMENTS .
NOTE : BACKFILL STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS DEPARTMENT of TRANSPORTATION and INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARD DRAWINGS ITEM : 599 Under Roadbed Duct Details January , 2015 TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES Standard Drawing 530-1 NOTE SECTION A-A UNDERGROUND SERVICE 300mm BELOW ASPHALT WARNING TAPE , PLACED 100mm % % c DUCT ( 12.55 MPa ) BACKFILL ASPHALT 100mm % % c DUCT ( 12.55 MPa ) A A WIRING INSTALLED UNDER ITEM 531 KLEIN Cat .
No .
58002 SURFACE .
File : 530-1 1000 ( MIN ) 300 MINIMUM 3000 ( MIN ) TRAVELLED ROAD 3000 ( MIN ) STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS DEPARTMENT of TRANSPORTATION and INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARD DRAWINGS ITEM : 599 Underground Duct Details January , 2015 TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES Standard Drawing 531-1 File : 531-1 ( MIN ) SECONDARY CABLE TRENCH GROUND ROD NOTES : SEE LIGHTING LAYOUT DRAWING .
FOR NUMBER AND LOCATION BURDY , Cat .
No .
GAR 644C GROUND CONNECTOR GREEN GROUND WIRE EXACT LOCATION .
TYPE RWU-90 FLEXIBLE 7 STRAND 600 VOLT .
WIRING TO BE STRANDED COPPER , KLEIN Cat .
No .
58002 BACKFILL 3. . 2 1 .
( NUMBER AND SIZE AS SHOWN ON WIRING DIAGRAM ) ( SIZE AS INDICATED IN THE CONTRACT DOCUMENTS . )
( WHEN REQUIRED AND AS SPECIFIED IN THE CONTRACT DOCUMENTS ) GROUND ROD OR GROUND PLATE 300 ( MIN ) 50mm O RIGID PVC UNDERGROUND DUCT 100mm O UNDER ROADBED DUCT ( 12.55 MPa ) CHECK EXISTING AND FUTURE UTILITIES BEFORE COMMENCING EXCAVATION WORK .
1000 FINAL GRADE OR ASPHALT UNDERGROUND SERVICE WARNING TAPE , PLACED 300mm BELOW FINAL GRADE OR ASPHALT SURFACE .
BEFORE ANY TRENCHING TO POWER POLES , CHECK WITH NB POWER AND ALIANT FOR CHECK WITH ALIANT FOR FIBRE-OPTIC CABLE LOCATION .
CALL 1-800-332-3333 BEFORE DIGGING .
STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS DEPARTMENT of TRANSPORTATION and INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARD DRAWINGS ITEM : 599 Underground Junction Box Detail January , 2015 TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES Standard Drawing 532-1 EDGE OF EXCAVATION BACKFILL ZONE FREE DRAINING BACKFILL DUCT AS PER ITEM 531 .................... .......... .......... .................... .................... .................... .................... .................... .................... .......... .................... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... ............... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... ......... .......... ......... ......... .......... ......... .......... .......... .......... ......... ....... ........ .... .... ....... ....... .......
FINAL GRADE SECTION C-C C C PLAN 300 300 600 400 ....... 300 150 ENCLOSURE WITH POLYMER CONCRETE LID ........ ........ .... ...... ...... ..... ...... .... .... .... .... .... .... .... .... .... .... .... .... .......... .......... .............. .............
EDGE OF EXCAVATION File : 532-1 PEM-1212PCH - D.T.I .
STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS DEPARTMENT of TRANSPORTATION and INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARD DRAWINGS ITEM : 599 Power Point , Multiple Lights January , 2015 TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES Standard Drawing 533-1 POLE N.B .
POWER POLE AS PER ITEM 531 GROUND PLATE GROUND ROD OR ( INSTALLED File : 533-1 CONTROL BOX FINAL GRADE 50mm PVC CONDUIT FINAL GRADE N.B .
POWER PVC DUCT TO 32mm CONDUIT DISCONNECT 1.5m 200mm x 200mm x 3000mm WIRE FOR N.B .
POWER 300mm SUFFICIENT CONNECTION PROVIDE CONDUIT PRESSURE TREATED POST GREEN # 8 GROUND WIRE AS PER ITEM 531 GROUND CONNECTOR 1.2m TO BY OTHERS ) 32mm TO D.T.I .
LIGHT WIRED TO D.T.I .
STANDARDS STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS DEPARTMENT of TRANSPORTATION and INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARD DRAWINGS ITEM : 599 Power Point , Single Light January , 2015 TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES Standard Drawing 533-2 FINAL GRADE 50mm PVC CONDUIT 1.2m TO FINAL GRADE DISCONNECT PVC DUCT TO N.B .
POWER POLE 32mm CONDUIT WIRE FOR N.B .
POWER N.B .
POWER POLE 300mm SUFFICIENT 1.5m 200mm x 200mm x 3000mm CONNECTION PROVIDE PRESSURE TREATED POST GREEN # 8 GROUND WIRE AS PER ITEM 531 GROUND PLATE GROUND ROD OR AS PER ITEM 531 GROUND CONNECTOR ( SUPPLIED BY OWNER ) ( INSTALLED BY OTHERS ) TO D.T.I .
LIGHT File : 533-2 STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS DEPARTMENT of TRANSPORTATION and INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARD DRAWINGS ITEM : 599 Screw Base Detail January , 2015 TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES Standard Drawing 538-1 KELLY BAR ADAPTER ( SUPPLIED BY CONTRACTOR ) UNIVERSAL DRIVE TOOL ( SUPPLIED BY CONTRACTOR ) ANCHOR BOLT ( SUPPLIED BY OWNER ) SCREW BASE ( SUPPLIED BY OWNER ) File : 538-1 SIGN & LIGHT SCHEDULE SIZE AS SHOWN ON NOTE : FLOW OF TRAFFIC BASE 1 BASE 2 BASE 3 REQUIRED NUMBER OF BASES INDICATED ON SIGN SCHEDULE C OF L L C OF L C OF L C OF L BASES 93^ EDGE OF TRAVELLED ROADWAY C OF ROADWAY BE ALIGNED WITH THESE CENTRELINES CENTRES OF SCREW BASES ARE TO KELLY BAR ADAPTER ( SUPPLIED BY CONTRACTOR ) UNIVERSAL DRIVE TOOL ( SUPPLIED BY CONTRACTOR ) ANCHOR BOLT ( SUPPLIED BY OWNER ) SCREW BASE ( SUPPLIED BY OWNER ) File : 538-1 SIGN & LIGHT SCHEDULE SIZE AS SHOWN ON NOTE : FLOW OF TRAFFIC BASE 1 BASE 2 BASE 3 REQUIRED NUMBER OF BASES INDICATED ON SIGN SCHEDULE C OF L L C OF L C OF L C OF L BASES 93^ EDGE OF TRAVELLED ROADWAY C OF ROADWAY BE ALIGNED WITH THESE CENTRELINES CENTRES OF SCREW BASES ARE TO STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS DEPARTMENT of TRANSPORTATION and INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARD DRAWINGS ITEM : 599 Type “ E ” Sign or Light Base Details Soil Foundation January , 2015 TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES Standard Drawing 540-1 File : 540-1 SECTION A-A ( 9 REQUIRED ) BARS 50mm LONG FOR 20M REINFORCING PLASTIC CLIP-ON CHAIRS REINFORCING STEEL FIBRE-FORM 610mm x 2285mm 25mm CHAMFER MINIMUM OF 2 REQUIRED FINAL GRADE 50mm O DUCT AS PER ITEM 531 ( DELETE FOR SIGN BASE ) 50 ( MAX ) 25 ( MIN ) UP-SLOPE SIDE 2 285 UNIT TO BE 460mm DEEP AND HOT DIPPED GALVANIZED BOLTS AND WASHERS .
COIL LENGTH 64mm MIN .
25mm O , 100mm LONG REBAR SPACING NOTE : OF 350mm .
STEEL SHALL BE LAPPED MIN .
1 .
SPACED AS SHOWN 10M BARS TO BE EQUALLY SPACED 8-20M BARS 25 465 2 @ 250 300 425 2 150 2 .
CONCRETE COVER SHALL BE A MINIMUM OF 40mm ON SIDES & TOP , AND A MINIMUM OF 75mm ON THE BOTTOM .
AS PER CSA G164 .
( 4 REQUIRED ) A A POLE ANCHORAGE TYPE DGR-2 TO MEET AASHTO REQUIREMENTS , 305mm BOLT CIRCLE .
STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS DEPARTMENT of TRANSPORTATION and INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARD DRAWINGS ITEM : 599 Type “ F ” Sign or Light Base Details Soil Foundation January , 2015 TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES Standard Drawing 540-2 File : 540-2 50 ( MAX ) 25 ( MIN ) UP-SLOPE SIDE UNIT TO BE 460mm DEEP AND HOT DIPPED GALVANIZED BOLTS AND WASHERS .
COIL LENGTH 64mm MIN .
32mm O,100mm LONG SECTION B-B 25mm CHAMFER FINAL GRADE 760mm x 2435mm FIBRE-FORM 50mm O DUCT AS PER ITEM 531 FOR 20M REINFORCING PLASTIC CLIP-ON CHAIRS BARS 50mm LONG B B ( 9 REQUIRED ) MINIMUM OF 2 REQUIRED ( DELETE FOR SIGN BASE ) REINFORCING STEEL 2 435 OF 350mm .
STEEL SHALL BE LAPPED MIN .
1 .
2 .
CONCRETE COVER SHALL BE A MINIMUM OF 40mm ON SIDES & TOP , AND A MINIMUM OF 75mm ON THE BOTTOM .
REBAR SPACING NOTE : SPACED AS SHOWN 10M BARS EQUALLY SPACED 10 - 20M BARS 615 3 @ 250 425 300 300 2 300 2 @ 250 25 AS PER CSA G164 .
( 4 REQUIRED ) POLE ANCHORAGE TYPE DGR-2 TO MEET AASHTO REQUIREMENTS , 370mm BOLT CIRCLE .
STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS DEPARTMENT of TRANSPORTATION and INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARD DRAWINGS ITEM : 599 Type “ G ” Sign or Light Base Details Soil Foundation January , 2015 TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES Standard Drawing 540-3 ACCESSORIES ( NCA ) TYPE DGR-__ __mm REBAR SPACING NOTE : SECTION B-B 25mm CHAMFER FINAL GRADE REINFORCING STEEL 1 .
FOR 20M REINFORCING PLASTIC CLIP-ON CHAIRS SPACED AS SHOWN 10M BARS BARS 50mm LONG EQUALLY SPACED 12 - 20M BARS B B MILLIMETRES UNLESS OTHERWISE 2950 300 2850 STEEL SHALL BE LAPPED MIN .
2 .
ALL DIMENSIONS ARE IN NOTED .
3000 760mm x 3048mm FIBRE-FORM 300 300 300 300 300 300 5 @ 150 660 BOLTS CIRCLE .
___mm ‘ , ___mm LONG BOLTS AND WASHERS .
COIL LENGTH ___mm MIN .
UNIT TO BE ___mm DEEP AND HOT DIPPED ( 12 REQUIRED ) CONCRETE 35MPa ROUND BARS IN THE FORM OF DEFORMED 3 .
GRADE 400 AND SHALL BE OF 325mm FOR 10M BARS AND 550mm FOR 20M BARS .
4.CONCRETE COVER FOR REINFORCING STEEL SHALL BE A MINIMUM OF 40mm FOR THE SIDES AND TOP AND 75mm FOR THE BOTTOM .
STEEL SHALL MEET CAN/CSA G30.18-M MINIMUM OF 2 REQUIRED ( DELETE FOR SIGN BASE ) 50mm ‘ DUCT AS PER ITEM 531 POLE ANCHORAGE NATIONAL CONCRETE 50 ( MAX ) GALVANIZED AS PER CAN/CSA G164 .
( 4 REQUIRED ) File : 540-3 STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS DEPARTMENT of TRANSPORTATION and INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARD DRAWINGS ITEM : 599 Sign or Light Base Detail Bedrock Foundation January , 2015 TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES Standard Drawing 540-4 NOTE : 25mm CHAMFER BY THE ENGINEER .
INTO THE ROCK WITH A GROUT APPROVED REINFORCING STEEL SHALL BE GROUTED REINFORCING STEEL INTO BEDROCK TO ACCEPT 20M REINFORCING RODS PLASTIC CLIP-ON CHAIRS FOR REINFORCING STEEL CAGE 50mm O DUCT AS PER ITEM 531 ( 6 REQUIRED ) MINIMUM OF 2 REQUIRED 1 .
STEEL SHALL BE LAPPED MIN .
BEDROCK LINE FOR TYPE `` E '' SEE STANDARD DRAWING 540-1 .
FOR TYPE `` F '' SEE STANDARD DRAWING 540-2 .
FINAL GRADE 50mm O HOLES SHALL BE DRILLED ( DELETE FOR SIGN BASE ) USE FIBREFORM 1675 MIN .
760 MIN .
UP-SLOPE SIDE 2 .
CONCRETE COVER SHALL BE A MINIMUM 50 ( MAX ) 25 ( MIN ) OF 40mm ON SIDES & TOP .
OF 350mm .
TYPE `` E '' TYPE `` F '' POLE ANCHORAGE TYPE DGR-2 TO MEET AASHTO REQUIREMENTS .
File : 540-4 STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS DEPARTMENT of TRANSPORTATION and INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARD DRAWINGS ITEM : 599 Angulation of Sign Foundations January , 2015 TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES Standard Drawing 540-5 NOTE : FLOW OF TRAFFIC ROADWAY EDGE OF TRAVELLED ROADWAY BASE 1 BASE 2 BASE 3 ANCHOR BOLTS ANCHOR BOLTS ARE TO BE REQUIRED NUMBER OF BASES INDICATED ON SIGN SCHEDULE ALIGNED WITH THESE CENTRELINES C OF L C OF L C OF L C OF L C OF L BASES 93^ File : 540-5 STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS DEPARTMENT of TRANSPORTATION and INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARD DRAWINGS ITEM : 599 Light Standard Detail Single and Double Davit January , 2015 TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES Standard Drawing 542-1 SEE STANDARD DRAWING ( SUPPLIED BY OWNER ) STANDARD ALUMINUM LIGHT SEE STANDARD DRAWING 542-4 ( SUPPLIED BY OWNER ) LUMINAIRE AND LAMP DAVIT ( SUPPLIED BY OWNER ) 542-2 OR 542-3 FRANGIBLE BASE File : 542-1 ( SUPPLIED BY OWNER ) STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS DEPARTMENT of TRANSPORTATION and INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARD DRAWINGS ITEM : 599 Light Standard Wiring Details 120 volt January , 2015 TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES Standard Drawing 542-2 BLACK WIRE WHITE WIRE BLACK WIRE GROUND WIRE FUSE HOLDER ( SUPPLIED BY OWNER ) SCRULUG KPA4C GREEN GROUND WIRE 120V BLACK WIRE GROUND WIRE ( SUPPLIED BY OWNER ) SCRULUG KPA4C GREEN GROUND WIRE BLACK WIRE WHITE WIRE WHITE WIRE SINGLE DAVIT ALUMINUM LIGHT STANDARD 120V RED WIRE RED WIRE File : 542-2 FUSE HOLDER THIS CABLE SHALL BE SUPPORT GRIP ATTACHED AT THE END OF THE DAVIT SUPPORTED BY A CSA APPROVED THIS CABLE SHALL BE SUPPORT GRIP ATTACHED AT THE END OF THE DAVIT SUPPORTED BY A CSA APPROVED NEUTRAL DISCONNECT NEUTRAL DISCONNECT CSA ELECTRICAL CONNECTOR ( SUPPLIED BY OWNER ) TECK 90 14/2 CABLE BLACK WIRE WHITE WIRE TECK 90 14/2 CABLE BLACK WIRE WHITE WIRE WHITE WIRE BLACK WIRE ( SUPPLIED BY OWNER ) ( SUPPLIED BY OWNER ) TYPICAL CONNECTION FOR DOUBLE DAVIT ALUMINUM LIGHT STANDARD TYPICAL CONNECTION FOR STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS DEPARTMENT of TRANSPORTATION and INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARD DRAWINGS ITEM : 599 Light Standard Wiring Details 240 volt January , 2015 TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES Standard Drawing 542-3 240V 240V RED WIRE WHITE WIRE RED WIRE BLACK WIRE GROUND WIRE ( SUPPLIED BY OWNER ) FUSE HOLDER SCRULUG KPA4C GREEN GROUND WIRE BLACK WIRE RED WIRE WHITE WIRE BLACK WIRE GROUND WIRE ( SUPPLIED BY OWNER ) SCRULUG KPA4C FUSE HOLDER File : 542-3 THIS CABLE SHALL BE SUPPORT GRIP ATTACHED AT THE END OF THE DAVIT SUPPORTED BY A CSA APPROVED THIS CABLE SHALL BE SUPPORT GRIP ATTACHED AT THE END OF THE DAVIT SUPPORTED BY A CSA APPROVED WHITE WIRE WHITE WIRE BLACK WIRE RED WIRE GREEN GROUND WIRE BLACK WIRE BLACK WIRE RED WIRE RED WIRE TECK 90 14/3 CABLE TECK 90 14/3 CABLE CSA ELECTRICAL CONNECTOR ( SUPPLIED BY OWNER ) TYPICAL CONNECTION FOR DOUBLE DAVIT ALUMINUM LIGHT STANDARD TYPICAL CONNECTION FOR SINGLE DAVIT ALUMINUM LIGHT STANDARD STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS DEPARTMENT of TRANSPORTATION and INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARD DRAWINGS ITEM : 599 Light Standard Anchor Details January , 2015 TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES Standard Drawing 542-4 STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS DEPARTMENT of TRANSPORTATION and INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARD DRAWINGS ITEM : 599 Median Flashing Light Details January , 2015 TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES Standard Drawing 544-1 MEDIAN FLASHING LIGHT ITEM 538 OR 540 CAST IN PLACE CONCRETE BARRIER 19mm S/S LOCKWASHER SUPPLIED WITH ANCHOR ( 4 REQUIRED ) 19mm GALVANIZED FLAT WASHER MEDIAN BARRIER ( 4 REQUIRED ) ( 4 REQUIRED ) INSTALLED BY OTHERS LIGHT BASE LIGHT BASE AS PER ALUMINUM SHIM ( IF REQUIRED- MAXIMUM OF 2 PER ANCHOR BOLT ) 19mm O x 100mm BOLT File : 544-1 NUT LOCK WASHER FLAT WASHER BOLT ( SUPPLIED BY OWNER ) 12.5mm THICK STEEL WASHER FRANGIBLE BASE 12.5mm THICK STEEL WASHER BOLT LIGHT SHOE BASE LIGHT POLE LIGHT BASE AS PER ITEM 538 OR 540 TOP OF POST FRANGIBLE BASE STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS DEPARTMENT of TRANSPORTATION and INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARD DRAWINGS ITEM : 599 Roadside Sign Post Anchor Details January , 2015 TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES Standard Drawing 550-1 STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS DEPARTMENT of TRANSPORTATION and INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARD DRAWINGS ITEM : 599 Roadside Sign Details January , 2015 TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES Standard Drawing 552-1 DETAIL `` A '' 75mm x 75mm x 1524mm T-BAR EXIT PANEL SERVICE PANEL EDGE OF ALUMINUM SIGN POST 50 ( MAX ) 50 ( MAX ) 50 ( MAX ) ITEM 550 TRAVELLED ROADWAY 75 300 SADDLE CLIP POST STRAP SIGN POST SIGN PANEL PANEL BOLT , LOCKWASHER AND NUT SPACED AT 915mm CENTERS SQUARE HEAD COMPLETE WITH STOP NUT ( 12 REQUIRED ) BASE AS PER ITEM 538 OR 540 10mm 0 x 165mm LONG S/S BOLT WITH 15mm File : 552-1 STRAP INSTALLATION SEE DRAWINGS 552-2 , 552-3 , 552-4 , 552-5 AND 552-6 FOR STRAP SEQUENCE SEE DETAIL `` A '' FOR FRANGIBLE BASES ( SUPPLIED BY OWNER ) STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS DEPARTMENT of TRANSPORTATION and INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARD DRAWINGS ITEM : 599 Roadside Sign Strap Sequence January , 2015 TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES Standard Drawing 552-2 File : 552-2 Regardless of the number of panels , the strap sequence of the third post shall be the same as that of the first post and the strap sequence of the fourth post shall be the same as that of the second post .
Number of Sign Panels Number of Straps on First Post Number of Straps on Second Post 2 2 2 3 2 2 4 3 2 5 3 3 6 4 3 7 4 4 8 5 4 9 5 5 Strap Sequence for Two-Post Signs Strap Sequence for Third and Fourth Post STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS DEPARTMENT of TRANSPORTATION and INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARD DRAWINGS ITEM : 599 Roadside Sign Strap Sequence January , 2015 TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES Standard Drawing 552-3 File : 552-3 Regardless of the number of panels , the strap sequence of the third post shall be the same as that of the first post and the strap sequence of the fourth post shall be the same as that of the second post .
Number of Sign Panels Number of Straps on First Post Number of Straps on Second Post 10 6 5 11 6 6 12 7 6 13 7 7 Strap Sequence for Two-Post Signs Strap Sequence for Third and Fourth Post STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS DEPARTMENT of TRANSPORTATION and INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARD DRAWINGS ITEM : 599 Roadside Sign Strap Sequence January , 2015 TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES Standard Drawing 552-4 File : 552-4 Regardless of the number of panels , the strap sequence of the third post shall be the same as that of the first post and the strap sequence of the fourth post shall be the same as that of the second post .
Number of Sign Panels Number of Straps on First Post Number of Straps on Second Post 14 8 7 15 8 8 Strap Sequence for Third and Fourth Post Strap Sequence for Two-Post Signs 9 8 16 STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS DEPARTMENT of TRANSPORTATION and INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARD DRAWINGS ITEM : 599 Roadside Sign Strap Sequence January , 2015 TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES Standard Drawing 552-5 File : 552-5 Regardless of the number of panels , the strap sequence of the third post shall be the same as that of the first post and the strap sequence of the fourth post shall be the same as that of the second post .
Number of Sign Panels Number of Straps on First Post Number of Straps on Second Post 17 9 9 Strap Sequence for Two-Post Signs Strap Sequence for Third and Fourth Post STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS DEPARTMENT of TRANSPORTATION and INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARD DRAWINGS ITEM : 599 Roadside Sign Strap Sequence January , 2015 TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES Standard Drawing 552-6 Regardless of the number of panels , the strap sequence of the third post shall be the same as that of the first post and the strap sequence of the fourth post shall be the same as that of the second post .
DOUBLE HAZARD MARKER SIGNS INSTALLED ON SINGLE POSTS SHALL FOLLOW THE STRAP INSTALLATION OF THE FIRST POST FOR THE SPECIFIED NUMBER OF SIGN PANELS INSTALLED .
NOTE : OTHER THAN THE GORE EXIT SIGN , ALL File : 552-6 Number of Sign Panels Number of Straps on First Post Number of Straps on Second Post 3 2 2 4 3 2 Strap Sequence for Two-Post Signs Strap Sequence for Third and Fourth Post ROADSIDE SIGN SERVICE PANEL STRAP SEQUENCE GORE EXIT SIGN STRAP SEQUENCE ( SINGLE POST ) STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS DEPARTMENT of TRANSPORTATION and INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARD DRAWINGS ITEM : 599 Overhead Sign Structure Foundation Anchorage Details January , 2015 TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES Standard Drawing 554-1 STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS DEPARTMENT of TRANSPORTATION and INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARD DRAWINGS ITEM : 599 Overhead Sign Structure Foundation Base Plate and Template Details January , 2015 TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES Standard Drawing 554-2 DEPA TABLE Janua IT 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 ARTMENT E OF CONTE ary , 2015 TEM 601 602 603 604 J 605 606 607 608 609 610 A 611 612 613 T 614 615 616 617 618 T 620 T 621 T 622 623 630 699 60 60 60 60 60 60 60 60 60 60 60 61 61 62 62 62 STAN of TRANS ENTS DESCRIPTIO Geotextile .... Sediment Co Filter Screen Jute Mats ....
Erosion Cont Removal of E Gabions ....... Random Ripr Rock Weir ... Armour Stone Individual Ro Gravel for Fis Topsoil ........ Hydroseeding Fertilizing ..... Mulching ...... Root Wads ..
Trees and Sh Temporary W Temporary W Fish Rescue Culvert Erosio Soil Reinforce Standard Dra 02 - 1 Sedi 04 - 1 Jute 05 - 1 Type 05 - 2 Type 05 - 3 Type 05 - 4 Type 05 - 5 Type 05 - 6 Type 05 - 7 Type 07 - 1 Gabi 09 - 1 Rock 10 - 1 Armo 17 - 1 Root 21 - 1 Tem 23 - 1 End Road 23 - 2 End Road NDARD SP PORTATIO ON ..................... ntrol Fence .. .................... ..................... trol Structure Erosion Contro ..................... rap ............... ..................... e Protection .
ck Placemen sh Habitat ..... ..................... g .................. ..................... ..................... ..................... hrubs ............ Water Barrier .
Water Control …… ............. on Protection ement ……… awings : ment Control Mat Details e A - Spillway e A - Spillway e B - Erosion e B - Erosion e C - Erosion e C - Erosion e D - Erosion ion Backfilling k Weir Details our Stone Pro t Wad Detail i porary Worki Treatment fo dway Foreslo Treatment fo dway Foreslo ECIFICATI ON and INF ENVIRONMENT ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ol Structure .. ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... t ................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... Works ......... ..................... n ……………… ………………… Fence Structure for Structure De Control Struc Control Struc Control Struc Control Struc Control Struc g Details s otection Syste n Pool ng Pad r Culverts ≤ 1 ope 3:1 or Ste r Culverts ≤ 1 ope Flatter Th IONS FRASTRUC TAL ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ……………… ………………… r Sediment Po etails cture for Ditch cture Details cture for Ditch cture Details cture for Ditch em Details 1500mm ID – eeper 1500mm ID – an 3:1 CTURE .............. .............. ............. ............. ............. ............ ............. ............. ............. ............. ............. ............. ............. ............. ............. ............. .............. ............. ............. ............. ............. ……… ……… .
ond hes hes hes DI NUMBER O PAGES 2 2 2 1 3 2 3 3 1 2 1 2 2 4 2 2 1 2 1 2 2 1 2 VISION 600 Page 600-1 OF DEPA GEOT Janua 601.1 601.2 601.3 601.4 ARTMENT TEXTILE ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite MATERIAL .1 All mate .2 The pla long ch amide o to make .3 Type N .4 Type W .5 The ge .6 The m recomm .7 Thread and bio tensile SUBMITTA .1 The Co supplie .2 The Co installa CONSTRU .1 The Co specific .2 The are uniform .1 Ge pun .2 The stre STAN of TRANS TION em consists o LS erials shall be astic yarn of t hain synthetic or vinylidene- e the filament N1 , N2 , N3 an W1 , W2 and W otextile shall aterial shall mendations u for the seam ological degra strength equa ALS ontractor sha ed .
ontractor sha tion and instr CTION ontractor sha cally directed b eas to be cov m and regular otextile shall ncture the fab e geotextile s ess , folds , wri NDARD SP PORTATIO f the supply a e supplied by the geotextile c polymer com -chloride , and ts resistant to d N4 geotext W3 geotextile conform to th be handled ntil incorporat ms shall be e adation and b al to 90 % of t ll submit , in a ll submit , up ructions for ha all carry out t by the Engine vered with ge surface free f not be placed bric .
shall be place inkles and cre PECIFICAT ON and INF ENVIRONMENT and installatio the Contracto e and the thre mposed of at d shall contain o deterioration ile shall be a shall be a she he requiremen and protect ted into the W equal to or be both factory a hat of the geo advance of th on request , t andling of the the Work as er .
eotextile shall from bumps a d on stumps , ed so as to cr eases .
TIONS FRASTRUC TAL on of geotextil or .
eads used in least 85 % by n stabilizers o n by ultraviole pervious she eet of woven nts as indicate ted as per t Work .
etter than the and field sewn otextile .
he Work , a m the manufact selected geo indicated in l be prepared and depressio brush , limbs , reate a surfac CTURE e. sewing oper y mass of pro or inhibitors a et and heat ex eet of non-wov plastic yarn .
ed in Table 6 the manufac e geotextile in n or sealed s mill certificate turer ’ s recom otextile .
the Contrac d by shaping ons .
, ice or other ce that is sm rations shall c opylene , ethy added to the b xposure .
ven plastic ya 01-1. cturer ’ s instru n resistance t seams shall h e for the geot mmended proc ct Documents the ground to material that ooth and free ITEM : 601 Page 601-1 consist of a ylene , ester , base plastic arn .
uctions and to chemical have a grab textile to be cedures for s and/or as o present a may tear or e of tension GE Pag T ( T G S ( E A A O U P T N 601 601 601 EOTEXTILE ge 601-2 Property ( No Tearing Streng Trapezoid Me Grab Tensile Strength Both Directio Elongation At Break Apparent Opening Size UV Degradatio Permittivity Thickness NOTES : 1 ) 2 ) 1.4 .3 The exce .1 .4 For fabr .1 .5 The .1 1.5 MEASU .1 The cove .2 Ove 1.6 BASIS F .1 Pay iden Require ote 1 ) U gth ethod ) N ns ) N % µ on % R Se m Values abov otherwise no Special requi manufacturer ept as follows Where more overlap of at Roadbed con ric .
In no case sh Contractor s The damage minimum of o REMENT FO Quantity to ered with geo erlapped joints FOR PAYMEN ment for Work ntified under th DEPARTM ements Of N nit ASTM N D4533 N D4632 % D4632 m D475 Ret .
D4355 ec -1 D449 mm ve the heav ted , values a rement define r 's installation : than one wid least 500 mm nstruction , at hall Equipmen hall immediat ed area shall one metre bey OR PAYMENT be measure otextile in acco s , patches an NT k under this It he Contract .
STA MENT of TR ENVIRONM Table 601 on-Woven A M N1 3 160 2 400 2 50 1 50 to 250 5 1 1.75 to 3.50 vy line are M re minimum r ed in the Con procedures s dth of fabric i m and all over least 300 mm nt travel on un tely repair da be covered yond the peri T ed for payme ordance with d seams sha em shall inclu ANDARD S RANSPORT ENTAL -1 And Woven G N2 N3 250 31 600 79 50 50 50 to 250 50 to 25 1.25 to 2.75 1.0 to 2.5 Minimum Ave requirements .
ntract Docume shall be the sta s used , the fa rlap joints sha m of fill materi ncovered fabr maged geote with a patc meter of the d ent shall be this Item .
ll be measure ude a separate SPECIFICA TATION an Geotextiles Type Of Fa 3 N4 0 500 0 1200 0 50 0 o 0 50 to 250 00 o 50 1.00 to 2.50 erage Roll V . ents .
andard of inst abric shall be all be securely ial shall be ke ric .
extile .
h of the sam damaged are the number ed as a single e Unit Price fo ATIONS nd INFRAS abric W1 W 200 5 400 1 25 max .
m 840 max .
No 70 min No 0.01 min .
No Values ( MARV tallation that s e joined by se y held in plac ept between E me fabric typ ea .
of square m e layer of fabr or each type o TRUCTUR ITEM : 60 January , 20 W2 W3 500 625 200 1500 25 max .
25 max ote 2 Note ote 2 Note ote 2 Note V ) and unles shall be applie ewing or by a ce .
Equipment an pe extending metres of are ric .
of geotextile , a RE 01 15 3 5 0 x .
2 2 2 ss ed an nd a ea as DEPA SEDIM Janua 602.1 602.2 602.3 602.4 ARTMENT MENT CONTR ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite fence .
MATERIAL .1 All mate .2 The fen .3 The fab .4 Suppor SUBMITTA .1 Submitt CONSTRU .1 The Co specific .2 The Co environ well as .3 The se prefabr .1 In a run con pro .4 The Co from the .5 The Co during .6 The Co thereof .7 The Co approx dispose the sed .1 Sub sed STAN of TRANS ROL FENCE TION em consists o LS erials shall be nce may be pr bric shall conf rt posts are to ALS tals are requir CTION ontractor sha cally directed b ontractor shall mental repres applicable pe diment contro ricated sedime areas of pote n-off to transp ntrol fences in operly located ontractor shal e time of insta ontractor sha periods of pro ontractor sha f. ontractor sha imately but n ed of at a loc diment will not bject to the diment contro NDARD SP PORTATIO of the supply e supplied by refabricated or form to the re be supplied a red in accorda all carry out t by the Engine install additio sentative , as ermits and reg ol fence shall ent control fe ential sheet fl port sediment n these areas for effective l maintain the allation until th ll inspect all olonged rainfa all immediate all remove re not exceeding ation at least t be returned approval of ol fence , at his PECIFICAT ON and INF ENVIRONMENT , installation , the Contracto r constructed quirements o as indicated on ance with any the Work as er .
nal sediment defined in 94 ulations .
l be installed nce shall be i ow runoff wh t ( s ) , and the s , the Contrac runoff contro e sediment c e completion sediment co all .
ely repair an etained sedim g one-half the t 30 m away f to the Work A the Engineer s/her own exp TIONS FRASTRUC TAL maintenance or .
on site from th of 601.2 , Type n Standard Dr cross-referen indicated in control fence 48.2 , when ne as indicated installed as p here construc Contract Doc ctor shall ens l. control fence of the Contra ontrol fences ny damage to ment prior to e height of th from any wat Area or the w r , the Contra pense .
CTURE e and remov he specified in e W1 , geotext rawing 602-1. nced Item form the Contrac as directed b ecessary to c on the Stand per the manuf ction activity m cuments do n sure that sed in a functiona ct or removal .
after each ra o sediment o it having a he fence , and tercourse , an watercourse ; o actor may ins al of a sedim ndividual com tile .
ming part of th ct Documents by the Contrac comply with It dard Drawing facturer ’ s instr may cause th not provide fo iment control al condition c . ainfall and at control fence accumulated d this sedime nd in such a m or stall a secon ITEM : 602 Page 602-1 ment control mponents .
is Item .
s and/or as ctor 's on-site tem 948 , as g 602-1 and ructions .
he drainage or sediment fences are continuously t least daily es or parts to a level ent shall be manner that nd , back-up SE Pag 602 602 602 DIMENT CON ge 602-2 2.4 .8 The subj Con .1 .2 .9 At th at a not rem 2.5 MEASU .1 The cont 2.6 BASIS O .1 Pay NTROL FENC Contractor s ject to the En ntract .
Sediment co disposed of o If the Engine all or any pa deemed to h under this Ite he time of rem location at le be returned t oved fence a REMENT FO Quantity to trol fence sup OF PAYMENT ment for Wor DEPARTM CE shall remove ngineer ’ s app ntrol fence re outside the W er notifies the art of the sed ave complete em and the se moval , the Co east 30 m fro to the Work A nd sedimenta OR PAYMENT be measured pplied , installe T rk under this I STA MENT of TR ENVIRONM all sediment proval but in emoved shall Work Site .
e Contractor i iment control ed her/his obl ediment contr ontractor sha om any water Area or the w ation , to the s T d for paymen ed , maintained tem shall be ANDARD S RANSPORT ENTAL control fence all cases sh become the in writing , prio l fence is to r igations for th ol fence shall ll excavate an rcourse , and watercourse a atisfaction of nt shall be th d and remove at the Unit Pr SPECIFICA TATION an e and the tim hall occur prio property of t or to the com remain in pla hat portion of l become the ny remaining in such a ma and shall dres the Engineer he number of ed in accorda rice .
ATIONS nd INFRAS me of such rem or to the com the Contracto mpletion of the ace , the Cont f the sedimen property of th sediment an anner that the ss and seed t r. f linear metre ance with this TRUCTUR ITEM : 60 January , 20 moval shall b mpletion of th or and shall b e Contract , tha tractor shall b nt control fenc he Owner .
nd dispose of e sediment w the area of th es of sedime Item .
RE 02 15 be he be at be ce f it will he nt DEPA FILTE Janua 603.1 603.2 603.3 603.4 ARTMENT R SCREEN ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite screen .
MATERIAL .1 All mate .2 The filte 601.2 , T .3 The m recomm SUBMITTA .1 The Co .1 The fine as .2 The con .2 Submitt CONSTRU .1 The Co specific .2 The Co .3 The po in such of the w .4 The ge and in a .5 The Co applica .6 The Co related Enginee STAN of TRANS TION em consists .
LS erials shall be er screen sha Type N4 .
aterial shall mendations u ALS ontractor shal e purpose of e particulate m to be effective e barrier mu nditions speci tals are requir CTION ontractor sha cally directed b ontractor shal rtion of the g h a manner th watercourse .
otextile is to f a manner tha ontractor sha able .
ontractor shal items , perta er .
NDARD SP PORTATIO of the desig e supplied by all utilize , as a be handled ntil incorporat l submit a det the filter scre matter ) from m e over the en ust be able t ific to the site red in accorda all carry out t by the Engine l construct the eotextile loca hat water cann form a contin at conforms w all maintain th ll remove fro aining to the PECIFICAT ON and INF ENVIRONMENT gn , supply , in the Contracto a minimum re and protect ted into the W tailed design een is to prov migration off ntire water dep to withstand where install ance with any the Work as er .
e filter screen ated along the not pass betw uous sheet a ith the manuf he filter scree m the waterc filter screen , TIONS FRASTRUC TAL nstallation , m or .
equirement , ge ted as per t Work .
in accordanc vide an effecti site and is to pth .
all natural f led .
cross-referen indicated in n as per the d e bottom of th ween the bott and the seams facturer ’ s inst en in a funct course all ma , following no CTURE maintenance eotextile mee the manufac ce with Item 9 ive barrier to o be construct forces and t nced Item form the Contrac esign submitt he watercours tom line of th s are to be co tructions .
tional manne aterials and a otification to and removal eting the requ turer ’ s instru 56. sediment ( sil ted in such a the predictab ming part of th ct Documents ted under 603 se shall be he e geotextile a onstructed wit er throughout associated St and approva ITEM : 603 Page 603-1 l of a filter irements of uctions and lt and other manner so ble weather is Item .
s and/or as 3.3.1. eld in place and the bed th materials t the period tructures or al from the FIL Pag 603 603 LTER SCREE ge 603-2 3.5 MEASU .1 The desi 3.6 BASIS O .1 Pay EN REMENT FO Quantity to b igned , supplie OF PAYMENT ment for Wor DEPARTM OR PAYMENT be measured ed , installed , T rk under this I STA MENT of TR ENVIRONM T d for payment maintained a tem shall be ANDARD S RANSPORT ENTAL t shall be the nd removed i at the Unit Pr SPECIFICA TATION an number of li n accordance rice .
ATIONS nd INFRAS near metres e with this Item TRUCTUR ITEM : 60 January , 20 of filter scree m. RE 03 15 en DEPA JUTE Janua 604.1 604.2 604.3 604.4 604.5 604.6 ARTMENT MATS ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite MATERIAL .1 All mate .2 Jute ma to mesh .3 Mats sh 500 g/m .4 Staples SUBMITTA .1 The Co being s .2 The Co materia .3 Submitt CONSTRU .1 The Co specific .2 Jute Ma manufa .3 Jute m same d hydrose .4 Staples with the MEASURE .1 The Qu supplie .2 Overlap BASIS OF .1 Payme STAN of TRANS TION em consists o LS erials shall be ats shall be m h openings of hall be a min m2 .
s shall have th ALS ontractor sha supplied meet ontractor shal als .
tals are requir CTION ontractor sha cally directed b ats shall be in acturer 's proce ats shall be i day as remo eeding .
s shall be driv e ground , suc MENT FOR P uantity to be ed and installe pped joints , p PAYMENT nt for Work u NDARD SP PORTATIO f the supply a e supplied by made of unble f approximate nimum of 1.2 he approxima ll submit , upo t the specified l submit the red in accorda all carry out t by the Engine nstalled as ind edures .
nstalled alon oval of erosio ven perpendi ch that the ma PAYMENT measured fo ed in accorda patches and s nder this Item PECIFICAT ON and INF ENVIRONMENT and installatio the Contracto eached , loose ely 20 mm .
m in width a ate dimension on request , t d requirement manufacturer ance with any the Work as er .
dicated on St g the full leng on structures , icular to the g ats are secure r payment sh nce with this eams shall be m shall be at t TIONS FRASTRUC TAL on of jute mats or .
ely twisted jut and shall have ns as indicate the manufact ts .
r ’ s recommen cross-referen indicated in tandard Draw gth of all CE , after final s ground in an ed in uniform hall be the nu Item .
e measured a the Unit Price CTURE s as a ditch li te yarn 3 to 5 e an average d on Standar turer 's certific ded procedur nced Item form the Contrac wing 604-1 and ditches and shaping of th n approved pa contact with t umber of squ as a single lay e. ner .
mm in diame e unit shippin rd Drawing 60 cation that th res for install ming part of th ct Documents d in accordan all topsoiled he ditches , a attern and fin the ground .
uare metres o yer .
ITEM : 604 Page 604-1 eter , woven g weight of 04-1. e materials ation of the is Item .
s and/or as nce with the ditches the and prior to nished flush of jute mats DEPA EROS Janua 605.1 605.2 605.3 605.4 ARTMENT ION CONTRO ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite MATERIAL .1 All mate .2 Geotex .3 Random of rock .4 Fill mat capable Engine SUBMITTA .1 Submitt CONSTRU .1 The Co specific .2 The Co site env well as .3 Erosion Drawing .4 Erosion tempora .1 In a run con are .5 The Co .6 The ap control STAN of TRANS OL STRUCTU TION em consists o LS erials shall be xtile shall be s m riprap shal from the Wor terial shall be e of forming er .
ALS tals are requir CTION ontractor sha cally directed b ontractor shall vironmental re applicable pe n control stru gs 605-1 throu n control stru ary or partially areas of pote n-off to trans ntrol structure e properly loca ontractor shall plication , con structures sha NDARD SP PORTATIO URE f the supply , c e supplied by supplied in ac l be supplied rk Site .
obtained from an impermea red in accorda all carry out t by the Engine install additio epresentative , ermits and reg ctures shall ugh 605-7. uctures may y constructed ential sheet fl port sedimen es in these ar ated for effect carry out the struction deta all be carried o PECIFICAT ON and INF ENVIRONMENT construction a the Contracto ccordance wit in accordanc m within the l able dike wh ance with any the Work as er .
onal erosion co as defined in ulations .
be constructe be installed ditches , and/o ow runoff wh nt , and the C reas , the Con tive runoff co Work in accor ails and clean out as indicate TIONS FRASTRUC TAL and maintena or .
h the requirem ce with the re limits of the e hen compacte cross-referen indicated in control structur n 948.2 when ed , to the di in natural sw or in complete here construc Contract Doc tractor shall e ntrol .
rdance with Ite n-out requirem ed in Table 60 CTURE ance of an ero ments of 601 equirements o excavation an ed , unless ot nced Item form the Contrac res as directe necessary to imensions as wales prior t ed ditches .
ction activity m cuments do ensure that e em 946 and It ments for the d 05-1 and 605. osion control .2 , Type N1 .
of 608.2 and m d shall be of therwise direc ming part of th ct Documents ed by the Con comply with I s indicated o to ditch cons may cause th not provide erosion contro tem 948. different types 4.7 .
ITEM : 605 Page 605-1 structure .
may consist a gradation cted by the is Item .
s and/or as tractor 's on- tem 948 , as n Standard struction , in he drainage for erosion ol structures s of erosion ER Pag 605 OSION CON ge 605-2 Type '' A '' Type spillw pond grub whe dow '' B '' Type insta requ cann '' C '' Type insta '' D '' Type insta 5.4 .7 Clea rem .1 .8 The insta .1 .2 .9 The duri .10 The ther TROL STRU App e A structures ways of dyke d runoff from bbed areas , o re runoff leav wn a natural sl e B structures alled in rock d uired for Type not be driven .
e C structures alled in earth e D structures alled in earth an-out consis oved materia Sediment rem any part of th sediment pon Contractor sh allation until th All erosion co ditches is esta .1 In Work control st ground is All erosion co Contractor s ng periods of Contractor s reof .
DEPARTM CTURE E plication s shall be inst s that are bui ditches or fro r at the end o ves the ditch t ope .
s are typically ditches where e C and D stru .
s are typically ditches or sw s are typically ditches or sw ts of removal als in accorda moval shall b he erosion con nd dyke .
hall maintain e heir removal .
ontrol structure ablished as an Areas that a tructures Typ s prepared for ontrol structure shall inspect a f prolonged ra shall immedia STA MENT of TR ENVIRONM Table Erosion Cont talled as lt to om of a cut to flow 60 y e stakes uctures 60 y wales .
60 y wales .
Sta of sediment nce with 605. e performed ntrol structure erosion contro es shall be ke n effective ero re hydroseed pes B , C , and hydroseeding es ( s ) shall be all erosion co ainfall .
ately repair a ANDARD S RANSPORT ENTAL 605-1 trol Structure Construction Details Standard Drawings 05-1 and 605- Standard Drawings 05-3 and 605- Standard Drawings 05-5 and 605- andard Drawi 605-7 deposits reta .4.11. so as to caus e , and in the c ol structure ( s ) ept in place un osion deterren ded up to but d D shall be k g , as approved removed und ontrol structur any damage SPECIFICA TATION an es Cle -2 The Con sedimen of sedim within 30 spillway .
-4 The Co sedimen of sedim within 1 notch .
-6 The Co sedimen of sedim within 1 notch .
ng The Co sedimen of sedim within 1 notch .
ained by the s se minimal d case of Type ) in a function ntil the grass nt , or as direct t no later tha kept in place d by the Engin er Item 606. re ( s ) after eac to erosion c ATIONS nd INFRAS ean-Out Requ ntractor shall r t deposits pri entation reac 00 mm of the ontractor sha nt deposits pr mentation rea 00 mm of th ontractor sha nt deposits pr mentation rea 00 mm of th ontractor sha nt deposits pr mentation rea 00 mm of th structure and isturbance to A structures , nal condition fr on hydroseed ted by the Eng an September until the day neer .
ch rainfall and control structu TRUCTUR ITEM : 60 January , 20 uirements remove the or to the leve ching a point crest of the all remove th rior to the lev aching a poi he crest of th all remove th rior to the lev aching a poi he crest of th all remove th rior to the lev aching a poi he crest of th disposal of th o the ground o to the rom the time ded slopes an gineer .
r 15th , erosio y on which th d at least dai ure ( s ) or par RE 05 15 el he vel nt he he vel nt he he vel nt he he or of nd on he ly rts DEPA EROS Janua 605.4 605.5 605.6 ARTMENT ION CONTRO ary , 2015 .11 The Co any wa or wate .12 The Co Enginee MEASURE .1 The Qu are sup .2 The Qu numbe BASIS OF .1 Paymen control .2 Paymen of erosi STAN of TRANS OL STRUCTU ontractor shal atercourse , an ercourse .
ontractor shal er .
MENT FOR P uantity to be m pplied , constru uantity to be m r of such clea PAYMENT nt for Work u structure , as i nt for Work un on control stru NDARD SP PORTATIO URE l dispose of t nd in such a m ll not remove PAYMENT measured for ucted and mai measured for an-outs perfor under this Item identified unde nder this Item ucture , as ide PECIFICAT ON and INF ENVIRONMENT the excavated manner that t e any erosion payment sha ntained in acc payment for rmed in accor m shall includ er the Contrac shall include ntified under t TIONS FRASTRUC TAL d sediment a he sediment n control struc ll be the num cordance with clean-out of r rdance with 6 de a separate ct. a separate U the Contract .
CTURE t a location , a will not be re cture without mber of erosion this Item .
retained sedim 605.4.6 as app e Unit Price Unit Price for th at least 30 m eturned to the the authoriza n control struc ment deposits proved by the for each type he clean-out o ITEM : 605 Page 605-3 m away from e Work Area ation of the cture ( s ) that s will be the e Engineer .
e of erosion of each type DEPA REMO Janua 606.1 606.2 606.3 606.4 ARTMENT OVAL OF ERO ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite MATERIAL .1 None id SUBMITTA .1 None id CONSTRU .1 The Co specific .2 Schedu Enginee .1 Ero be .2 If th all dee and .3 At the t at a loc not be .4 The Co maintai necess remova .5 The Co and ditc .6 The Co sedime and/or erosion STAN of TRANS OSION CONT TION em consists o LS dentified .
ALS dentified .
CTION ontractor sha cally directed b uling of the re er .
osion control disposed of o he Engineer n or any of the emed to have d the erosion time of remov cation at leas returned to th ontractor is to ined at a min sary precautio al activity .
ontractor shal ch grades of t ontractor sha entation and o 616 , and to t n control struc NDARD SP PORTATIO TROL STRUC f the removal all carry out t by the Engine moval of the structures re outside the W notifies the C e erosion cont e completed h control struct val , the Contr st 30 m from he Work Area o ensure that nimum during on is taken to ll be respons the adjacent W all restore th other disturbe the satisfactio cture .
PECIFICAT ON and INF CTURE ENVIRONMENT of an erosion the Work as er .
erosion contro emoved shall Work Site .
ontractor in w trol structure ( his/her obliga ture ( s ) indicat ractor shall ex any watercou or the waterc all possible c g the erosion o ensure tha ible to match Work Area ( s ) e area of th ed ground wit on of the Eng TIONS FRASTRUC TAL n control struc indicated in ol structures s become the writing , prior to ( s ) are to rem ations for that ted shall beco xcavate any urse , and in s course .
care is taken n control stru at no sedimen h the affected ) .
he removed thin the Work gineer within 4 CTURE cture .
the Contrac shall be subje property of t o the comple main in place , t portion of th ome the prop remaining se such a mann to ensure tha cture remova nt release oc d ditches and erosion cont k Area , in acc 48 hours follo ct Documents ect to the app the Contracto etion of the Co , the Contrac he Work und perty of the Ow ediment and d er that the se at ground dis al operation a ccurs as a re Slopes with trol structure cordance with owing the rem ITEM : 606 Page 606-1 s and/or as proval of the or and shall ontract , that ctor shall be er this Item wner .
dispose of it ediment will sturbance is and that all esult of this the Slopes , deposited h Items 614 moval of the RE Pag 606 606 MOVAL OF E ge 606-2 6.5 MEASU .1 The rem 6.6 BASIS O .1 Pay cont EROSION CO REMENT FO Quantity to oved in accor OF PAYMENT ment for Wor trol structure , DEPARTM ONTROL STR OR PAYMENT be measured rdance with th T rk under this as identified u STA MENT of TR RUCTURE ENVIRONM T d for paymen his Item .
Item shall in under the Con ANDARD S RANSPORT ENTAL t shall be the clude a sepa ntract .
SPECIFICA TATION an e number of arate Unit Pric ATIONS nd INFRAS erosion contr ce for each t TRUCTUR ITEM : 60 January , 20 rol structure ( s type of erosio RE 06 15 s ) on DEPA GABIO Janua 607.1 607.2 ARTMENT ONS ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite filled wi MATERIAL .1 All mate .2 Gabion .1 Fas typ .3 Rocks u dimens not exc .1 Roc acc .2 Roc gab .4 Geotex .5 Gabion .1 Fac ass Doc .2 Wh bas hor .3 Wir 100 .4 Sel form .5 Hot AS .6 Wir .6 The Co 366.2 .
STAN of TRANS TION em consists of th rock .
LS erials shall be baskets shall steners to sec e and propert used in the co sion of any ro ceed 300 mm ck used for cordance with cks shall be bion .
xtile shall be s baskets shal ctory fabricat sembled at th cuments .
hen the lengt sket walls sha rizontal width .
re mesh shall 0 mm , and fab lvedge edges med , are as st t dip galvaniz TM Tests : A6 re shall be dim ontractor shall NDARD SP PORTATIO f the supply a e supplied by t l be fabricated cure the bask ties of the bas onstruction of ck equal to o in greatest dim basket fill ma ASTM C131 of a size that supplied in ac l conform to th ted so that t he Work Area h exceeds ho all be used to be a uniform bricated to be of the mesh trong as the b zed wire shal 641 , A90 , and mensioned , as l supply free d Minimu Applic Me Selve Bind Interlocking W ECIFICATI ON and INF ENVIRONMENT and installation the Contracto d of galvanized kets shall be s sket .
f gabions sha or greater than mension .
aterial , when and/or C535 , t at least two ccordance wit he following m the sides , en a into rectang orizontal widt divide the bas regular patte non-ravelling .
shall be secu body of the me l have a min A764 .
s a minimum , draining back Ta m Twisted G cation sh dges ding Wire Fasteners IONS FRASTRUC TAL n of gabion b or .
d wire mesh .
supplied in a all be clean , ha n one and on tested by Lo shall have an o layers of ov h the requirem minimum stan nds , lid and ular baskets th , diaphragm sket into equa ern , with a ma .
urely fastened esh .
imum covera as indicated kfill behind the able 607-1 Galvanized W CTURE askets fabrica material com ard , sound an ne-half times t os Angeles A n abrasion los verlapping roc ments of 601 ndards : internal diap of the sizes i ms of the sam al cells of a le aximum nomin d together so age of 260 g/ in Table 607- e gabion Stru Wire Dimensio Diameter 2.95 mm 3.80 mm 2.20 mm 3.17 mm ated from wire mpatible with t nd durable , w the mesh size Abrasion test s not greater t ck are require .2 , Type N1 .
phragms can indicated in th me mesh as ength not in ex nal opening si that the joints m2 and shall 1. cture in acco ons ITEM : 607 Page 607-1 e mesh and the material with the least e , and shall method in than 40 % .
ed to fill the be readily he Contract the gabion xcess of the ize of 80 by s , which are conform to ordance with GA Pag 607 607 607 607 ABIONS ge 607-2 7.3 SUBMIT .1 The be s .2 The insta .3 The leas .4 Sub 7.4 CONST .1 The spec .2 The Con .3 The grad reco .4 The defo .5 The align .6 Bulg .7 The .8 The the l 7.5 MEASU .1 The supp 7.6 BASIS O .1 Pay TTALS Contractor s supplied .
Contractor s allation and in Contractor sh st 14 Days in a mittals are req RUCTION Contractor s cifically directe Contractor s ntract Docume Contractor s de and shall ommendations gabion baske ormations are rock for the e nment and a n ges in the gab geotextile sh Contractor s lines indicated REMENT FO Quantity to plied and insta OF PAYMENT ment for Work DEPARTM hall submit , in shall submit , nstructions fo hall notify the advance of ob quired in acco shall carry o ed by the Eng shall prepare ents .
shall place th l assemble s. ets in any row avoided .
exposed rock neat , compact bions shall not hall be placed shall backfill th d on the Stand OR PAYMENT be measure alled in accord T k under this It STA MENT of TR ENVIRONM n advance of upon reques r handling of Engineer , in btaining materi ordance with a ut the Work gineer .
the area to re he gabions on the gabions w shall be fille face ( s ) of the t , square appe t exceed 40 m in accordanc he areas beh dard Drawing T d for paymen dance with th tem shall be a ANDARD S RANSPORT ENTAL the Work , a m st , the manuf the selected g writing , for ap ial from the so any cross-refe as indicated eceive the ga n a prepared according t ed in stages to e gabion bask earance .
mm at the mos ce with 601.4 ind gabion St 607-1. nt shall be th is Item .
at the Unit Pric SPECIFICA TATION an mill certificate facturer ’ s rec gabion .
pproval of the ource propose erenced Item f d in the Cont abions in acco d rock and/or to the manu o minimize vo ket shall be ha st extreme po .
tructure in ac he volume in ce .
ATIONS nd INFRAS e for the gabio commended p e source of su ed .
forming part o tract Docume ordance with r compacted ufacturer ’ s ins oid spaces an and placed to int measured ccordance wit n cubic metre TRUCTUR ITEM : 60 January , 20 on materials t procedures fo pply of rock , f this Item .
ents and/or a 161.4 and th soil foundatio structions an nd so that loc o ensure prope in any cell .
h 366.4 and t es of gabion RE 07 15 to or at as he on nd cal er to s , DEPA RAND Janua 608.1 608.2 608.2 608.3 ARTMENT DOM RIPRAP ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite MATERIAL .1 All mate .2 Random shown .3 Random third of .4 Random 2.6 t/m3 .1 Roc hav .2 Roc hav .5 Random Deval lo .6 Accepta and/or f .7 Random .1 Ra con gra .1 .2 The spe ripr SUBMITTA .1 The Co gravel/f propose STAN of TRANS TION em consists of LS erials shall be m riprap mate in Table 608- m riprap for e its length .
m riprap shall 3 and angular ck when teste ve a Micro-De ck when teste ve a Freeze/T m riprap used oss not greate ability of the r field testing pr m Riprap Mixe ndom riprap nsist of a rand avel subbase w Finely shatte 608.2.4.2 ma e Contractor ecified mixture rap material in ALS ontractor shall finely shattere ed source .
NDARD SP PORTATIO f supply and p e supplied by t erials shall be 1. ach rock shal consist of cle surfaces suc ed by the Mic eval loss not g ed by the Fre haw loss not g d for Backslop er than 70 % a rock will be d rocedures car ed mixed shall dom riprap ma which shall co ered rock wh ay be substitu shall produc e mixed at th ndicated , to fo notify the En ed rock mater PECIFICAT ON and INF ENVIRONMENT placing of rand the Contracto e a well-grade ll have both th ean , hard , sou h that the roc cro-Deval test reater than 35 eeze/Thaw tes greater than 1 pe stabilization and a Freeze/T determined by rried out by qu be noted in t aterial of the d onform to the r hich conforms uted for gravel ce a consiste he proportion orm a very den ngineer , in writ rials , at least TIONS FRASTRUC TAL dom riprap .
or .
ed mixture an hickness and und , durable r ks interlock w t method in a 5 % .
st method in a 15 % .
n or in erosion Thaw loss no y the Owner ’ s ualified perso the Contract designated siz requirements s to the requ , subject to th ent mixed ho n of approxim nse material .
ting , for appro 14 Days in a CTURE nd shall confo breadth grea rock , having a when placed .
accordance w accordance w n control struc ot greater than s service reco nnel .
Documents ze ( R- # ) thoro of 201.2. uirements of he approval of omogeneous mately 20 % b oval of the so dvance of ob orm to the gr ater than or eq a density of n with MTO LS with MTO LS ctures may ha n 30 % .
ords and/or by as R- # mixed ughly mixed w 608.2.4 , 608 f the Engineer blended su by weight to t ource of suppl btaining mater ITEM : 608 Page 608-1 rading limits qual to one- ot less than - 618 , shall - 614 , shall ave a Micro- y laboratory d and shall with a pitrun 8.2.4.1 , and r. pply of the the random y of rock or rial from the RA Pag M ( 6 4 3 2 1 1 7 5 3 2 2 1 1 0 N ANDOM RIPR ge 608-2 Mass Size ( Note 1 ) ( kg ) ( mm ) 6000 1600 4000 1400 3000 1300 2000 1100 500 1000 000 900 750 820 500 710 300 600 250 570 200 530 150 480 100 420 75 380 50 330 25 260 15 220 10 190 5 150 2.5 120 0.5 70 Thickness ( mm ) ( Note 3 ) OTES : 1 ) Ap 2 ) Ra 3 ) Me RAP R-A ( Note 2 ) 100 7 4 0 0 300 proximate dia ndom riprap f easured perpe DEPARTM Ran R-5 R-2 100 70 - 40 - 100 0 - 90 0 - 55 0 -1 0 -15 300 500 ameter ( for info for abutment a endicular to th ST MENT of TR ENVIRONM Table 6 dom Riprap Fin 25 R-50 100 70 - 90 0 90 40 - 55 55 0 - 15 5 0 600 ormation only and slope pro e prepared su TANDARD RANSPORT ENTAL 608 - 1 Grading Lim ner by Mass ( R-100 7 100 4 70 - 90 40 - 55 0 - 15 800 y ) tection urface SPECIFICA TATION an mits ( % ) R-250 R-5 10 70 - 100 70 - 90 40 - 40 - 55 0 - 0 - 15 1100 14 ATIONS nd INFRAS 500 R-1000 100 70 - 90 00 - 90 40 - 55 - 55 0 - 15 15 400 1600 TRUCTUR ITEM : 60 January , 20 0 R-2000 100 70 -90 0 40 - 55 5 0 - 15 2200 RE 08 15 DEPA RAND Janua 608.4 608.5 608.6 ARTMENT DOM RIPRAP ary , 2015 CONSTRU .1 The Co specific .2 The Co materia .3 Control .1 Diff acc .2 The und .4 The Co abutting .1 The Wo .5 The Co MEASURE .1 The Qu supplie BASIS OF .1 Paymen riprap , a .2 Cost of disagre results bear the .1 Cos by STAN of TRANS CTION ontractor sha cally directed b ontractor shall als .
of the gradat ferences in op cordance with e Contractor dertake the te ontractor shal g Structures a e Contractor s ork .
ontractor shall MENT FOR P uantity to be d and placed PAYMENT nt for Work un as identified u f the provisio eement betwe show that the e cost of the t st of any rete the Contracto NDARD SP PORTATIO all carry out t by the Engine clear the Wor tion shall be b pinion betwee ASTM D5519 shall provide sting required ll place rando are not damag shall be respo tamp random PAYMENT measured fo in accordance nder this Item under the Cont on of material een the Owne e material do test .
esting to resol or .
PECIFICAT ON and INF ENVIRONMENT the Work as er .
rk Area of all d by visual exam en the Enginee 9. e the Equipm d. om riprap ma ed .
onsible , at his/ m riprap mixed or payment s e with this Item shall include tract .
ls , labour and r and the Con es not meet t ve the supply TIONS FRASTRUC TAL indicated in driftwood , deb mination .
er and the Co ment , a sort aterial such th /her own expe d during place shall be the m. a separate U d Equipment ntractor shall the specified y of the speci CTURE the Contrac bris , snow , ice ontractor shall ting site and hat the under ense to repair ement .
number of to Unit Price for e to test the r be borne by gradation , ot ified material ct Documents e , and other ob be resolved b the labour rlying materia any such dam onnes of ran each gradation random riprap the Contracto therwise the O gradation sha ITEM : 608 Page 608-3 s and/or as bjectionable by testing in required to als and any mage to the ndom riprap n of random p to resolve or if the test Owner shall all be borne DEPA ROCK Janua 609.1 609.2 609.3 609.4 609.5 609.6 ARTMENT K WEIR ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite MATERIAL .1 All mate .2 Individu .1 Roc .1 .2 .2 Roc not .3 Random SUBMITTA .1 The Co rock , at .2 Submitt CONSTRU .1 The Co specific .2 Rock W MEASURE .1 The Qu accorda BASIS OF .1 Paymen STAN of TRANS TION em consists of LS erials shall be ual rocks shal cks shall be c Micro-Deval Freeze-Thaw cks with visib t be accepted m Riprap R-50 ALS ontractor shall t least 14 Days tals are requir CTION ontractor sha cally directed b Weirs shall be MENT FOR P uantity to be ance with this PAYMENT nt for Work un NDARD SP PORTATIO f the supply an e supplied by t l have approx clean , hard , so loss not grea w loss not gre ble planes of w . 0 Mixed shall submit upon s in advance o red in accorda all carry out t by the Engine constructed in PAYMENT measured fo Item .
nder this Item PECIFICAT ON and INF ENVIRONMENT nd installation the Contracto ximate dimens ound and dura ater than 35 % eater than 25 % weakness an conform to Ite request to th of obtaining m ance with any the Work as er .
n accordance or payment sh shall be at the TIONS FRASTRUC TAL n of a Rock W or .
sions as indica able and shall ( MTO LS618 % ( MTO LS61 nd/or marked em 608.2. he Engineer fo material from t cross-referen indicated in with Standard hall be the n e Unit Price .
CTURE Weir .
ated on Stand l meet the foll 8 ) .
14 ) .
deterioration or approval o he source pro nced Item form the Contrac d Drawing 609 number of Ro dard Drawing owing test req by water or w of the source o oposed .
ming part of th ct Documents 9-1. ock Weirs con ITEM : 609 Page 609-1 609-1. quirements : weather will of supply of is Item .
s and/or as nstructed in DEPA ARMO Janua 610.1 610.2 610.3 610.4 ARTMENT OUR STONE P ry , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite MATERIAL .1 All mate specifie Docume .2 The ar weathe having a .1 The hav .2 Wh mat .3 Individu or equa .4 Rock w will not .5 The ac laborato .6 The ap fragmen SUBMITTA .1 The Co least 14 CONSTRUC .1 The Co specific .2 The Co stone a with the .3 The Co required .4 The Co Work A area of STAN of TRANS PROTECTIO TION m consists of S erials shall be ed size range ents .
mour stone ring and degr a density of n e rock , when t ve a Micro-Dev hen tested by terial shall hav ual rock shall al to one-half o with visible pla be accepted .
cceptability of ory and/or field pproval of so nts to be obta ALS ontractor shall 4 Days in adva CTION ontractor sha ally directed b ntractor shall and filter blan e Standard Dr ontractor sha d. ontractor shall Area is cleared the Work .
NDARD SP PORTATIO N E f supply and p e supplied by e by mass of protection sh radation in wa ot less than 2 tested by the val loss not gr the Freeze/T ve a Freeze/T be angular an of its length .
anes of weakn f the rock sh d testing proc me rock frag ined at that q notify the En ance of obtain ll carry out t by the Enginee place armour ket material ) awing 610-1. ll verify the maintain the d of all driftwo PECIFICAT ON and INF ENVIRONMENT placing of the a y the Contract individual roc hall be rock ater , free of O 2.6 t/m3 .
Micro-Deval te reater than 35 Thaw test me Thaw loss not nd each rock ness and/or s hall be determ cedures carrie gments does uarry .
gineer , in writ ning material fr the Work as er .
r stone protec as indicated existing grad grades and S ood , debris , sn TIONS FRASTRUC TAL armour stone ctor for both a ck or gradati that is clean Overburden , est method in 5 % .
ethod in accor greater than 1 shall have bo ubject to mar mined by the ed out by qual not convey ting , for appro rom the sourc indicated in ction system ( in the Contr des and shal Slopes of the now , ice and a CTURE protection sy armour stone on limit , as i n hard , soun spoil , shale a n accordance w rdance with M 15 % .
oth thickness a rked deteriora e Owner ’ s se ified personne the Enginee oval of the so ce proposed .
the Contrac ( comprised of ract Documen l notify the E underlying m all other objec ystem .
and filter bla ndicated in th nd , durable , and organic m with MTO LS MTO LS - 61 and breadth g ation by water ervice records el .
er ’ s approval urce of supply ct Documents the composit nts and/or in Engineer if re material to ens ctionable mat ITEM : 610 Page 610-1 anket , in the he Contract resistant to material and - 618 , shall 4 , the rock greater than r or weather s and/or by of all rock y of rock , at s and/or as te of armour accordance eshaping is sure that the terials in the AR Pag 610 610 610 RMOUR STON ge 610-2 0.4.4 .1 .5 Con .1 .2 .6 The abut .1 .7 Arm rock resu .1 .2 .8 No p .9 The resu 0.5 MEASU .1 The prot 0.6 BASIS O .1 Pay syst .2 The reso the t shal .1 NE PROTECT The armour embankment ntrol of the gra Any differenc testing in acc The Contrac undertake the Contractor sh tting Structure The Contract Work .
mour stone pro ks below and ults .
The Contrac throughout th The Contract be bound and pushing or du Contractor sh ult of water lev REMENT FO Quantity to ection system OF PAYMENT ment for Wor tem , as identif cost of the pr olve disagreem test results sh ll bear the cos The cost of a borne by the DEPARTM TION stone protec t , so that the e adation shall b ce in opinion cordance with ctor shall pro e testing requ hall place the es are not dam tor shall be re otection shall the placemen ctor shall ens he entire armo tor shall place d consolidated mping of arm hall be respon vel variations , OR PAYMENT be measured m supplied and T rk under this I fied under the rovision of ma ment between how that the m st of the test .
any retesting Contractor .
ST MENT of TR ENVIRONM ction shall be embankment i be by visual ex between the ASTM D5519 ovide the Eq ired .
armour stone maged .
sponsible at h be placed su nt shall be con sure that dur our stone prote e the individua d to as great a our stone pro nsible for any W waves or wea T d for payment d placed in ac tem include a e Contract .
aterials , labou n the Owner a material does to resolve th TANDARD S RANSPORT ENTAL e placed in c is fully protect xamination .
e Engineer a 9. uipment , a s e protection su his/her own ex uch that each ntrolled to ens ring placeme ection mass .
al rock in such an extent as t otection shall b Work or mate ather condition t shall be the ccordance with a separate Un ur and Equipm and the Cont not meet the he supply of t SPECIFICA TATION an conjunction w ted as soon a and the Cont sorting site a uch that the u xpense to rep rock is stabl sure that a un ent the larger h a manner th he nature of t be permitted d erials required ns .
e number of t h this Item .
nit Price for ea ment to test th tractor shall b specified gra the specified ATIONS nd INFRAS with the cons after placemen ractor shall b and the labo underlying ma pair any such e , secure and niform and co r rocks shall hat the whole the rock will a during placem to repair dam tonnes of the ach armour s e armour ston be borne by th adation , otherw material gra STRUCTUR ITEM : 6 January , 20 struction of th nt as practical be resolved b our required aterials and an damage to th d supported b ontinuous cov l be disperse e structure sha llow .
ment .
mage which is e armour ston stone protectio ne protection he Contractor wise the Own dation shall b RE 10 15 he .
by to ny he by er ed all a ne on to r if er be DEPA INDIVI Janua 611.1 611.2 611.3 611.4 611.5 611.6 ARTMENT IDUAL ROCK ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite MATERIAL .1 All mate .1 The pro .2 The m degrad .3 Individu breadth SUBMITTA .1 The Co supplyi CONSTRU .1 The Co specific .2 The Co underly MEASURE .1 The Qu accorda BASIS OF .1 Payme STAN of TRANS K PLACEMEN TION em consists o LS erials shall be e rocks may oduction .
material shall ation in water ual rocks sha h greater than ALS ontractor sha ng of any ma CTION ontractor sha cally directed b ontractor sha ying or surrou MENT FOR P uantity to be ance with this PAYMENT nt for Work u NDARD SP PORTATIO NT f the supply a e supplied by be made av be rocks th r and free of d ll be typically n or equal to o ll notify the E aterial from the all carry out t by the Engine all ensure th nding materia PAYMENT measured fo s Item .
nder this Item ECIFICATI ON and INF ENVIRONMENT and placing of the Contracto ailable from hat are hard deleterious m 600 mm  10 one-half of the Engineer , for e source ( s ) id the Work as er .
hat the place al .
or payment s m shall be at t IONS FRASTRUC TAL f individual ro or .
the Work Sit d , sound , du materials .
00 mm long a eir length .
approval , of dentified .
indicated in ement of ind shall be the n the Unit Price CTURE ocks .
te at the loca urable , resist and shall have the source ( s the Contrac dividual rocks number of in e. ation ( s ) of the tant to weat e both the thi s ) of supply , ct Documents s does not dividual rock ITEM : 611 Page 611-1 eir origin or thering and ckness and prior to the s and/or as disturb the ks placed in DEPART GRAVEL January , 612.1 D .1 612.2 M .1 .2 .3 .4 612.3 S .1 .2 612.4 C .1 TMENT of FOR FISH H 2015 DESCRIPTION 1 This Item c MATERIALS 1 All materia 2 Gravel for particles fr it shall con 3 Gravel for accordance 4 Gravel fro Document UBMITTALS The Contra Days in ad 2 The Contra the comme CONSTRUCT The Contra directed by STAND TRANSPO HABITAT N consists of the als shall be su fish habitat s ree of clay , sil nform to the g fish habitat e with MTO L om the existi s as being av actor shall no vance of obta actor shall su encement of t ION actor shall car y the Engineer ARD SPEC ORTATION ENV e supply and upplied by the shall consist o lt or other del radation limit Gradati AST Sieve 125 100 50 m 16 m 9.5 1.18 shall show a S - 618. ing streambe vailable .
otify the Engin aining material ubmit verificat the Work .
rry out the Wo r. CIFICATIO and INFRA VIRONMENTAL placement of e Contractor .
of a well grade eterious mate s presented i Tab ion Limits fo TM e Size mm mm mm mm mm mm a Micro-Deva ed may be neer , in writing l from the sou tion that the m ork as indicate NS ASTRUCTU f gravel for fis ed granular m erials when te n Table 612- ble 612-1 or Gravel for Pe al loss of not used in the g , for approva urce proposed material mee ed in the Con URE sh habitat .
material comp ested in acco 1 .
Fish Habitat ercent Passin 100 85 - 90 60 - 75 20 - 45 15 - 35 0 - 3 t greater tha Work , if ide al of the sour .
ets the specifi ntract Docume posed of clean rdance with A t ng n 35 % , when entified in th rce of gravel , ed requireme ents and/or as ITEM : 612 Page 612-1 n , uncoated ASTM C136 n tested in he Contract at least 14 ents prior to s specifically GR Pag 612 612 612 RAVEL FOR F ge 612-2 2.4 .2 The con .1 .2 .3 2.5 MEASU .1 The supp 2.6 BASIS O .1 Pay FISH HABITA e Contractor nducting salva Streambed m abandoned a All salvage a by environme The Contract clean , neat a REMENT FO Quantity to b plied and plac OF PAYMENT ment for Wor DEPARTM AT shall adhere age of existin material shall and are identif activity shall o entally accept tor shall be re and environme OR PAYMENT be measured ced in accorda T rk under this I S MENT of T ENVIRONM to the followin g streambed only be taken fied in the Co occur in the d ted and appro esponsible fo entally accept T d for payment ance with this tem shall be TANDARD TRANSPOR ENTAL ng constructio materials : n from areas ontract Docum dry and in are oved techniqu r the salvage table conditio t shall be the s Item .
at the Unit Pr D SPECIFIC RTATION a on practices , of the existin ments .
eas separated ues .
e area and sh on .
number of to rice .
CATIONS and INFRAS as a minimu g watercours d from the ex hall leave the onnes of grav STRUCTU ITEM January , m standard , w e which are b xisting stream salvage area vel for fish ha RE M : 612 2015 when being m flow a in a abitat DEPA TOPSO Janua 613.1 613.2 613.3 613.4 ARTMENT OIL ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite from an MATERIAL .1 Topsoil .1 If a obt .2 Topsoil weight .
.3 Topsoil clods , r thickne .1 In a gre SUBMITTA .1 The Co the Wo CONSTRU .1 The Co specific .2 Areas to Day pre .3 Topsoil materia .4 Topsoil brough .1 Ha of r .2 In equ .3 Top the and STAN of TRANS TION em consists o n off site sour LS l shall be mat additional mat tain that mate l composition l shall be free roots and an ess of the laye areas of lawn eatest dimensi ALS ontractor shal ork Site , at lea CTION ontractor sha cally directed b o be topsoiled eceding the pl l placement in als above Sub l shall be spr t to a true and nd placement restricted acc areas of law uivalent .
psoil shall be slopes of the d on Backslop NDARD SP PORTATIO of the placem rce .
terial salvaged terial is requir erial from outs n shall consis e of debris a y other coars er of topsoil to n restoration , on .
l notify the E ast 7 Days pri all carry out t by the Engine d shall be sca acement of to n the Work A bgrade , unles read on the p d even surfac t and raking s cess .
wn restoratio placed on For e layer of Borro pes or as direc PECIFICAT ON and INF ENVIRONMENT ment of topso d and stockpi red beyond th side the Work st of 20 to 70 nd stones lar se vegetative o be placed .
topsoil shall b ngineer of th or to importin the Work as er .
rified or otherw opsoil .
Area shall be c ss otherwise a prepared area ce meeting the shall be requi on , topsoil sh reslopes from ow A/A1- qual cted by the En TIONS FRASTRUC TAL oil , either ava iled under Ite hat available o k Site .
0 % sand and rger than 75 e material , of be free of de e source ( s ) o ng material fro indicated in rwise loosened completed pr approved by t a ( s ) to a dept e required gra ired in areas hall be rolled m Subgrade sh lity material as ngineer .
CTURE ilable on site m 106 and 10 on the Work S contain 2 to mm in greate f a size equa bris and ston of topsoil to b om off site .
the Contrac d to a depth o rior to the pla the Engineer .
th of 100 mm ade .
adjacent to fi d using a la houlder down s identified in e or including 07 .
Site , the Cont o 10 % organic est dimension al to or great es larger than be obtained fr ct Documents of at least 50 m acement of an m  25 mm a nished lawns awn roller o in cuts and fil the Contract D ITEM : 613 Page 613-1 the supply tractor shall c matter by n and large ter than the n 25 mm in rom outside s and/or as mm within 1 ny Roadbed and shall be s or in areas r approved ls , including Documents ; TO Pag 613 613 613 PSOIL ge 613-2 3.4 .5 Plac such .6 Top prio .7 Top to im .1 .8 If ex of th 3.5 MEASU .1 The plac .2 The 3.6 BASIS O .1 Pay cing of topsoi h a degree th soil shall not r approval of soil that is con mporting topso The Contract authorization xcess topsoil m he Owner .
REMENT FO Quantity to ced in accorda area shall be OF PAYMENT ment for Wor DEPARTM il shall not be at balling and be placed a the Engineer ntained within oil .
tor shall inco from the Eng material exists OR PAYMENT be measure ance with this e measured a T rk under this I STA MENT of TR ENVIRONM e carried out d clumping res fter the end r. n the Work Site rporate impor ineer .
s after comple T d for paymen s Item .
along the slop tem shall be ANDARD S RANSPORT ENTAL on frozen ma sults .
of the week e that can be rted topsoil in etion of the Wo nt shall be th pe of the grou at the Unit Pr SPECIFICA TATION an aterials or wh in which Sep or has been s nto the Work ork , this mater he number o nd .
rice .
ATIONS nd INFRAS hen materials ptember 30th salvaged sha only after re rial shall rema of square me TRUCTUR ITEM : 6 January , 20 s are wetted t occurs witho ll be used prio eceiving writte ain the propert etres of topso RE 13 15 to ut or en ty oil DEPA HYDR Janua 614.1 614.2 ARTMENT ROSEEDING ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite ditches .2 Hydros .1 Ro .2 Mu MATERIAL .1 All mate .2 Seed m by the E .1 Add .2 The Ca Mix STAN of TRANS TION em consists s and other pr seeding shall adside Mix w nicipal Mix w LS erials shall be mix shall be a Engineer , the ditional altern e seed mixes nada Seeds A xture , respect Cre Ha Ca Als An Re Kentucky B Creeping R Annual Ry NDARD SP PORTATIO of supply a repared areas be identified b with Mulch per ith Mulch per e supplied by as indicated in e seed mix sh natives to the s for Tables 6 Act for Canad tively .
Co Sp eeping Red F ard Fescue anada Bluegra sike or White nnual Ryegras ed Top C Species Bluegrass Red Fescue ( yegrass PECIFICAT ON and INF ENVIRONMENT nd applicatio s. by the followi r 616.4 - Hydr r 616.4 - Hydr the Contracto n Table 614-1 all be as indic municipal see 614-1 and 61 da No .
1 Grou Table omposition o pecies Fescue ass Clover ss Tab Composition ( Turf Type ) TIONS FRASTRUC TAL on of hydros ng mix design roseeding `` B '' roseeding `` BM or .
1 , except tha cated in Table ed mix may b 4-2 shall mee und Cover Mi 614-1 of Roadside M ble 614-2 of Municipa See Alternativ 50 30 20 CTURE seeding on F nations : '' M '' t for lawns an e 614-2. be approved b et or exceed ixture and Ca Mix Seed Mix % By Mass 40 20 15 5 15 5 al Mix ed Mix % By M ve 1 Alt Foreslopes , B nd other area by the Engine the requirem anada No .
1 L Mass ternative 2 40 40 20 ITEM : 614 Page 614-1 Backslopes , as identified eer .
ments of the Lawn Grass HY Pag 614 614 614 YDROSEEDIN ge 614-2 4.2 .3 Fert 10-2 .4 Bag perc .1 .5 See cond .1 .6 Bind .7 Wat .8 Hyd for u colo cotto .1 .9 Whe whic 4.3 SUBMIT .1 The the m .2 The the subm be s .3 The 4.4 CONST .1 The spec .2 Area stick .1 NG tilizer shall b 20-20 ( N-P-K ) s of seed a centages , dat Bags of seed ed and fertiliz ditions .
Seed and fer der may be su ter shall be fre raulic mulch f use in hydros oured green w on fibres and/ Hydraulic mu other specifie en applied , th ch will allow m TTALS Contractor s materials supp Contractor s component mission shall sampled by th Contractor s RUCTION Contractor s cifically directe as to be hydr ks , roots and Stones grea outside the W DEPARTM be a 15-25-1 ) thereafter .
and fertilizer te of bagging d shall also be er shall be k rtilizer that ha upplied in liqu ee of any imp for hydroseed eeding , and s with an enviro /or shredded ulch shall form ed materials a he hydroseed moisture to per shall submit , u plied meet the shall submit , u species and include the lo he Engineer .
hall submit th shall carry o ed by the Eng roseeded sha large rocks w ter than 75 Work Area .
STA MENT of TR ENVIRONM 5 ( N-P-K ) m shall be lab and supplier' e marked with kept dry and ve been subj uid , flake or po purities which ding as specif shall consist o nmentally acc newsprint .
m a homogen and shall cont ing mix shall rcolate into the upon request , e specified req upon request percentages ocation ( s ) wh he proposed b ut the Work gineer .
all be free of r which would im mm in the le ANDARD S RANSPORT ENTAL mix for seedi belled , identif s name .
h lot number .
protected fro ected to mois owder form .
would inhibit fied in Table 6 of shredded w ceptable dye , neous slurry w tain no growth be capable e underlying s , the manufac quirements as , a Certificate s , including w ere the lot ( s ) binder applica as indicated ruts , ridges an mpede growth east dimensi SPECIFICA TATION an ing done Ma fying mass ( om direct sun sture shall not germination 614-3 shall be wood fibres , s , or shredded when agitated h-inhibiting ch of forming a soil .
cturer ’ s and/o s detailed in th e of Analysis weed and in of seed to be ation rate in c d in the Cont nd deleteriou h of the seed ion shall be ATIONS nd INFRAS ay 1st to Lab ( kg ) , mix com nlight and oth t be used .
of the seed .
e a product m shredded new straw mixed d or mixed in hemicals or c an absorptive or supplier ’ s c he Contract Do for the seed nert material e used on the conjunction wi tract Docume s materials s mix and mow removed an TRUCTUR ITEM : 6 January , 20 bour Day an mponents an her detriment made primarily wsprint with raw water with th compounds .
mat , certification th ocuments .
mix identifyin content .
Th e Contract ma ith 614.3.1. ents and/or a uch as weed wing .
nd disposed o RE 14 15 nd nd tal y he at ng is ay as s , of DEPA HYDR Janua 614.4 614.4 Seed Fertiliz Hydrau Binder Mulch : 614.4 ARTMENT ROSEEDING ary , 2015 .3 Final sh as port accorda .4 The Co depth o .1 Hyd .5 Hydrau tank ca homoge .6 Applica .1 App gro .2 Bin BM .3 Hyd Ty zer ulic Mulch : A r ( tackifier ) : A : Hay/straw b .7 Timing .1 Hyd pre .1 .2 .2 Hyd .3 Hyd ove .1 .4 Afte Hyd STAN of TRANS haping of Slo tions of the ance with Item ontractor shal of 25 mm no s droseeding wi ulic mulch , see pable of conti eneous slurry ation Rates plication rates ound condition nder is require M. droseeding B ype of Mater All Application rat bales/rolls/pro of Application droseeding s eparation , as d The Enginee of the comm The Engine hydroseedin droseeding sh droseeding d er at least 95 % Areas of poo er Labour Da droseed B ( BM NDARD SP PORTATIO opes and othe Work are co m 946. l ensure all s sooner than 2 ill not be perm ed , fertilizer an nually agitatin is produced .
s shall be as ns .
d with both th B includes mu Applicat rial te per manufa ocessed straw n hall be carrie defined by 61 er shall appro mencement of er shall be n ng .
hould not be one between % of the area or or no grow ay , and up to M ) , incorporat PECIFICAT ON and INF ENVIRONMENT er exposed ea ompleted , to such areas ar 2 Days prior to mitted on harde nd binder sha ng the mixture shown in Ta he hydroseedi lching applied Table 614 tion Rates fo acturer ’ s spec w d out in all ca 4.4.4. ove and pre-m f the hydrosee notified at lea performed du n May 1st and hydroseeded wth shall be re o the end of ting a 10-20-2 TIONS FRASTRUC TAL arth surfaces enable hyd re prepared to o hydroseedin ened , crusted all be thorough e during the hy able 614-3 an ng and mulch d after hydros 4-3 or Hydroseed “ B ” ( kg/ha 125 375 500 cifications .
Per 616 ases within 2 measure all a eding of any a ast 24 hours uring windy co d Labour Day d in the growi eseeded as de the week in 20 fertilizer mix CTURE shall be don droseeding to o a loosened ng .
d or rutted soil hly mixed with ydroseeding o nd may vary hing operation seed , in accor d ) 6.4 Days after c areas to be h area .
in advance o onditions or p y must produ ing season of etermined by which Septe x as per 614.2 e in areas of o be done in condition to .
h water in a hy operation to en by ±15 % , de ns of Hydrosee rdance with 6 '' BM ( kg/h 200 375 500 Straw only completion of hydroseeded , of the applica periods of rain ce a satisfac f that year .
the Engineer ember 30th o 2.3 shall be us ITEM : 614 Page 614-3 cut and fill , n stages in a minimum ydroseeding nsure that a epending on eding B and 616.2 .
M '' ha ) 0 5 0 per 616.4 the surface in advance ation of the nfall .
ctory growth r. occurs , only sed .
HY Pag 614 614 614 YDROSEEDIN ge 614-4 4.4.7.4 .5 .6 4.5 MEASU .1 The supp .2 The 4.6 BASIS O .1 Pay hyd NG .1 The hay/s out within .2 Growth w condition No hydrosee approval of th The Contract and all other by a method .1 Where o susceptib water to r REMENT FO Quantity to b plied and app area shall be OF PAYMENT yment for W droseeding , a DEPARTM straw mulchin n 48 hours of t will be based s of 614.4.7.3 eding shall be he Engineer .
tor shall take installations approved by overspray com ble vegetation remove such o OR PAYMENT be measured plied in accord e measured a T Work under th as identified u STA MENT of TR ENVIRONM ng operation , w the hydroseed on the perfo 3. e carried out e all reasonab and , where s the Engineer mes in conta , the Contract overspray .
T d for payment dance with th along the slop his Item sha nder the Con ANDARD S RANSPORT ENTAL which forms p ding operation ormance duri after the we ble care to pr such overspra r. act with the tor shall imme t shall be the is Item .
pe of the grou all include a ntract .
SPECIFICA TATION an part of Hydros n in accordanc ng the next eek of Septe revent oversp ay occurs , the foliage of a ediately spray area in squa nd .
separate Un ATIONS nd INFRAS seed B ( BM ) , s ce with 616.4. growing seas mber 30th wi pray onto Str e Contractor s any trees , sh y the affected v are metres of nit Price for TRUCTUR ITEM : 6 January , 20 shall be carrie son as per th thout the prio uctures , sign shall remove hrubs or othe vegetation wit f hydroseedin each type o RE 14 15 ed he or s , it er th ng of DEPA FERTI Janua 615.1 615.2 615.3 615.4 ARTMENT ILIZING ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite MATERIAL .1 All mate .2 Fertilize from su .3 Hydrau environ .1 Hyd .2 Hyd with .4 Water s SUBMITTA .1 The Co the mat .2 The Co tankful CONSTRU .1 The Co specific .2 Applica will be .3 Fertilizi .1 The fert .4 The Co .5 Hydrau .6 Fertilize agitatio .7 Applica STAN of TRANS TION em consists o S erials shall be er shall have ulphur-coated ulic mulch sha nmentally acc draulic mulch draulic mulch h the other sp shall be free o ALS ontractor shal terials supplie ontractor sha for the select CTION ontractor sha cally directed b ation shall be permitted .
ng shall be ca e Engineer s tilizer .
ontractor shal ulic mulch , at t er , at the rat on sufficient to ation rates sha NDARD SP PORTATIO f supplying an e supplied by a compositio urea .
all be shredd eptable dye .
shall contain h material sha pecified mate of any impurit l submit , upo d meet the sp all submit the ted Equipmen all carry out t by the Engine by hydroseed arried out bet shall be notif l not perform the rate of 15 te of 250 kg o distribute th all not vary by PECIFICAT ON and INF ENVIRONMENT nd applying fe the Contracto on of 20-10-1 ed wood fibre n no growth-in all form a hom rials .
ties which wo n request , the pecified require proposed pr nt to be emplo the Work as er .
ding methods tween mid-Ap fied at least the Work und 50 kg/ha , shal g/ha , shall be e mix uniform y more than 1 TIONS FRASTRUC TAL ertilizer .
or .
0 ( N-P-K ) wit es or shredd nhibiting chem mogeneous sl ould inhibit the e manufactur ements as de roportioning o oyed in the W indicated in s and no direc pril and Victor 24 hours in der adverse fi ll be mixed wi e introduced mly in the tank 15 % .
CTURE th 50 % of the ed newsprint micals or com lurry when ag e effect of the rer ’ s and/or su etailed in the C of the ingred Work and in co the Contrac ct access to th ria Day .
n advance of ield condition ith water in th immediately k. Pa e nitrogen be t coloured gre mpounds .
gitated or mix e fertilizer .
upplier ’ s certi Contract Docu dients and co onjunction wit ct Documents he areas with f the applica ns .
he fertilizer tan y prior to spr ITEM : 615 age 615-1 eing derived een with an xed in water fication that uments .
overage per th 615.3.1. s and/or as Equipment ation of the nk .
raying , with FER Pag 615 615 615 RTILIZING ge 615-2 5.4 .8 The all o met .1 5.5 MEASU .1 The supp .2 Area 5.6 BASIS O .1 Pay Contractor s other installat hod approved Where overs vegetation , th remove such REMENT FO Quantity to plied and app as shall be m OF PAYMENT ment for Wor DEPARTM shall take all tions and , wh d by the Engin pray comes i he Contracto overspray .
OR PAYMENT be measure plied in accord easured alon T rk under this I STA MENT of TR ENVIRONM reasonable c here such ov neer .
n contact with or shall imme T ed for payme dance with th g the slope o tem shall be ANDARD S RANSPORT ENTAL care to preven verspray occu h the foliage o ediately spray ent shall be is Item .
of the ground .
at the Unit Pr SPECIFICA TATION an nt overspray urs , the Cont of any trees , y the affected the area in rice .
ATIONS nd INFRAS onto Structur ractor shall r shrubs or oth d vegetation square metr TRUCTUR ITEM : 6 January , 20 res , signs , an remove it by her susceptib with water t res of fertilize RE 15 15 nd a le to er DEPA MULC Janua 616.1 616.2 616.3 616.4 ARTMENT CHING ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite MATERIAL .1 All mate .2 Mulch s .1 Un ma spr .2 App .3 When a the und .4 Binder ground .5 Binder underly .6 Binder .7 Water regulato SUBMITTA .1 The Co the mat CONSTRU .1 The Co specific .2 The Co represe permits .3 Mulch s STAN of TRANS TION em consists o LS erials shall be shall be hay o processed fo aterial , and n reading ; or proved equiva applied the m derlying soil .
must be cap and shall rem shall not form ying soil .
may be supp shall be con ory agency .
ALS ontractor shal terials supplie CTION ontractor sha cally directed b ontractor shall entative , as de s and regulatio shall be applie NDARD SP PORTATIO f the supply a e supplied by or straw and s orm such as not so wet , alent .
ulch shall for pable of join main effective m an impervio plied in liquid , ntaminant-free l submit , upo d meet the sp all carry out t by the Engine apply additio efined in 948.2 ons ed with binde PECIFICAT ON and INF ENVIRONMENT and applicatio the Contracto supplied in eit bales or roll decayed or m an absorpt ing together e for 60 Days ous seal whic flake or powd e and obtain n request , the pecified require the Work as er .
onal mulch as 2 , when neces er at the manu TIONS FRASTRUC TAL on of mulch on or .
ther of the fol ls , free of no compacted tive mat , whic the mulch p from the time h would prev der form .
ed from a s e manufactur ements as de indicated in s directed by t ssary to comp ufacturer 's rec CTURE n exposed gro lowing forms oxious weeds so as to in ch will allow m particles to s e of applicatio vent the penet source appro rer ’ s and/or su etailed in the C the Contrac the Contracto ply with Item 9 commended a Pa ound .
: s and other u hibit even a moisture to pe ecure the m on .
tration of moi oved by the upplier ’ s certi Contract Docu ct Documents or 's on-site en 948 , as well a application ra ITEM : 616 age 616-1 undesirable and uniform ercolate into ulch to the sture to the appropriate fication that uments .
s and/or as nvironmental s applicable ate .
MU Pag 616 616 616 ULCHING ge 616-2 6.4 .4 App 450 .1 .2 .3 .5 The Con .1 .6 The all o met .7 Ditc may 6.5 MEASU .1 The and .2 Area 6.6 BASIS O .1 Pay proved unproc 0 kg/ha ± 15 % Lumps and th Binder shall wood-fibre or Binder applic has been pla Contractor s ntract period .
The Contrac after the initia Contractor s other installat hod approved hes carried o y , subject to th REMENT FO Quantity to b applied in ac as shall be m OF PAYMENT ment for Wor DEPARTM cessed hay o % .
hick clumps o be mixed in r paper mulch cation shall b aced .
shall maintain ctor shall app al application shall take all tions and , wh d by the Engin out in accorda he approval o OR PAYMENT be measured ccordance wit easured alon T rk under this I STA MENT of TR ENVIRONM or straw mulc of mulch shall a solution o h and sprayed be completed n the mulched ply additional of mulch .
reasonable c here such ov neer .
ance with 116 of the Enginee T for payment th this Item .
g the slope o tem shall be ANDARD S RANSPORT ENTAL ch shall be sp be broken ap of water with d uniformly ov within 48 ho d areas until mulch as re care to preven verspray occu 6.4 , and areas er , be placed shall be the a of the ground .
at the Unit Pr SPECIFICA TATION an pread evenly part and disp sufficient gre ver the mulch ours after the mulch is no equired , to re nt overspray urs , the Cont s requiring th without binde area in squar rice .
ATIONS nd INFRAS y and uniform ersed .
een dye or g hed ground .
e unprocessed longer requi estore the ar onto Structur ractor shall r e hand place er .
re metres of m TRUCTUR ITEM : 6 January , 20 mly at a rate o green-coloure d hay or stra ired during th ea ( s ) expose res , signs , an remove it by ement of mulc mulch supplie RE 16 15 of ed aw he ed nd a ch ed DEPA ROOT Janua 617.1 617.2 617.3 617.4 617.5 617.6 ARTMENT T WADS ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite MATERIAL .1 All mate .2 The tre native t .1 Tre and .3 The tre ground mass is indicate .4 The tre .5 Reinfor .6 Header of 2 m. SUBMITTA .1 The Co at least CONSTRU .1 The Co specific .2 The roo Standa .3 Header Standa .4 The tree MEASURE .1 The Qu in acco BASIS OF .1 Paymen STAN of TRANS TION em consists o S erials shall be ees to be use to the Work S ees may be sa d footer logs , ees to be use and shall be s at least 1 m ed in the Con ees shall be of rcing steel use r and footer lo ALS ontractor shall 14 Days in ad CTION ontractor sha cally directed b ot wads shall rd Drawing 61 r and footer lo rd Drawing 61 e root mass s MENT FOR P uantity to be m rdance with th PAYMENT nt for Work un NDARD SP PORTATIO f the supply a e supplied by ed as root wa Site .
alvaged on-si as directed b ed for root w e removed fr m in diameter tract Docume f sound wood ed to secure ogs shall be a notify the Eng dvance of obt all carry out t by the Engine be embedde 17-1 or as dire ogs shall be in 17-1. hall be washe PAYMENT measured for p his Item .
nder this Item ECIFICATI ON and INF ENVIRONMENT and installatio the Contracto ads , and hea ite from areas by the Engine wads shall be rom the grou r. The trees s ents .
d and free of d the header an a minimum of gineer , in writ aining materia the Work as er .
ed into the si ected by the E nstalled horizo ed and free of payment shal shall be at the IONS FRASTRUC TAL on of root wad or .
der and foote s being cleare er .
300 to 400 nd complete shall be cut to decay , breaka nd footer logs f 300 mm in d ting , for appro al from the pro indicated in de of the out Engineer .
ontally and an soil prior to in l be the numb e Unit Price .
CTURE ds .
er logs shall ed to be used mm in diame with roots , s o a length of age or other d s shall be 15M diameter and oval of the sou oposed source the Contrac tlet pool facin nchored using nstallation .
ber of root wa be deciduous d as root wad eter at 1.3 m such that the 5 m above t damage .
M rebar .
have a minim urce of supply e. ct Documents ng the flow , a g 15M rebar , a ads supplied a ITEM : 617 Page 617-1 s trees and s or header m above the e intact root he roots as mum length y of material , s and/or as as shown in as shown in and installed DEPA TREES Janua 618.1 618.2 618.3 618.4 ARTMENT S AND SHRU ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite MATERIAL .1 All mate .2 Trees Docum .1 Tre .2 Shr .3 Trees a sound w .4 Plants , excess .5 Nursery surroun .6 Topsoil .7 Stakes minimu .8 Trees s trunks .
SUBMITTA .1 The Co at least CONSTRU .1 The Co specific .2 Roots o other a .3 Excava ball .
.4 Each tr topsoil STAN of TRANS UBS TION em consists o S erials shall be and shrubs s ents : ees shall be W rubs shall be and shrubs s with a strong if supplied f of 750 mm fo y stock shall nding soil .
l shall meet th for supportin um of 2130 m shall be tied t ALS ontractor shall 14 Days in ad CTION ontractor sha cally directed b of the trees a pproved mea ation for plant ree and shrub shall be place NDARD SP PORTATIO f the supply , p e supplied by shall be of t White Ash , Hy Speckled Ald hall be free o fibrous root s from the vici or trees and 4 l have a roo he requireme ng trees shall m long .
to stakes usin notify the Eng dvance of obt all carry out t by the Engine nd shrubs sh ans .
ing shall be to b shall be pla ed around the PECIFICAT ON and INF ENVIRONMENT planting and the Contracto the species i ybrid Poplar a der and/or Re of disease , in system .
nity of the W 450 mm for sh ot ball at lea nts of 613.2. be steel T-ba ng trunk collar gineer , in writ aining materia the Work as er .
all be kept m o a depth of 1 aced on a be e root system TIONS FRASTRUC TAL maintenance or .
indicated bel and/or Yellow ed Osier Dogw nsects , defect Work Site , sh hrubs .
st 200 mm ar , 32 x 32 x rs which neith ting , for appro al from the so indicated in oist until plan 150 mm belo edding of top m in 150 mm li CTURE of trees and low or as in Birch .
wood .
ts or injuries hall have ade in diameter 5 mm , or wo her pinch nor oval of the sou urce proposed the Contrac nting by the u w and around soil of 150 m fts , tamped to Pa shrubs .
dicated in th and shall be equate root s including the ood , 38 x 38 m r are abrasive urce of supply d. ct Documents se of wet bur d the root sys mm loose thic o eliminate vo ITEM : 618 age 618-1 he Contract structurally systems , in e roots and mm , each a e to the tree y of material , s and/or as rlap bags or stem or root ckness , and oids .
TR Pag 618 618 618 EES AND SH ge 618-2 8.4 .5 Whe pen .6 A be .7 Tree app .8 The plan plan .9 The follo grow natu 8.5 MEASU .1 The plan 8.6 BASIS O .1 Pay shru .2 Hold expi HRUBS en two-thirds etrated into s erm shall be b es large eno roved by the Contractor nting and as nt growth with Contractor s owing growing wth within the ural disasters REMENT FO Quantity to nted and main OF PAYMENT ment for Wo ub , as identifie dback in the iration of the w DEPARTM backfilled , th oil , the remai built around th ugh to requi Engineer .
shall be resp necessary th out causing e shall guarant g season , an e warranty p . OR PAYMENT be measured ntained in acc T rk under this ed under the amount of 20 warranty peri STA MENT of TR ENVIRONM he planting h ning depth of he rim of the re staking sh ponsible to w hereafter , so erosion of the tee the trees nd shall repla eriod , except T d for paymen cordance with Item shall in Contract .
0 % of the val od or until rel ANDARD S RANSPORT ENTAL hole shall be f hole shall be hole and the hall be stake water each p as to mainta e surrounding s and shrubs ace at his co t those dama nt will be the this Item .
nclude a sepa lue of the Wo eased by the SPECIFICA TATION an filled with w e backfilled to plant watered ed and tied a plant daily fo ain soil moist berm .
s for both the ost all trees aged by vand e number of t arate Unit Pri ork under this e Engineer , w ATIONS nd INFRAS water .
After o finish grade .
d again .
at the time o r at least tw ture condition e year of pla and shrubs dalism or floo trees and sh ice for each s Item will be hichever is th TRUCTUR ITEM : 6 January , 20 the water ha .
of planting , a wo weeks afte ns required fo anting and th not sustainin oding or othe hrubs supplied type of tree o e held until th he least time .
RE 18 15 as as er or he ng er d , or he DEPA TEMP Janua 620.1 620.2 620.3 620.4 620.5 620.6 ARTMENT ORARY WAT ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite barrier .
MATERIAL .1 All mate .2 Plastic require SUBMITTA .1 The Co plans a CONSTRU .1 The Co specific .2 The Co through .3 The Co least da .4 The Co thereof .5 When waterco .1 Tem be MEASURE .1 The Qu water b BASIS OF .1 Payme STAN of TRANS TER BARRIE TION em consists o LS erials shall be liners shall ments of CGS ALS ontractor shall nd details of t CTION ontractor sha cally directed b ontractor shal hout the perio ontractor shal aily during pe ontractor sha f. the tempora ourse all mate mporary wate left in place a MENT FOR P uantity to be barrier supplie PAYMENT nt for Work u NDARD SP PORTATIO ER of the supply e supplied by be clear po SB 51.34. l submit for a he proposed t all carry out t by the Engine l maintain the od of use .
l inspect and eriods of prolo all immediatel ry barrier is erials pertaini er barrier loca and incorpora PAYMENT measured fo ed , installed , m nder this Item PECIFICAT ON and INF ENVIRONMENT y , installation , the Contracto olyethylene a pproval , at le temporary wa the Work as er .
e temporary w document the onged rainfall .
y repair any no longer r ng to the tem ated within th ated into the fi or payment w maintained an m shall be at t TIONS FRASTRUC TAL maintenance or .
a minimum o ast 14 Days ater barrier .
indicated in water barrier e temporary w . damage to t required , the mporary water e limits of an inal embankm will be the nu nd removed in the Unit Price CTURE e and remov of 6 mils thic prior to startin the Contrac in a functiona water barrier the temporar e Contractor r barrier .
n embankmen ment as appro umber of line n accordance e. val of a temp ck , and shal ng Work unde ct Documents al condition c after each ra ry water barr shall remov nt to be const oved by the E ear metres of e with this Item ITEM : 620 Page 620-1 orary water ll meet the er this Item , s and/or as continuously infall and at rier or parts e from the tructed may Engineer .
f temporary m. DEPA TEMP Janua 621.1 621.2 621.3 621.4 ARTMENT ORARY WAT ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite tempor .2 This Ite otherwi MATERIAL .1 All mate .2 Supply fence s solely a .3 Materia Standa SUBMITTA .1 Two co Profess .2 The des .1 The .2 The exc .3 The ant .4 A p adv whe CONSTRU .1 The Co specific .1 The the .2 The fol .1 Dra Tim Ru Des Min STAN of TRANS TER CONTRO TION em consists o rary water con em applies to ise indicated LS erials shall be of materials shown on the as part of the als for Temp ard Drawing 6 ALS opies of design sional Enginee sign of each T e flow capacity e proposed m ceed the minim e proposed m ticipate stream precautionary vance of any s en directed by CTION ontractor sha cally directed b e Contractor s written appro lowing inform ainage Area me of Concen noff Coefficie sign Flow ( Q1 nimum Specif NDARD SP PORTATIO OL WORKS of the design ntrol works , he Culverts with in the Contra e supplied by shall include e Plans and TWCW .
orary Workin 21-1. n drawings an er , shall be su TWCW plan sh y of the TWCW method , descri mum specified method of mon m flow increase Work Area cle stream flow in y the Enginee all carry out t by the Engine shall not weld oval of the Eng mation is provi tration ent 100 ) fied Flow Cap PECIFICAT ON and INF ENVIRONMENT , supply , con erein after ca h a nominal in ct Documents the Contracto e sediment c fence directe ng Pads for nd design cal bmitted a min hall include , b W ; iption and dra d flow capacity nitoring stream es ; and ean-up proced ncrease antici r. the Work as er .
or attach any gineer .
ded on the dr pacity TIONS FRASTRUC TAL struction , ope alled `` TWCW '' nside diamete s. or .
control fence ed to be inst Work access culations for t nimum of 14 D but are not lim awings of the y of the TWCW m flows and w dure and mitig pated to exce indicated in y part of the T rawings for ea CTURE eration , main '' .
er ( ID ) greate per 602.2 th talled by the s in wetlands the TWCW , s Days before co ited to : TWCW desig W ; weather forec gation measu eed the flow c the Contrac TWCW to an ach watercou Pa ntenance and er than 1200 hat is addition Engineer , an s shall be su stamped and ommencing W gned to accom casts at the W ures to be imp capacity of the ct Documents existing struc urse crossing : ITEM : 621 age 621-1 removal of mm , unless nal to such nd required upplied per signed by a Work .
mmodate or Work Area to plemented in e TWCW , or s and/or as cture without : TEM Pag 621 621 621 MPORARY W ge 621-2 1.4.2 .2 .3 .3 The Wor Wor .4 The due and .5 The prol .6 The cont repa .1 .2 .7 The sedi .8 Whe mat .1 1.5 MEASU .1 The Con 1.6 BASIS O .1 Pay .2 The not f D WATER CON The Contract of installation the measure flows exceed Notwithstand minimum spe obtain the req TWCW shal rk Area dry .
T rk Area to the Contractor is to infiltration pumping .
Contractor s onged rainfal Contractor tinuously thro air any damag Failure to ma identified by 621.6.2 .
This penalty TWCW plan ( m3/sec ) mea Work under iment control en TWCW is erials pertain Any parts of under the C approved by REMENT FO design , sup ntrol Works ( T OF PAYMENT ment for Wor Contractor s functioning pr DEPARTM TROL WORK tor shall cons n with the risk s taken to m d the design c ding the abov ecified flow to quired permit l separate the The TWCW s e flow of the w s responsible n. Methods to shall inspect t l. shall monitor oughout the e ge to the TWC aintain a prop the Engineer will not apply was followed asurements th this Item sha fence as des s no longer r ing to the TW f the TWCW ontract may the Engineer OR PAYMENT pply , placeme TWCW ) in acc T rk under this I hall be subjec roperly per 62 STA ENT of TR KS ENVIRONM sider these fac k of delay du inimize dama capacity of the ve the Contra o satisfy the c ts .
e Work Area shall also con watercourse .
e for control a o remove infil the TWCW a r and ensure entire period CW or parts t perly functioni r or a represe y during perio d and the Co hat verifies th all include ins scribed in 621 required , the WCW .
within the lim be left in pla r. T ent , mainten cordance with tem shall be ct to a penalty 21.4.6.1 .
ANDARD S RANSPORT ENTAL ctors in desig e to weather age to the site e TWCW .
actor must pro commitments from the flow ntrol the introd and/or remov ltrated water after each rain e that the TW of use , includ hereof .
ng TWCW or entative of DF ods of flow ex ontractor subm at flows exce stallation , repl .2.2 .
Contractor mits of an em ace and inco ance , operat h this Item sha at the Lump S y of $ 1000 pe SPECIFICA TATION an gning a TWCW r events .
The e and the en ovide TWCW to the regula w of the wate duction of se val of any wa may include nfall and at le WCW operat ding evening r properly imp FO or DELG , xceeding the mits documen eeded the flow lacement and shall remove mbankment a orporated into tion and rem all be paid for Sum Price .
er Day for eac ATIONS d INFRAST W plan which submitted pl nvironment in Ws which acc atory agencies rcourse , and diment and d ater entering t the construc east daily du e in a functi s and weeke plement the T shall result in e flow capacit ntation , such w capacity of t d maintenanc e from the w and/or fill to b o the final em moval of Tem r on a Lump S ch Day that th TRUCTURE ITEM : 62 January , 20 h balances co lan must deta the event tha ommodate th s necessary t shall keep th debris from th the Work Are ction of sump ring periods o ional conditio ends , and sha TWCW plan , a n penalties pe ty provided th as actual flo the TWCW .
ce of addition watercourse a be constructe mbankment a mporary Wate Sum basis .
he TWCW are E 21 15 st ail at he to he he ea ps of on all as er he ow al all ed as er e DEPA FISH R Janua 622.1 622.2 622.3 622.4 ARTMENT RESCUE ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite stream death o .2 For the biologis MATERIAL .1 None id SUBMITTA .1 The Co the biol CONSTRU .1 The Co specific .2 The Co activitie .3 The Co prevent .1 Bru wou .2 Afte Wo .4 All spec water fl .5 A fish re .6 After a might re The Co lost or d .7 For eac within th .1 The the STAN of TRANS TION em consists o diversions w or injury to the e purpose of st. S dentified .
ALS ontractor shall ogist .
CTION ontractor sha cally directed b ontractor shall es that pose a ontractor shall t fish from mig ush , logs and uld obscure fis er completion ork Area to fac cies of fish sh ows above or escue will be c fish rescue th e-enter the W ontractor shall damaged nets ch fish rescue hree weeks of e summary sh approximate NDARD SP PORTATIO of rescuing a where construc e fish .
this Item the l submit the b all carry out t by the Engine l arrange to h risk to fish .
install the bio grating into the debris shall sh is reduced n of the Work cilitate capturin hall be captur r below the Wo considered co he biologist m Work Area and be responsib s. e the biologist f completing th hall describe t numbers and ECIFICATI ON and INF ENVIRONMENT nd salvaging ction activities e person ( s ) c biologist ’ s fish the Work as er .
have the biolo ologist ’ s barri e Work Area .
be removed f or eliminated in 622.4.3 a ng the fish .
red from the W ork Area .
omplete when may leave his d there is no o ble for the ca t shall submit he Work .
the efforts tak d sizes of each IONS FRASTRUC TAL fish from na s or comprom carrying out t rescue repor indicated in ogist at the W er nets or str from the Wor d. nd 622.4.3.1 , Work Area an n deemed by t s/her barrier n other suitable re of the nets a written sum ken to isolate h fish species CTURE atural waterco mised habitat the fish rescu rt within one w the Contrac Work Area at t ructures as di rk Area as req , stream flow nd promptly p he biologist .
nets in place i e option to pre s and for repla mmary of the the Work Are salvaged and ourses and/or conditions po ue will be kno week of rece ct Documents the time of an rected by the quired so tha may be cut o placed alive in if he/she deem event fish from acement or re results to the ea , the specie d relocated .
ITEM : 622 Page 622-1 r temporary ose a risk of own as the iving it from s and/or as ny in-stream e biologist to at cover that off from the n permanent ms that fish m returning .
epair of any e Contractor es captured , FIS Pag 622 622 SH RESCUE ge 622-2 2.5 MEASU .1 The acco 2.6 BASIS O .1 Pay .2 Pay Con Eng D REMENT FO Quantity to ordance with t OF PAYMENT ment for Work ment will no nstruction for e ineer under a DEPARTME OR PAYMENT be measured this Item .
T k under this Ite t be made f each Culvert n alternative s STA ENT of TRA ENVIRONM T d for paymen em shall be at for fish rescu installation a sequence .
ANDARD S ANSPORTA ENTAL nt shall be the t the Unit Pric ues other tha s shown on t SPECIFICA ATION and e number of ce .
an those ide the Plans , or ATIONS d INFRAST fish rescues ntified in the r those pre-ap TRUCTURE ITEM : 62 January , 20 carried out e Sequence pproved by th E 22 15 in of he DEPA CULV Janua 623.1 623.2 623.3 623.4 623.5 623.6 ARTMENT ERT EROSIO ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite riprap f MATERIAL .1 All mate .2 Geotex .3 Random SUBMITTA .1 Submitt CONSTRU .1 The Co specific .2 The Wo .3 The Co excavat height , .1 Sta of t .2 Sta of t .4 After sh includin the Culv .5 The Co Standa MEASURE .1 The Qu accorda BASIS OF .1 Paymen STAN of TRANS ON PROTECT TION em consists o for erosion pro S erials shall be xtile shall be T m riprap shall ALS tals are requir CTION ontractor sha cally directed b ork shall be pe ontractor shall te and shape slope and wid andard Drawin the riprap is th andard Drawin the riprap is 2 : haping per 62 ng the faces o vert perimeter ontractor shall rd Drawing 62 MENT FOR P uantity to be ance with this PAYMENT nt for Work un NDARD SP PORTATIO TION of the excava otection of the e supplied by Type N2 meet l be Type R-2 red in accorda all carry out t by the Engine erformed befo excavate and the excess ba dth specified in ng 623-1 appli he same as , a ng 623-2 appli :1 with the end 23.4.3 , the Co of the sides of r. carefully plac 23-2 , in the ou PAYMENT measured fo Item .
nder this Item ECIFICATI ON and INF ENVIRONMENT ation for , and e ends of con the Contracto ting the requi 25 meeting the ance with any the Work as er .
ore stream flow d shape the e ackfill and Ro n Standard Dr ies where the nd flush with , ies where the d of the pipe r ntractor shall f the excavati ce riprap in ac utlet pool .
or payment s shall be at the IONS FRASTRUC TAL supply and ncrete Culvert or .
rements of 60 e requiremen cross-referen indicated in w is diverted in existing ground oadbed emban rawings 623-1 Roadbed fore the Roadbed Roadbed fore recessed into place geotex ion .
The geot ccordance with shall be the n e Unit Price .
CTURE installation o ts .
01.2. nts of 608.2. nced Item form the Contrac nto the culvert d beyond eac nkment mater 1 and/or 623-2 reslope is 3:1 slope .
eslope is flatte the Roadbed xtile per 601.4 textile shall be h 608.4 on the number of C of geotextile a ming part of th ct Documents t. ch end of the C rials from the 2. or steeper , an er than 3:1 , an slope .
4 on the prepa e cut to fit clo e prepared slo Culvert ends p ITEM : 623 Page 623-1 and random is Item .
s and/or as Culvert , and invert to the nd the slope nd the slope ared slopes , sely around ope , and for protected in DEPA SOIL R Janua 630.1 630.2 630.3 630.4 ARTMENT REINFORCE ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite MATERIAL .1 All mate .2 Soil rei .1 So .3 Soil rei SUBMITTA .1 The Co product .2 The Co instruct .3 The Co supplie recomm .4 Submitt CONSTRU .1 The Co specific .2 The ma .1 Ge .2 Ge as .3 The con .4 Equ 150 .5 The ma of t STAN of TRANS MENT TION em consists o S erials shall be nforcement s oil reinforceme nforcement s ALS ontractor shall t specifications ontractor shall ions for handl ontractor sha r to ensure mended by the tals are requir CTION ontractor sha cally directed b anufacturer ’ s i ogrid shall be ogrid materia recommended e Contractor nstruction as r uipment shall 0 mm of cover e Contractor anufacturer ’ s r the intact geog NDARD SP PORTATIO f the supply a e supplied by hall be geogr ent shall be a hall be Tensa submit , at lea s and a mill ce l submit , befo ing and recom ll , upon requ that Work A e manufacture red in accorda all carry out t by the Engine nstallation pro oriented such l shall be tens d by the manu shall ensure recommended not travel ov r , which shall r shall imme recommendat grid and shall ECIFICATI ON and INF ENVIRONMENT and installatio the Contracto rid manufactu a biaxial geog ar BX1100 or ast 14 Days in ertificate for th ore incorporat mmended proc est , make av Area prepara er .
ance with any the Work as er .
ocedures shal h that the roll l sioned by han ufacturer .
e that geogr d by the manu ver unprotecte be placed the ediately repa ions .
All repa be subject to IONS FRASTRUC TAL on of geogrid s or .
ured from a po rid .
Titan 1515 , o n advance of t he geogrid to b ting the mate cedures for in vailable at th ation and geo cross-referen indicated in l be observed length runs pa nd .
Overlaps a rid sections d ufacturer .
ed geogrid or e same Day as air damaged aired sections the approval CTURE soil reinforcem olypropylene or an approve the Work , the be supplied .
erial into the W nstalling the se he Work Site ogrid installa nced Item form the Contrac d along with th arallel to the R and securing o do not sepa over backfille s geogrid plac d geogrid in shall meet th of the Engine ment .
polymer .
ed equivalent name of the s Work , the ma elected geogri a representa tion procedu ming part of th ct Documents he following : Roadway cent of outside edg arate at over ed geogrid wit cement .
n accordance he performanc er .
ITEM : 630 Page 630-1 . supplier , the anufacturer ’ s id .
ative of the res are as is Item .
s and/or as terline .
ges shall be rlaps during th less than e with the ce standard SO Pag 630 630 OIL REINFOR ge 630-2 0.5 MEASU .1 The reinf .2 Ove 0.6 BASIS O .1 Pay CEMENT REMENT FO Quantity to b forcement sup erlapped joints OF PAYMENT ment for Work DEPARTM OR PAYMENT be measured pplied and ins s , patches and T k under this Ite STA MENT of TR ENVIRONM T for payment talled in accor d seams shall em shall be at ANDARD S RANSPORT ENTAL shall be the rdance with th be measured t the Unit Pric SPECIFICA TATION an number of sq his Item .
d as a single la ce .
ATIONS nd INFRAS quare metres ayer of soil rei TRUCTUR ITEM : 63 January , 20 of geogrid so nforcement .
RE 30 15 oil STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS DEPARTMENT of TRANSPORTATION and INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARD DRAWINGS ITEM : 699 Sediment Control Fence January , 2015 ENVIRONMENTAL Standard Drawing 602-1 STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS DEPARTMENT of TRANSPORTATION and INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARD DRAWINGS ITEM : 699 Jute Mat Details January , 2015 ENVIRONMENTAL Standard Drawing 604-1 U-SHAPED STEEL WIRE No.11 GAUGE OR HEAVIER 25 150 * FORESLOPE VARIES BACKSLOPE VARIES 1000 MINIMUM OF 250mm OVERLAP STAPLE DETAIL * NOTE 200mm LONG FOR LOOSE OR SANDY SOILS NOTES 1 .
ALWAYS USE THREE STRIPS OF JUTE MATS 2 .
JUTE MATS ARE TO BE INSTALLED LONGITUDINALLY IN THE DITCH 3 .
LAY FIRST STRIP IN DITCH BOTTOM STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS DEPARTMENT of TRANSPORTATION and INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARD DRAWINGS ITEM : 699 Type A - Spillway Structure for Sediment Pond January , 2015 ENVIRONMENTAL Standard Drawing 605-1 STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS DEPARTMENT of TRANSPORTATION and INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARD DRAWINGS ITEM : 699 Type A - Spillway Structure Details January , 2015 ENVIRONMENTAL Standard Drawing 605-2 STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS DEPARTMENT of TRANSPORTATION and INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARD DRAWINGS ITEM : 699 Type B - Erosion Control Structure for Ditches January , 2015 ENVIRONMENTAL Standard Drawing 605-3 MAY VARY WITH SOIL CONDITIONS AS DIRECTED BY THE ENGINEER ALL RIPRAP SHOWN IS R-5 SIZE FLOW VARIES VARIES FORESLOPE VARIES 2:1 SEDIMENT PIT ( COMMON ONLY ) BACKSLOPE VARIES VARIES 1.5:1 2:1 GEOTEXTILE UNDER RIPRAP DEPTH , WIDTH AND SIDE SLOPES OF SEDIMENT PIT NOTES : 1 .
2 .
A A C C B B VARIES SECTION DETAILS ON STANDARD DRAWING 605-4 TYPE N1 1.5:1 VARIES SEE SECTION B-B File : 605-3 STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS DEPARTMENT of TRANSPORTATION and INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARD DRAWINGS ITEM : 699 Type B - Erosion Control Structure Details January , 2015 ENVIRONMENTAL Standard Drawing 605-4 RANDOM RIPRAP R-5 GEOTEXTILE SECTION A-A VARIES 1 1 VARIES 600mm FOR 2 1 2 1 FLOW GEOTEXTILE GEOTEXTILE RANDOM RIPRAP R-5 SECTION B-B 2 1 1 1.5 SECTION C-C SEDIMENT PIT 1 VARIES VARIES 1 1 1.5 ( COMMON ONLY ) SUBGRADE SUBGRADE STANDARD DITCH VARIES 300 600 1000 2100 ( * H=300 ) 4000 ( COMMON ONLY ) 300 150 VARIES VARIES VARIES 150 150 ( INCREASE TO 900mm FOR DITCHES 900mm OR MORE BELOW SUBGRADE ) DITCH DEPTH OF 600mm OR 600mm FOR DITCHES 900mm OR MORE BELOW SUBGRADE H PLAN/SECTION LINES ON STANDARD DRAWING 605-3 File : 605-4 * H * H = 300mm FOR STANDARD 3300 ( * H=600 ) STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS DEPARTMENT of TRANSPORTATION and INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARD DRAWINGS ITEM : 699 Type C - Erosion Control Structure for Ditches January , 2015 ENVIRONMENTAL Standard Drawing 605-5 STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS DEPARTMENT of TRANSPORTATION and INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARD DRAWINGS ITEM : 699 Type C - Erosion Control Structure Details January , 2015 ENVIRONMENTAL Standard Drawing 605-6 GEOTEXTILE SECTION B-B SECTION A-A SEDIMENT PIT 2 1 RANDOM RIPRAP R-5 1 1.5 SECTION C-C 1 VARIES VARIES 1 1 1.5 ( COMMON ONLY ) SUBGRADE VARIES 1 1 VARIES SUBGRADE 600 FOR STANDARD DITCH * FILL 2 1 ( COMMON ONLY ) FLOW GEOTEXTILE 300mm MINIMUM IN GROUND 100mm EMBEDMENT 2 STAKES PER BALE OF BALES * MAY BE DEEPER 150 MINIMUM VARIES 300 4000 300 500 450 1000 150 VARIES 350 VARIES VARIES PLAN / SECTION LINES ON STANDARD DRAWING 605-5 COMMON FULL WIDTH 450 File : 605-6 STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS DEPARTMENT of TRANSPORTATION and INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARD DRAWINGS ITEM : 699 Type D - Erosion Control Structure for Ditches January , 2015 ENVIRONMENTAL Standard Drawing 605-7 STAKES ( 50 x 50 x 900 min . )
DIRECTION OF FLOW SHOULDER BACKSLOPE 0.15m IN SILTY SOIL 0.10m TYPICAL STRAW BALES 450 TYP .
UPGRADE BALES SECTION A-A A A DITCH BOTTOM H 300 NOTES : 4 ) THE SEDIMENT PIT OF STANDARD DWGS 605-5 AND 605-6 IS REQUIRED FOR TYPE ’ D ’ STRUCTURE .
Note 2 Note 4 3 ) IF TRENCH FOR BALE EMBEDMENT IS EXCAVATED WIDER THAN BALES , BACKFILL WITH EXCAVATED MATERIAL .
FORESLOPE/ BACKSLOPE 6:1 / 3:1 4:1 / 3:1 3:1 / 3:1 3:1 / 2:1 2:1 / 2:1 5 4 3 3 2 File : 605-7 ( 900x450x350 TYP . )
FORESLOPE VARIES ( 4:1 SHOWN ) EMBEDMENT ( Note 3 ) WIDE SWALES AS REQ ’ D NUMBER OF BALES VARIES WITH SLOPES ( Note 1 ) No .
OF BALES 2 2 3 3 3 HEIGHT ’ H ’ ( FROM TOP OF BALES AT DITCH CENTRE TO POINT WHERE HIGHEST BALES INTERCEPT SLOPES . )
1 ) SEE TABLE FOR TYPICAL NUMBER OF UPSTREAM BALES WHICH ARE REQUIRED TO ENSURE MIN .
300mm FOR FS BS 2 ) INSTALL MINIMUM OF 3 BALES DOWNGRADE AS REINFORCEMENT .
JOINTS OF DOWNGRADE BALES SHOULD BE STAGGERED FROM UPSTREAM BALES .
STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS DEPARTMENT of TRANSPORTATION and INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARD DRAWINGS ITEM : 699 Gabion Backfilling Details January , 2015 ENVIRONMENTAL Standard Drawing 607-1 STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS DEPARTMENT of TRANSPORTATION and INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARD DRAWINGS ITEM : 699 Rock Weir Details January , 2015 ENVIRONMENTAL Standard Drawing 609-1 2 1 2 1 1 1 1 1 TOP OF SLOPE 2:1 2:1 SECTION A-A N.T.S .
STREAM BED OF RE-ALIGNED CHANNEL R-50 RANDOM RIPRAP MIXED | STREAM B B EXISTING GROUND LOWEST POINT OF ROCK WEIR R-50 RANDOM RIPRAP MIXED | STREAM LOWEST POINT OF ROCK WEIR | ROCK WEIR PLAN VARIES SECTION B-B N.T.S .
R-50 RANDOM RIPRAP MIXED STREAM BED MATERIAL ROCK WEIR ROCK 30^ STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS DEPARTMENT of TRANSPORTATION and INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARD DRAWINGS ITEM : 699 Armour Stone Protection System Details January , 2015 ENVIRONMENTAL Standard Drawing 610-1 STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS DEPARTMENT of TRANSPORTATION and INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARD DRAWINGS ITEM : 699 Root Wad Detail in Pool January , 2015 ENVIRONMENTAL Standard Drawing 617-1 15M REBAR HEADER LOG FOOTER LOG 5.0 m\ LONG ROOT WAD TRUNK ( SIZED FOR SITE CONDITIONS ) RANDOM RIPRAP MIXED 1 10 1 2 | POOL OUTLET File : 617-1 STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS DEPARTMENT of TRANSPORTATION and INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARD DRAWINGS ITEM : 699 Temporary Working Pad January , 2015 ENVIRONMENTAL Standard Drawing 621-1 MIN .
600m m 1000mm 450m m ORANGE PERIMETER FENCE SEDIMENT CONTROL FENCE 600mm OVERLAPS BIAXIAL GEOGRID MIN .
MIN .
600mm OVERLAPS GEOTEXTILE TYPE W2 MIN .
600mm OF 75mm SUBBASE File : 621-1 300mm STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS DEPARTMENT of TRANSPORTATION and INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARD DRAWINGS ITEM : 699 End Treatment for Culverts ≤ 1500mm ID - Roadway Foreslope 3:1 or Steeper January , 2015 ENVIRONMENTAL Standard Drawing 623-1 2 D 0.6m EMBANKMENT FORESLOPE ( 3:1 OR STEEPER ) EXISTING GROUND TO AND MATCHING INTO ROADWAY EMBANKMENT FORESLOPE .
TO ALLOW FOR 0.5m THICKNESS OF RIPRAP R-25 PARALLEL EXCAVATE BACKFILL , EMBANKMENT AND EXISTING GROUND TYPE N2 GEOTEXTILE * * CULVERT OUTLET FEATURES DETAILS OF CULVERT AFTER PLACEMENT OF RIPRAP R-25 ON SLOPE END VIEW PLAN VIEW 0.6m 3m 3m AT EXISTING GROUND EMBANKMENT TOE OF SLOPE D * * VARIES PER TABLE BELOW POOL ( OUTLET ONLY ) DEPTH EMBANKMENT FORESLOPE ( 3:1 OR STEEPER ) TO AND MATCHING INTO ROADWAY EMBANKMENT FORESLOPE .
TO ALLOW FOR 0.5m THICKNESS OF RIPRAP R-25 PARALLEL EXCAVATE BACKFILL , EMBANKMENT AND EXISTING GROUND TYPE N2 GEOTEXTILE ABOVE TOP OF PIPE 0.6m OF BACKFILL INLET OF PIPE EXISTING GROUND * * PER TABLE BELOW EXISTING GROUND VARIES DEPTH OF INVERT BELOW BELOW PIPE 0.2m ( NOM . )
BEDDING 1m D * * D = OUTSIDE DIAMETER POOL 2 D ( NO LESS THAN 1.5 ) * * * POOL SLOPES VARIES OUTLET OF PIPE ( PIPE + OFFTAKE ) SUM OF SLOPES BELOW EXISTING GROUND MIN .
DEPTH OF INVERT BELOW PIPE INVERT MIN .
DEPTH OF POOL 0 - 3 % > 3 - 6 % > 10 % > 6 - 10 % 0.1m 0.0m 0.2m 0.0m 0.3m 0.3m 0.2m 0.3m File : 623-1 STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS DEPARTMENT of TRANSPORTATION and INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARD DRAWINGS ITEM : 699 End Treatment for Culverts ≤ 1500mm ID - Roadway Foreslope Flatter Than 3:1 January , 2015 ENVIRONMENTAL Standard Drawing 623-2 2 D 0.6m EXISTING GROUND TYPE N2 GEOTEXTILE * * CULVERT OUTLET FEATURES * * VARIES PER TABLE BELOW POOL ( OUTLET ONLY ) DEPTH EMBANKMENT FORESLOPE ( FLATTER THAN 3:1 ) AT TOP OF PIPE BACKFILL .
PIPE INVERT TO INTERCEPT ROADWAY EMBANKMENT FORESLOPE TO ALLOW FOR 0.5m THICKNESS OF RIPRAP R-25 AT 2:1 FROM EXCAVATE BACKFILL , EMBANKMENT AND EXISTING GROUND 0.5m DETAILS OF CULVERT AFTER PLACEMENT OF RIPRAP R-25 TO AND MATCHING INTO ROADWAY EMBANKMENT FORESLOPE .
TO ALLOW FOR 0.5m THICKNESS OF RIPRAP R-25 PARALLEL EXCAVATE BACKFILL , EMBANKMENT AND EXISTING GROUND TYPE N2 GEOTEXTILE ABOVE TOP OF PIPE 0.6m OF BACKFILL INLET OF PIPE EXISTING GROUND * * PER TABLE BELOW EXISTING GROUND VARIES DEPTH OF INVERT BELOW BELOW PIPE 0.2m ( NOM . )
BEDDING 1m D * * D = OUTSIDE DIAMETER END VIEW PLAN VIEW 0.6m 3m 3m AT EXISTING GROUND EMBANKMENT TOE OF SLOPE D POOL 2 D ( NO LESS THAN 1.5 ) * * * POOL SLOPES VARIES OUTLET OF PIPE ( PIPE + OFFTAKE ) SUM OF SLOPES BELOW EXISTING GROUND MIN .
DEPTH OF INVERT BELOW PIPE INVERT MIN .
DEPTH OF POOL 0 - 3 % > 3 - 6 % > 10 % > 6 - 10 % 0.1m 0.0m 0.2m 0.0m 0.3m 0.3m 0.2m 0.3m File : 623-2 DEPA TABLE Janua IT 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 ARTMENT E OF CONTE ary , 2015 TEM 801 H 802 H 806 O 807 O 808 O 810 F 811 F 812 E 820 P 821 A 825 M STAN of TRANS ENTS Haulage -Soil , Haulage - Asp Overhaul - Co Overhaul - Un Overhaul - So Fixed Rates .. Force Accoun Extra Work ... Payment Adju Adjustment fo Mobilization ... NDARD SP PORTATIO PAYM DESCR , Rock and Ag phalt Concrete ommon Excav nclassified Exc lid Rock Exca ..................... t ................... ..................... ustments ....... r Asphalt Bind ..................... ECIFICATI ON and INF ENTS & ADJUS RIPTION ggregate ....... e .................. vation ........... cavation ....... avation ......... ..................... ..................... ..................... .................... der Price ....... .................... IONS FRASTRUC STMENTS .................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... CTURE NUMBE PAGE ... 1 ... 1 .... 1 ... 1 ... 1 ... 1 .. 1 .. 5 ... 1 .. 1 ... 1 DI R OF ES VISION 800 Page 800-1 DEPA HAULA Janua 801.1 801.2 801.3 ARTMENT AGE - SOIL , ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 Haulag identifie .1 Cu http APPLICAT .1 The pro Item or .1 If n Co .2 Where paymen .3 Where pay the .1 If th the .4 Extra h along t placem PRIVATE T .1 Notwith haulage under I .2 Revisio date of .1 An sh .2 A STAN of TRANS ROCK AND TION e rates for t ed in Table 80 rrent haulage p : //www.gnb.c ION ovision for pa in the Contra no specific re ntract Docum the Contracto nt for haulage the Owner pr e Contractor t he Owner rev e Contractor th aulage to and he most direc ment of the ma TRUCKS hstanding 80 e rates not le tem 932. ons made to h the revision r n adjustment hall pay the re 5 % mark-up w NDARD SP PORTATIO AGGREGAT PAYM the haulage 01-1 on a ton e rates , includ ca/0113/haula ayment of hau act Document eference to t ments then the or is required e and no mark rovides for pa he haulage ra vises the haul he revised rat d from the we ct route perm aterial at the W 1.1 and 801 ess than the h haulage rates result in the fo shall be mad evised rates to will be applied ECIFICATI ON and INF TE ENTS & ADJUS of specified ne-kilometre ding Table 80 age/haulage- ulage on any ts .
the provision e haulage sha d to include h k-up on haula ayment of the ates as set ou lage rates du tes plus the 5 eigh scale loca missible by law Work Site .
.2 , the Contr haulage rates s by the Own ollowing : e to cover the o the owners d only to the a IONS FRASTRUC STMENTS soil , rock an basis .
1-1 , are avail rates-current- Item shall be n of payment all be included haulage of ma age shall be m e haulage of m ut in Table 80 ring the term 5 % mark-up fr ation shall no w between th ractor shall p s as set out in ner , during the e increase or of Private Tru amount of the CTURE nd aggregate lable from the -year-e.asp e specifically t is made un d in the Unit P aterials in the made by the O materials in th 01-1 plus a 5 % of the Contra rom the date ot be paid whe e material so pay to the o n Table 801-1 e term of the decrease in ucks .
e increase or e materials s e following we and clearly s nder the Item Price for the I e Unit Price , n Owner to the he Item , the O % mark-up .
act , the Owne of the revisio en the weigh ource and the owner of Priv 1 for material Contract , sh rates and the decrease in r ITEM : 801 Page 801-1 shall be as eb address : stated in the m or in the tem .
no separate Contractor .
Owner shall er shall pay n. scale is not e location of vate Trucks ls governed all from the e Contractor rates .
DEPA HAULA Janua 802.1 ARTMENT AGE - ASPH ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 Haulag kilomet .1 Cu http .2 Revisio date of .1 An sh .2 A STAN of TRANS HALT CONCR TION e rates in Ta tre basis .
rrent haulage p : //www.gnb.c ons made to h the revision r n adjustment hall pay the re 5 % mark-up w NDARD SP PORTATIO RETE PAYM able 802-1 ar e rates , includ ca/0113/haula haulage rates result in the fo shall be mad evised rates to will be applied ECIFICATI ON and INF ENTS & ADJUS re applicable , ding Table 80 age/haulage- s by the Own ollowing : e to cover the o the owners d only to the a IONS FRASTRUC STMENTS for the haula 2-1 , are avail rates-current- ner , during the e increase or of Private Tru amount of the CTURE age of aspha lable from the -year-e.asp e term of the decrease in ucks .
e increase or alt concrete , o e following we Contract , sh rates and the decrease in r ITEM : 802 Page 802-1 on a tonne- eb address : all from the e Contractor rates .
DEPA OVER Janua 806.1 ARTMENT RHAUL - COM ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 Overha set out .1 Cu http .2 The ov its origi .3 If the o pay the STAN of TRANS MMON EXCAV TION aul rates , whe in Table 806- rrent overhau p : //www.gnb.c erhaul rates nal position ; verhaul rates e Contractor t NDARD SP PORTATIO VATION PAYM en required u -1. ul rates , includ ca/0113/haula are paid for t i.e .
bank mea s are revised he revised ov ECIFICATI ON and INF ENTS & ADJUS nder an Item ding Table 80 age/haulage- the volume in asure , and ha by the Owne verhaul rates IONS FRASTRUC STMENTS m , shall be pa 06-1 , are avai rates-current- n cubic metre auled more tha er during the t from the date CTURE id to the Con lable from the -year-e.asp es of excavate an 300 metre term of the C e of the revisio ntractor by the e following we ed material m es .
Contract , the O on .
ITEM : 806 Page 806-1 e Owner as eb address : measured in Owner shall DEPA OVER Janua 807.1 ARTMENT RHAUL - UNC ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 Overha set out .1 Cu http .2 The ov its origi .3 If the o pay the STAN of TRANS CLASSIFIED E TION aul rates , whe in Table 807- rrent overhau p : //www.gnb.c erhaul rates nal position ; verhaul rates e Contractor t NDARD SP PORTATIO EXCAVATIO PAYM en required u -1. ul rates , includ ca/0113/haula are paid for t i.e .
bank mea s are revised he revised ov ECIFICATI ON and INF N ENTS & ADJUS nder an Item ding Table 80 age/haulage- the volume in asure , and ha by the Owne verhaul rates IONS FRASTRUC STMENTS m , shall be pa 07-1 , are avai rates-current- n cubic metre auled more tha er during the t from the date CTURE id to the Con lable from the -year-e.asp es of excavate an 300 metre term of the C e of the revisio ntractor by the e following we ed material m es .
Contract , the O on .
ITEM : 807 Page 807-1 e Owner as eb address : measured in Owner shall DEPA OVER Janua 808.1 ARTMENT RHAUL - SOL ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 Overha set out .1 Cu http .2 The ov its origi .3 If the o pay the STAN of TRANS ID ROCK EX TION aul rates , whe in Table 808- rrent overhau p : //www.gnb.c erhaul rates nal position ; verhaul rates e Contractor t NDARD SP PORTATIO XCAVATION PAYM en required u -1. ul rates , includ ca/0113/haula are paid for t i.e .
bank mea s are revised he revised ov ECIFICATI ON and INF ENTS & ADJUS nder an Item ding Table 80 age/haulage- the volume in asure , and ha by the Owne verhaul rates IONS FRASTRUC STMENTS m , shall be pa 08-1 , are avai rates-current- n cubic metre auled more tha er during the t from the date CTURE id to the Con lable from the -year-e.asp es of excavate an 300 metre term of the C e of the revisio ntractor by the e following we ed material m es .
Contract , the O on .
ITEM : 808 Page 808-1 e Owner as eb address : measured in Owner shall DEPA FIXED Janua 810.1 810.2 R 810.2 ARTMENT D RATES ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 Fixed r task .
.2 The rat added t .3 Fixed ra TERMS an .1 The rat Item Reference 260 261 S 260 P 260 A a C 261 A 261 P D A A T A 262 263 P 311 S NOTE : 1 2 .2 The Fix .1 Tim Fre all p STAN of TRANS TION ates shall app tes shall be to the fixed ra ates shall onl d CONDITIO tes as set out Smoothness Payment of A Anti-stripping admixture add Cement ( See Approval of 2 Payment of A Density Asphalt Conte Asphalt Conte Thickness Air Voids Portland Cem Steel H Pile S . If a tender made at th and is actu 2 .
The tende stabilizer .
Formula a the Contra xed Rate shall me required fo edericton or th profiling Work NDARD SP PORTATIO PAYM ply for Work p in accordanc ates units .
y be applied w NS in Table 810 Descript Retesting Appeal Testing Admixtures - dition per ton Note 1 ) nd and Subse Appeal Testing ent ent and Grada ment ( See Not Splices red Quantity i he fixed rate o ually incorpor ered Quantity Payment will and is actually act .
include all tim or retesting sh e site of origin k required to te ECIFICATI ON and INF ENTS & ADJUS performed in ce with Table with the appr 0-1 shall apply Table Fixed tion g Costs ( Dens - based on tot ne of Actual A equent Mix De g Costs ation te 2 ) s included for only if the adm rated into the for this Item i be made at t y incorporated me and Equipm hall include all n for the crew est the Work .
IONS FRASTRUC STMENTS the Contract e 810-1 and roval of the En y to the admin 810-1 Rates sity ) tal Asphalt A esign ( s ) p r an anti-strip mixture is req asphalt conc is for the add the Fixed Rat d into the recl ment required l travel time , i w whichever is CTURE for which the no overhead ngineer .
nistration of fi Unit per hour see 810.2.2 per core per tonne of Actual Aspha Binder per mix desig lump sum per tonne per splice pping admixtu quired for the crete placed o ition of Portla te only if adde laimed/recycl d to complete t including retu the least amo ere is a define ds or mark-u xed rate Wor Fixe $ 1 $ 4 f alt $ 2 gn DTI S Labora $ 5 $ 4 $ 5 $ 2 $ 5 $ 3 $ 8 re , payment w Design Mix F on the Contra and Cement a ed in the Des ed material p the retesting .
urn , from the D ount , all stand ITEM : 810 Page 810-1 ed and finite ps shall be rk .
ed Rate 100.00 40.00 25.00 Standard atory Rate 500.00 400.00 500.00 200.00 500.00 300.00 800.00 will be Formula ct. as a ign Mix placed on DTI office in dby time and DEPA FORC Janua 811.1 811.2 ARTMENT E ACCOUNT ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 Force A but for .2 The Fo under a .1 The GC und .2 If th agr suc TERMS an .1 The ter Accoun STAN of TRANS T TION Account is de which there is orce Account a provisional s e Contractor C 44 , a Lump der Force Acc he Contractor ree on a pric ch Work activ d CONDITIO rms and con nt Work .
NDARD SP PORTATIO PAYM efined as fore s not a Lump Work shall b sum .
may submit Sum or Unit count .
r chooses not e for the Wo ity and the W NS nditions as se ECIFICATI ON and INF ENTS & ADJUS eseen Work th Sum or Unit be defined in in writing , for Price for eac t to submit a p ork , the Engin Work shall be p et out in Item IONS FRASTRUC STMENTS hat is necess Price in the C the Contract r the Enginee ch or any num price , or if the neer shall pre performed as m 812 shall a CTURE sary to be pe Contract .
Documents er ’ s approval mber of the W e Engineer an epare a writte cost plus in a apply to the rformed on th and shall be and in accor Work activities nd the Contra en Work Ord accordance w administratio ITEM : 811 Page 811-1 he Contract carried out rdance with s described actor can not er for each with GC 45. on of Force DEP EXTR Janua 812.1 812.2 812.3 812.3 ARTMENT RA WORK ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 Extra W there i .2 Forese .3 Unfore .1 W the pe .4 The p Forese 2 CLARIFIC .1 The fo sum o .1 Ex Pr .2 Th pla req .3 If su as 3 CLARIFIC .1 Clarific 45 .
3 .2 Work O .1 Ex Ow Co .2 Th an .1 STAN T of TRANS TION Work is defin s not a lump een Work - Fo eseen Extra W here the dete e Engineer a erformed as c hrase “ Extra een Work ( Ite ATIONS OF G ollowing clarif r in-place Uni xtra Work pro rice basis sha he Contractor ace Unit Pric quired and no the price su ubcontractor ( s per 812.2.1 .
ATIONS OF G cations are m Orders xtra Work mus wner shall no ontractor .
he Work Orde nd materials a This estima invoices for NDARD SP SPORTATIO PAYM ed as Work t sum or Unit B orce Account Work is Work ermination of t nd the Contra ost plus in ac Work ” and em 811 ) and U GC 44 fications are it Price under oposed to be all require app r ’ s invoice for ce times the o mark-up is a ubmitted for as per 812.3 .
2 .
GC 45 made for the a st be authoriz t pay for any er shall descr anticipated to ate shall be th r that Work O PECIFICAT ON and IN MENTS & ADJUS hat is necess Bid Price in th - is described ordered by th the cost of the actor can not ccordance wit the statemen Unforeseen E made for the r GC 44. performed b proval of such r the Work sh units accepte allowed .
approval is .10 ) , the subc administration zed by the En such Work u ribe the natur be used , and he sole determ Order .
TIONS FRASTRU STMENTS sary to be per he Contract .
d in Item 811 he Engineer u e Extra Work agree on a p th GC 45. nts referring Extra Work .
e administratio by the Contra h price in writi hall show on ed in the Wo s for Work t contractor sha n of Extra Wo ngineer in writ nless a writte re of the Wor d the Enginee mination of th CTURE rformed on th .
under GC 37. k can not be m price under G to it hereina on of Extra W actor on a lum ng , prior to co ly the approv ork ; no detai to be carried all submit an ork performed ting in the for en Work Orde rk to be done er 's estimate o he rate of mar he Contract bu made under G GC 44 , the Wo after shall ap Work perform mp sum or in ommencing th ved lump sum led breakdow d out by an invoice to the d as cost plus rm of a Work er has been is e , the Equipm of the value o rk-up to be ap ITEM : 812 Page 812-1 ut for which C 43 , and if ork shall be pply to both med at lump n-place Unit he Work .
m or the in- wn shall be n approved e Contractor s under GC Order .
The ssued to the ment , labour of the Work .
pplied on all EXT Pag 812 812 TRA WORK ge 812-2 2.3 .3 Rep .1 .2 2.3 .4 Lab .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 D ports The Enginee hours expen Equipment o the end of ea The Enginee information o our The Contrac engaged in employees ’ w .1 The Con approval submitted a change The various l previously su .1 The Con the Extra Overtime acc hours of a ca Work for the to “ total hour .1 The distr hour .
.2 In the ca Work Or entirely to .3 The over of hours hours to .4 Where th distributin A mark-up sh paid by the C .1 The mark over $ 2,5 The number commensura DEPARTM PA er shall record nded and m owner on the ach Day or sh er and Contra on these repo tor shall show the Extra W wages .
ntractor shall , a list of the v d upon award e in any levies levies paid by ubmitted as pe ntractor must a Work Invoice cumulated by alendar week Contractor , s s that week ” .
ributed overtim ase where the rder ( s ) , the o o the Work O rtime distribut worked on t be paid in ea he overtime i ng overtime to hall be added Contractor .
k-up shall be 500 , as estima of hours to b ate with the tim STA ENT of TR AYMENTS & AD d daily , on a “ materials sup Extra Work , hift .
actor shall eac rts shall be co w the Actual Work , plus th submit , to th various levies d of a Contrac s paid or as o y the Contract er 812.3.4.1.1 be prepared es .
y the Contrac k , during whic shall be prora me as calcula e Contractor e overtime work Order ( s ) .
ted to each W that Work Or ach case .
s paid on da o each Work d to the total 20 % if the va ated by the En be paid for th me supervisin ANDARD S RANSPORT JUSTMENTS “ Daily Equipm pplied by the as agreed to ch sign and r onsidered for Basic and O he various le he Administra s paid for his/ ct and shall b otherwise requ tor must be s 1. to substantia ctor ’ s employe ch they have ated in the ra ated in 812.3. extends her/h ked during th Work Order s rder that wee aily rather tha Order shall a of the Actual alue of the W ngineer under he Superinten ng on the Extr SPECIFICA TATION an ment Report ” , e Contractor by the Engin retain a copy r payment by Overtime Rate evies paid b ative Services /her employee be verified ann uested by the hown individu ate wage rate ees within the worked on W atio of “ total h 4.3 shall be r his normal wo hat extended hall be deduc ek to determ an weekly Wo apply , but on a Basic and O Work Order is 812.3.2.2. ndent and/or ra Work .
ATIONS d INFRAST the Equipme r , subcontrac neer and the of these rep the Owner .
es paid for ea by the Contr s Branch of t es .
This list sh nually or whe e Owner .
ually , if differe es and all lev e established Work Order ( s ) ours on each rounded to th ork hours to W d period sha cted from the ine the numb ork hours , the a daily basis .
Overtime wag $ 2,500 or les foreman , sha TRUCTURE ITEM : 8 January , 20 ent and labou ctor or Hired Contractor a ports .
Only the ach individua ractor on the the Owner fo hall initially be enever there is ent from those vies shown on d normal work ) and on othe h Work Order e nearest hal Work solely on ll be charged e total numbe ber of regula e principle fo es plus levies ss , and 15 % all be paid fo E 12 15 ur d at e al e or e s e n k er r ” lf n d er ar or s if or DEP EXTR Janua 812.3 812.3 812.3 ARTMENT RA WORK ary , 2015 3 .5 Board .1 Th for fac .2 Th for su .3 A all .4 Fo all div .5 Fo 3 .6 Materi .1 An be ma .2 A ma 3 .7 Equipm .1 Ra the .1 .2 Th ho Se .1 .2 .3 Tr W Se .1 STAN T of TRANS he Owner sha r the Contrac cilities .
he Owner sha r the Contract upplied by the mark-up , as owances .
or Extra Wor owances not viding the dai or Extra Work als ny materials s e invoiced by ark-up as des copy of the s aterial item su ment ates for Equip e Crown Con Rates for E the Enginee he number of ours worked b ection 2 ( 7 ) of A service a approved ra per Day on The servic normally se ansportation ork shall be p ection 2 ( 8 ) of Travel and/ Work Site t NDARD SP SPORTATIO PAYM all pay board a ctor ’ s personn all pay board a tor ’ s personn Contractor .
described un rk which is ed in 812.3.5 ly rate by 10 k requiring mo upplied for an the Contracto cribed in 812. upplier 's invo ubmitted for p pment shall b struction Con Equipment no er upon applic f hours to be by each mach the Machine allowance of ates for mach Extra Work .
ce allowance erviced daily .
costs of Equ paid if the tim the Machine /or float costs o and from th PECIFICAT ON and IN MENTS & ADJUS allowance to nel working on allowance to el working on nder 812.3.4. completed in 5.1 and 812.3 hours/Day .
ore than 10 ho nd utilized in th or at his/her s 3.4.4.1. oice shall acco payment , inclu be as set out ntracts Act of t listed in the cation , in writ paid for mac hine ( rounded Rental Regu one-half hou hine and oper does not a ipment broug me spent on E Rental Regu s shall be paid he Extra Work TIONS FRASTRU STMENTS the Contracto n Extra Work the Contracto n Extra Work 4 , shall be p n less than 3.5.2 shall be ours per Day , he Extra Wor supplier 's invo ompany the C uding materia in the Machi the Province Machine Re ting , by the C chine and op d to the neare lation .
ur service tim rator , provide apply to truck ght to the Wor Extra Work is lation .
d to transport k area if the E CTURE or , at a daily r k and boarded or , at a daily r and boarded paid on board 10 hours pe paid at an ho , the daily rate rk , at the requ oice price ( ex Contractor 's in als from the C ne Rental Re of New Bruns ntal Regulatio ontractor .
perator shall b est half hour ) me per Day s d the machin ks , floats an rk Site and us 16 hours or t Equipment f Extra Work is rate set by th d in the Cont rate set by th d off site at a d and/or othe er Day , boar ourly rate det e shall apply .
est of the Eng xcluding the H nvoice for eac Contractor ’ s st egulation ( 82- swick .
on will be det be the actual ) and in accor shall be paid e works 6 ho nd other Equ sed exclusive less , in accor from another of 16 hours o ITEM : 812 Page 812-3 e Engineer , ractor 's site e Engineer , location not er approved rd or other termined by gineer , shall HST ) , plus a ch separate tock .
-113 ) under termined by l number of rdance with d at the full urs or more uipment not ely on Extra rdance with area of the or less .
EXT Pag 812 812 812 TRA WORK ge 812-4 2.3.7 .4 .5 2.3 .8 Hire .1 .2 .3 2.3 .9 Priv .1 .2 D Standby time the Work Site .1 Standby Extra Wo The number shall be paid ed Equipment If Extra Work such Equipm hired will be c Rates for Hir is used on Ex .1 The num 812.3.7.2 .2 The rate .1 If the is ful .3 When th used sole .1 Equi daily .2 The solel The Contract substantiated .1 The mar greater th .2 The Con Hired Eq ate Trucks H A 5 % mark-u mark-up shal The Contract property dam DEPARTM PA e shall be paid e specifically time shall no ork was order of hours to b for commens t k requires Eq ment may be classified as ed Equipmen xtra Work .
mber of hours 2. may include e rate include l compensatio e Engineer a ely on Extra W pment which y rate provided Contractor s y on Extra W tor shall invo d invoice plus rk-up shall be han $ 2500 , a ntractor shall uipment .
ired By The H up shall be p ll apply to the tor shall not b mage insuranc STA ENT of TR AYMENTS & AD d at half the a for Extra Wor t be paid for E red .
be paid for ve surate with th uipment the C hired by the Hired Equipm nt shall be est to be paid fo the Equipme es the operato on for the wa authorizes Eq Work , the Equ rents out at d it is utilized hall provide ork , in order t oice the Owne s a mark-up d e 10 % if the s estimated b clearly mark Hour paid on Privat e rate for the t be entitled to ce in relation t ANDARD S RANSPORT JUSTMENTS applicable ren rk .
Equipment th ehicles used e time superv Contractor do Contractor fr ment and not a tablished as p or machine an nt ’ s operator or ’ s cost , the ges ( regular a quipment to b uipment shall a daily rathe solely on Ext proof of the to be reimbur er the total a efined as follo value of the by the Engine on his/her inv te Trucks hir truck and the reimburseme to the Private SPECIFICA TATION an ntal rate for th at was on the by the Super vising on the oes not own o from some ot as a subcontr per 812.3.7 , b nd operator s cost if that wa rate shall be and overtime be rented fro be paid for a er than hourly tra Work .
amount of fu rsed .
mount of the ows : Extra Work eer under 812 voice that the red by the ho operator ’ s wa ent for the cos e Trucks .
ATIONS d INFRAST e Equipment e Work Site a rintendent an Extra Work .
or have at he ther source .
E ractor .
before the Hire shall be in acc as the basis o considered a ) , levies and o om a rental a at the rental ag y rate shall b uel , for Equip e Hired Equip is $ 2500 or 2.3.2.2. e Work was c our to do Ext ages .
st of any publ TRUCTURE ITEM : 8 January , 20 brought onto t the time the nd/or foreman r/his disposal Equipment so ed Equipmen cordance with of hire .
a flat rate tha overhead .
agency , to be gency ’ s rate .
be paid at the pment utilized pment owner ’ s less , or 5 % i carried out by ra Work .
This lic liability and E 12 15 o e n , l , o nt h at e e d s if y s d DEP EXTR Janua 812.3 812.3 812.3 812.3 ARTMENT RA WORK ary , 2015 3 .10 Subco .1 Th 90 .2 Th ma .3 Th su .1 .2 3 .11 Public .1 Th ind .2 Th an .1 3 .12 Invoici .1 Inv be .2 Ea W .3 Ea the su als inv 3 .13 Delays .1 Th ca .2 Th 99 de STAN T of TRANS ontracting he Contractor 07. he subcontrac ark-ups as sp he Contracto ubstantiated in The mark-u greater tha The Contra subcontrac Holidays he Contractor dividuals for P he amount pa ny Workers ’ C No other le ing voices for Ext etween the Co ach invoice sh ork done , and ach Work Ord e Contractor ’ s ubcontractors so attach a co voice submiss s he Contractor arrying out the he Contractor 98 , submit a emonstrated t NDARD SP SPORTATIO PAYM r may have E ctor shall invo pecified in 812 or shall invo nvoice plus a up shall be 1 n $ 2500 , as e actor shall m tor .
r shall be ent Public Holiday aid to the Con Compensation vies shall be tra Work mus ontractor and hall denote th d the invoice der shall be in s invoice .
In or Hired Eq opy of the su sion .
r shall have e Extra Work .
r may , howev request in w that the Extra PECIFICAT ON and IN MENTS & ADJUS xtra Work pe oice the Contr 2.3.4 , 812.3.5 oice the Ow mark-up , as f 0 % if the va estimated by t mark on her/h titled to paym ys which fall w ntractor shall n levy and plu paid to the C st be submitte Engineer .
he Work Orde date .
nvoiced separ the case whe uipment and bcontractor ’ s no claim fo ver , in accord writing for an a Work has d TIONS FRASTRU STMENTS erformed by a ractor for labo 5 , 812.3.6 and wner the tot follows : alue of the Ex the Engineer his invoice th ment on Extra within the time be the Actua us a mark-up a Contractor .
ed on a mont er number , th rately .
A copy ere all or a po invoiced to or Hired Equ r hindrances dance with GC adjustment delayed com CTURE a subcontracto our , board , m d 812.3.7. tal amount xtra Work is under 812.3. hat the Work a Work for w e period of th al Basic Rate as per 812.3. thly basis unl he location , de y of the Work ortion of the the Contract uipment invoi s or delays t C 15 ( 1 ) and to the Comp pletion of his or approved materials , Equ of the sub $ 2500 or les .2.2. k was carried wage costs ex he Extra Work paid the indi 4. ess otherwise escription and k Order shall Work was pe tor , the Cont ce ( s ) to the C that may be in accordanc pletion Date s/her normal ITEM : 812 Page 812-5 as per Item uipment and contractor 's ss , or 5 % if d out by a xpended on k. vidual , plus e agreed to d date ( s ) of accompany erformed by tractor shall Contractor ’ s caused by ce with Item if it can be operations .
DEPA PAYM Janua 820.1 ARTMENT MENT ADJUS ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 Payme allowed .2 Some P Provisio determ .1 Suc Item .3 Some Contrac the Wo .1 Suc .4 Other specific Item 26 STAN of TRANS TMENTS TION nt Adjustmen d for Work ca Payment Adju onal Sum pr ine whether t ch Payment m 261 .
Payment Adj ct Documents ork .
ch a Paymen Payment Adj cally required 60 .
NDARD SP PORTATIO PAYM nts are amoun rried out unde ustments may rovided .
The he Payment A Adjustments justments ma s , to be paid t Adjustment justments ma but allowed ECIFICATI ON and INF ENTS & ADJUS nts added to o er other Items y be identified quality of th Adjustment w may be for ay be added as a plus or may be for A ay be added for and prov IONS FRASTRUC STMENTS or deducted f s. d in the Contr he Work per will be paid as Mat Density d to the Con minus adjust Asphalt Binder d to the Con vided , such a CTURE from payment ract Documen rformed unde s a bonus or d and Smooth ntract for Wo tment based r Content und ntract for spe as a Material ts due the Co nts under an er the specif deducted as a ness under I ork not ident on quality or der Item 260 o ecialized Equ Transfer Ve ITEM : 820 Page 820-1 ontractor , as Item , with a fic Item will a penalty .
tem 260 or tified in the r quantity of or 261. uipment not ehicle under DEPA ADJUS Janua 821.1 ARTMENT STMENT FO ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 Compe betwee be calc .1 The Doc pub .2 The asp pay .3 The sha by Con pay .4 The dur .5 The PA T= P= Q= Wh PA Wh PA .6 The Co bin and me .1 STAN of TRANS R ASPHALT TION nsation payab n the time of t ulated in acco e Owner shal cument base blished month e price index phalt binder g yment adjustm e payment adj all be establish more than 5 % ntract were o yment adjustm e payment ad ring the month e payment adj = Payment Ad PG asphalt b PG asphalt b Quantity of A hen P > 1.05T , = ( P-1.05T ) xQ hen P < 0.95T , A= ( 0.95T-P ) xQ e quantity of ntractor .
For der shall be d its corres easurements .
For emulsifi quantity of li asphalt and NDARD SP PORTATIO BINDER PR PAYM ble to the Con tender openin ordance with th l adjust paym d on change hly and is avail is based on grade PG 58 ment for all gra justment shal hed for each m % for the pric opened .
When ment establish djustment sha h for which it is justment for th djustment for inder price ind binder price ind Asphalt Binder the Contracto Q the Owner de Q asphalt bind each month calculated us ponding asp ed asphalt e itres shall be the specific g ECIFICATI ON and INF RICE ENTS & ADJUS ntractor or the g for the Cont he following : ments to the C s to MTO 's P lable on the O the price ( exc 8-28 .
One ind ades .
l be in dollars month of pavi ce index for th n the price in ed for that mo ll apply to the s established .
he month sha asphalt binde dex for month dex for month r in tonnes or receives add educts from p er is the tota in which a p sing the tonn phalt binder ach month in converted int gravity of the IONS FRASTRUC STMENTS Owner , for th tract and the t Contractor und PG asphalt b OHMPA websi xcluding taxes dex shall be per tonne of a ng/surface tre he month pre ndex differenti onth of paving e quantity of a ll be calculate er in dollars prior to tende h of paving/ su ditional payme payments due al for all grad ayment adjus nage of asph content de n which a pay to tonnes of a asphalt emul CTURE e difference in time of the Wo der the applica binder price in ite .
s , FOB depots used to esta asphalt binde eatment in wh eceding the m ial is less tha g/ surface trea asphalt binde ed as follows , er opening urface treatme ent from the O e the Contract es of asphal stment is esta halt concrete etermined fro yment adjust asphalt binde sion in use .
n price of Asp ork under this able Item in t ndex .
The pri s in the Toron ablish and ca r. A payment hich the price i month that ten an 5 % , there atment .
r accepted int where : ent Owner as follo tor as follows t binder supp ablished , the accepted into om daily sto ment is estab er using the % ITEM : 821 Page 821-1 halt Binder Item , shall the Contract ice index is nto area ) of alculate the t adjustment index differs ders for the shall be no to the Work ows : : plied by the quantity of o the Work orage tank blished , the % of residue DEPA MOBIL Janua 825.1 825.2 825.3 825.4 825.5 825.6 ARTMENT LIZATION ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite .2 The Lu bid , incl .1 Not MATERIAL .1 All mate SUBMITTA .1 None id CONSTRU .1 The Co specific MEASUREM .1 Mobiliza BASIS OF P .1 Paymen .2 The tota comple Contrac .3 There s an exte .4 The pa regardle .5 At no ti Contrac STANDA of TRANS TION m consists of mp Sum Pric luding this Item twithstanding S erials shall be ALS dentified .
CTION ontractor sha cally directed b MENT FOR P ation in accord PAYMENT nt for Work un al of this Item ted in the Wo ct bid or greate shall be no ch ension to the C yments from ess of the num me shall the t ctor 's Lump S ARD SPECI PORTATIO PAYM f the mobilizati ce bid for this m. 825.1.2 , the m supplied by t all carry out t by the Engine PAYMENT dance with thi nder this Item will be paid o ork Area on Ite er than $ 250,0 ange in the Lu Contract Comp the Lump Su mber of times total of the am um Price .
FICATION ON and INF ENTS & ADJUS ion necessary Item shall no maximum Lum he Contractor the Work as er .
is Item shall b shall be at the on the first Pro ems other tha 000. ump Sum Pric pletion Date .
m Price shall the Contracto mounts paid to S FRASTRUC STMENTS y for the execu ot be greater t mp Sum Price r. indicated in be on a lump s e Lump Sum ogress Estima an this Item is ce of this Item l be full comp or mobilizes .
o the Contract CTURE ution of the W than ten perc e shall be $ 500 the Contrac sum basis .
Price .
ate , provided t s greater than m due to a cha pensation for t tor under this Work on the Co cent of the To 0,000. ct Documents that the value n five percent ange in Contra the Work und Item be grea ITEM : 825 Page 825-1 ontract .
otal Contract s and/or as of the Work of the Total act scope or der this Item ater than the DEPA TABLE Janua IT 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 ARTMENT E OF CONTE ary , 2015 TEM 905 S 906 W 907 S 908 S 912 H 913 In 916 S 917 T 918 D 919 M 921 C 922 P 926 E 927 A 928 G 931 S 932 P 933 H 934 B 936 C 941 L 946 W 947 D STAN of TRANS ENTS Scheduling ... Work Schedul Subcontractor Supply of Mat Hiring Practice nsurance Sch Signs ............ Traffic Control Detours .........
Maintenance o Construction R Pits and Quar Examination o Asphalt Concr Geotechnical Scales and W Private Trucks Heavy Equipm Back - Up Ala Compaction .. Lines and Gra Work Progres Disposal Area NDARD SP PORTATIO STA DESCR ..................... le ................. rs .................. erials ........... es ................. hedule .......... ..................... l Persons ..... ..................... of Traffic Flow Roads .......... ries .............. of Soils Inform rete Core Dat Instrumentati Weighing Proce s ................... ment ............. rms .............. ..................... ades ............. sion ............. as .................. ECIFICATI ON and INF ANDARD CONDI RIPTION ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... .................... ..................... ..................... w .................. ..................... ..................... mation ........... ta ................. on ................ edures ......... .................... ..................... .................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... IONS FRASTRUC ITIONS ................... .................. .................. ................... .................. ................... .................. .................. ................... .................. ................... ................... .................. .................. .................. .................. ................... .................. .................. .................. ................. .................. .................. CTURE NUMBE PAGE 1 3 1 4 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 2 1 1 1 5 3 2 1 2 4 2 2 DI R OF ES VISION 900 Page 900-1 TA Pag BLE OF CON ge 900-2 ITEM 948 951 952 953 956 957 958 961 962 971 996 997 998 999 NTENTS Environme Working Co Safety Sup Audited Sa Constructio Falsework Formwork Partnering Value Engi Advisemen Limited Fu Specified W Completion Standard D 941 - 1 St 952 - 1 Sa 952 - 2 Sa 958 - 1 De DEPARTM DES ental Requirem onditions ...... pport Systems afety Program on Drawings a .................... ..................... .................... ineering ....... nts ................ nds .............. Work ............. n Date ..........
Drawings andard Stake afety Net Sup afety Net Sup eck Overhang STA MENT of TR STANDARD CO SCRIPTION ments ........... ..................... s ................... m ................... and Calculatio ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... e Markings port System - port System - g Bracket - St ANDARD S RANSPORT ONDITIONS ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ons .............. ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... ..................... - Abutments - Piers teel Girder SPECIFICA TATION an NUM PA .... .... .... .... .. ... ... ... ... ... .... .... .. ATIONS nd INFRAS BER OF AGES 6 1 2 1 4 3 5 2 2 2 2 2 1 TRUCTUR ITEM : 900 January , 20 RE 0 015 DEPA SCHE Janua 905.1 ARTMENT DULING ary , 2015 GENERAL .1 Notifica .1 In n .2 The Ow STAN of TRANS ation of the sta no case shall wner reserves NDARD SP PORTATIO STA art date may any Work be s the right to l ECIFICATI ON and INF ANDARD CONDI be provided i e performed p imit the start IONS FRASTRUC ITIONS in the Contrac prior to the dat date of the W CTURE ct Documents te specified .
Work .
s at the time o ITEM : 905 Page 905-1 of Tender .
DEPA WORK Janua 906.1 906.2 ARTMENT K SCHEDULE ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This It constru .2 The Ini notice approva .1 Acc .3 The Init .1 If th .2 If th and .1 .2 .3 The Sch .4 Pur Co .4 The Co Estimat .1 If a the GC .5 The mo of Work Work S FORMAT .1 Prepare .2 Provide .3 Provide STAN of TRANS E TION tem details t uction Work S tial Work Sch of award of al by the Eng ceptance of th tial Work Sch he schedule is he schedule d identify the If the ident initialed by schedule by If the identif the meeting accordance e Engineer w hedule for the rsuant to GC ntractor is in d ontractor sha te at time of s an updated an en the Prog C 48 ( 2 ) , paym onthly update k and propos Schedule infor e the Work Sc e a separate b e a horizontal NDARD SP PORTATIO STA the Contract Schedules and hedule shall the Contract ineer .
he Initial Wor hedule shall b s satisfactory is not satisfa required mod ified modifica both the Con y signing it .
fied modificat g the Contra with the Eng ill distribute c e purposes of C 48 ( 2 ) , no pr default under ll attach an u signing of the nd revised Wo gress Estim ent of the Pro ed and revised sed revisions rmation for ea chedule in the bar for each t time scale id ECIFICATI ON and INF ANDARD CONDI tor ’ s respons d the format a be the Work and not late k Schedule w e reviewed fo y , the Enginee ctory , the En difications .
ations are m ntractor and t ions are not m actor shall su ineer ’ s comm copies of the a f 906.1.5 and rogress claim r 906.1.2 or 9 updated and estimate .
ork Schedule mate will be ogress Estima d Work Sched to the previo ach Item or ta e form of a ho rade or opera dentifying eac IONS FRASTRUC ITIONS sibilities in t and requireme schedule su er than 4 Da will not alter th or approval at er shall indica ngineer shall a made at the m the Engineer , made at the m ubmit a new ments .
approved sch GC 48 ( 1 ) .
ms will be pa 06.1.3.2.2. revised Wor is not attach e considere ate will be wit dule will inclu us schedule ask .
orizontal bar c ation or Item .
ch week by the CTURE the preparati ents for perio bmitted withi ays prior to th he Contract re t the first job m ate approval b advise the C meeting , eac , and the Eng meeting , then w Initial Work hedule , which id by the Ow rk Schedule t ed to the mo ed incomple thheld .
ude informatio and shall inc chart .
e date of the ion and sub dic revisions .
n 30 Days of he first job m equirements .
meeting as fo by signing it .
ontractor of t ch modificatio gineer shall a n within 3 Day k Schedule h shall be the wner during th to the month nthly Progres ete and , pu on in relation clude the unal Monday of th ITEM : 906 Page 906-1 bmission of .
f the formal meeting , for ollows : the reasons on shall be approve the ys following modified in Initial Work he time the ly Progress ss Estimate , ursuant to to progress ltered Initial hat week .
WO Pag 906 906 906 906 ORK SCHEDU ge 906-2 6.2 .4 Iden desc .5 The Item may .1 .6 Sev form pres Sch 6.3 CONTE .1 Inclu .2 Inclu cons .3 Sho for w .4 Sho Sch .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 Prov .1 .2 .6 Inclu .7 Inclu 6.4 SPECIF 6.4 .1 On G .1 ULE ntification of criptor that m format for th ms or by the c y be applicabl The critical p eral compute mats are gene sentation issu edule .
NT ude the seque ude the date struction .
ow the percen which a Progr ow changes w edule , includi major change activities mod revised proje other identifia vide a narrativ problem area corrective ac ude the dates ude the dates FIC REQUIRE Grading Cont The Work Sc designated a required for c DEPARTM the schedul ay be applica he schedule hronological o e to the Work ath of the Wo er scheduling erally accepta ues with the ence of const es for the com tage of comp ress Estimate which have o ing but not lim es in scope , dified since th ections of prog able changes ve report to d as , anticipated ction proposed s for submittin s when free is EMENTS tracts chedule infor areas of exca completion .
STA MENT of TR STANDARD CO e description able to the Wo descriptions order of the s k and the sch ork shall be in programs are able , however e Engineer p truction from mmencement pletion of each e is completed occurred in th mited to : he previous su gress and com .
efine the follo d delays and d and its effec ng shop drawi ssue materials mation shall avation and em ANDARD S RANSPORT ONDITIONS ns may be b ork and the sc may be by t start of each It edule .
ndicated .
e readily ava r the Contrac prior to the t initiation to co t and comple h schedule de d. he Work sinc ubmission , mpletion , and owing topics , the impact on ct. ings , product s , as defined include , but mbankment W SPECIFICA TATION an by Item num chedule .
he numerica tem or any ot ilable and the ctor is advised time of subm ompletion of t etion of each escription as o ce the previou d if applicable : n the Work Sc data , sample in Item 908 , w is not limited Work , expect ATIONS nd INFRAS mber , or any l sequence o ther logical pr e Owner advi d to resolve t mission of th the Work .
h major elem of the last Da us submissio chedule , and es , if applicab will be require d to : commen ted production TRUCTUR ITEM : 90 January , 20 y other logic of the Contra rogression tha ises that thes the format an he Initial Wo ent or Item o ay of the mont on of the Wo ble .
ed .
ncement date n and the tim RE 06 15 al ct at se nd rk of th rk s , me DEPA WORK Janua 906.4 906.4 906.4 ARTMENT K SCHEDULE ary , 2015 .2 On Pav .1 The var .2 For agg .3 On Stru .1 The the .2 The pha .4 On Cru .1 The cru STAN of TRANS E ving Contracts e Work Sche rious stages o r asphalt co gregate produ uctures Contr e Work Sched e various stag e Work Sched ase , stage or ushing Contra e Work Sched shed materia NDARD SP PORTATIO STA s edule shall ou or parts of the ncrete this o uction , aspha racts dule shall out es or portions dule shall cle portion of the acts dule shall inc al along with e ECIFICATI ON and INF ANDARD CONDI utline the seq e Work .
outline shoul lt concrete pr tline the sequ s of the Work arly indicate t e Work .
lude the plan expected prod IONS FRASTRUC ITIONS quence of Wo d include co roduction rate uence of Wor k. the commenc ned sequenc duction and ti CTURE ork with estim ommencemen e and placing rk along with cement and c ce of crushing me limits .
mated time lim nt dates , sch sequence .
estimated tim completion da g for the differ ITEM : 906 Page 906-3 mits for the heduling of me limits for ates of each rent sizes of DEPA SUBC Janua 907.1 ARTMENT ONTRACTO ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 The Co subcon .2 The Co conside .1 Thi app Item .3 The En the com .4 The Co Contrac .5 The ap applica STAN of TRANS RS TION ontractor ma ntractor ( s ) .
ontractor sha ered for appro s submission proximate val m ( s ) ) to be su ngineer may a mmencement ontractor sha ct Documents pproval for us ation is made .
NDARD SP PORTATIO STA ay apply to all apply in w oval as a subc n shall also i ue of the Wo ubcontracted .
approve the s of the Work p all ensure th s and has a c se of any sub ECIFICATI ON and INF ANDARD CONDI have portion writing to the contractor for nclude a des rk ( the approx subcontractor proposed und hat the appro opy of the Co bcontractor sh IONS FRASTRUC ITIONS ns of the Co Engineer wi r the Work .
scription of th ximate Quant r , by response der 907.1.2. roved subcon ontract Docum hall be exclus CTURE ontract carrie ith the name he Item ( s ) , e tity multiplied e in writing , t ntractor is en ments .
sive to the C ed out by an e of the com stimated Qua by the Unit P to the Contrac ntirely familia Contract unde ITEM : 907 Page 907-1 n approved pany to be antities and Price for the ctor prior to ar with the er which the DEPA SUPP Janua 908.1 908.2 908.3 ARTMENT LY OF MATE ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 All mate supplied QUALITY O .1 All mate .2 Materia .3 As spec testing .4 The Co manufa request .5 The Co the mat testing .
.1 The Con Eng sup .6 The Co authoriz .7 Materia be of a REJECTED .1 Rejecte Enginee .2 Where materia of remo STAN of TRANS ERIALS TION erial necessar d by the Owne OF MATERIA erial provided al supplied by cified or as re sample ( s ) of a ontractor shall acturer or sup ted by the Eng ontractor shall terial supply d e Owner will ntractor fails gineer to car pply dates .
ontractor sha zation of the E al which is not quality best s D MATERIAL ed material sh er .
the Contracto al be removed oval and dispo NDARD SP PORTATIO STA ry for the prop er , shall be su AL by the Contra the Contracto quested by th any material to l obtain for th pplier to carry gineer .
notify the Eng dates to enabl not be respo to give suffic rry out the re all not chang Engineer .
specifically id uited for its int hall be exped or fails to com and disposed osal of the reje ECIFICATI ON and INF ANDARD CONDI per completion upplied by the actor shall be or shall conform he Engineer , t o be provided he Engineer th y out such in gineer in writin le the Enginee onsible for an cient advance equired inspec ge the source dentified in the tended use .
ditiously remo mply with such d of outside th ected material IONS FRASTRUC ITIONS n of the Work , Contractor .
new , unless o m to the requi the Contractor d by the Contra he right to en spection , sam ng of the sour er to perform y delays to t e notice to th ction , samplin e of supply e tender but su oved from the h notice , the E he Work Site s. CTURE , except that li otherwise app irements of th r shall make a actor .
nter upon the mpling and te rces of supply the required the Contracto he Engineer ng and testin of any mate ubsequently re e Work Site a Engineer may and the Cont isted specifica roved .
he Contract .
available for in premises of t esting as spe y sufficiently in inspection , sa r 's operations in writing to ng before the erial without equired in the after notificatio y require that t tractor shall pa ITEM : 908 Page 908-1 ally as being nspection or the material ecified or as n advance of ampling and s where the enable the e scheduled the written e Work , shall on from the the rejected ay the costs SU Pag 908 908 908 PPLY OF MA ge 908-2 8.4 SUBSTI .1 Whe Unit shal .2 Afte anot .1 .2 .3 Sub Eng .4 No p 8.5 FREE IS .1 The Wor .2 The mate .3 The from have .1 8.5 .4 Care .1 .2 .3 ATERIALS ITUTIONS ere the Spec t/Lump Sum P ll be regarded r the award o ther material/p The submissi the proposed The Engineer stitution of m ineer .
proposed subs SSUE OF MA Owner shall rk as free issu Contractor s erials from DT Contractor s m the time of r e been accept Any replacem own expense e of Material The Contract provide adeq of such mat incorporated The Contract of bills of lad reconcile the The Contract delivery point .1 If such m repaired .2 If such m manufact until its d DEPARTM cifications req Price shall be as the standa of the Contrac product other ion shall be co material/prod r may decide material ( s ) /prod stitution ( s ) wil ATERIAL make availab e. shall be respo TI , Fredericton hall be respo receipt of the ted in the Wor ment due to lo e. tor shall , in ad uate and prop terial shall pr forthwith into tor shall provid ing , or such o quantities of m tor shall be r t and for its sa material is dam by the Contra material is reje ture of the ma isposition has STA MENT of TR STANDARD CO quire the Co based upon ard of quality r ct , the Contrac than the mate omplete includ duct .
not to entertai duct ( s ) shall n l be approved le specific ma onsible for loa n to the Work A onsible for all materials from rk by the Engi ss or damage dvance of rec per storage fa romptly place the Work .
de the Engine other docume material receiv responsible fo afe handling an maged while un actor , at no cos cted by the E aterial , the ma s been determ ANDARD S RANSPORT ONDITIONS ontractor to s the supply of required by th ctor may appl erial/product s ding all techn in substitution not be made d prior to the a aterials , as ide ading , transpo Area .
materials and m the Owner ’ ineer .
e shall be the ceipt of shipm acilities accep e the materia eer , immediate entation the E ved .
or acceptance nd storage .
nder the contr st to the Owne Engineer due t aterial shall re mined by the E SPECIFICA TATION an supply a spe f the material/ he Item .
ly , in writing , t specified in the ical data and n during the pe without the p award of the C entified in the orting , unload d for any dam r ’ s stock until responsibility ments of mate ptable to the E al in storage ely upon rece Engineer may e of free issu rol of the Cont er .
to the quality emain the res ngineer .
ATIONS nd INFRAS ecified materi /product so s to the Engine e Contract Do case history a eriod of the Co prior written a Contract .
Contract Doc ding , storing a mage or loss t such time tha y of the Contra erial supplied Engineer ; and except whe eipt of such sh y require to su ue material a tractor it shall of material as sponsibility of TRUCTUR ITEM : 90 January , 20 al/product , th specified , whic eer to substitut ocuments .
applications fo ontract .
approval of th cuments , for th and distributin that may occu at the materia actor , at his/he by the Owne d on the recei ere it is to b hipment , copie ubstantiate an at the specifie be replaced o s a result of th the Contracto RE 08 15 he ch te or he he ng ur als er er , pt be es nd ed or he or DEPA SUPP Janua 908.5.4 908.5 908.6 ARTMENT LY OF MATE ary , 2015 4 .4 Wh poi and suc ship or d .1 .5 The ship tak .1 .6 Wh lon who Doc .7 Wh Con ma the .1 .5 Return .1 Wh com of t DEMURRA .1 The Co for the W .2 In the e deducte STAN of TRANS ERIALS here material s nt in a damag d the quantitie ch damage o pment and pro deficiencies .
Where any d the Contract e Contractor pment and th ing delivery .
Such materia Contractor fo hen containers ger required o shall dispos cuments .
here material ntract , the Co aterial , report a stockpile site Where any d the Contract of Excess Ma here material mplete the Wo the Work .
AGE AND DAM ontractor shall Work and sha event of dem ed from mone NDARD SP PORTATIO STA supplied and ged condition o es shown on th r discrepancie ovide the Con damage or def tor to repair or shall account e Contractor al shall not , ex or purposes o s , reels , crate for their origi se of them , o supplied by t ontractor sha any damage o e. damage or def tor to repair or aterial is made ava ork , such exce MAGES be responsib all be responsi murrage or da ey owing to the ECIFICATI ON and INF ANDARD CONDI delivered to t or where there he bills of ladin es to the En ntractor with a ficiencies are r replace the m t for the full a shall be resp xcept with the ther than the es and other t nal purpose , utside the Wo the Owner is all , immediate or deficiencies ficiencies are r replace the m ailable to the ess material sh ble for the pro ible for any de mage charge e Contractor .
IONS FRASTRUC ITIONS the Work Area e are discrepa ng , the Contra gineer who s a written releas reported ther materials , at h amount of ma ponsible and li e written perm performance types of pack they shall be ork Site , unle s ordered and ly upon com s to the Engin reported ther materials , at h e Contractor i hall remain th ompt loading , emurrage and es being paid CTURE a by the Own ancies betwee actor shall imm shall arrange se from respo reafter it shall her/his own ex aterial supplie iable for such mission of the of the Work u kaging from fr ecome the pro ss otherwise d stockpiled p mencement o neer and take reafter it shall his/her own ex in excess of e property of unloading and d storage char by the Own ner arrives at en the quantit mediately repo for an inspe onsibility for su be the respon xpense .
ed by the Ow h free issue m Engineer , be nder the Cont ree issue mat operty of the specified in t prior to the aw of operations charge of the be the respon xpense .
the amount the Owner on d delivery of a rges .
er , that amou ITEM : 908 Page 908-3 the delivery ies received ort in writing ction of the uch damage nsibility of wner in each material after used by the tract .
terial are no Contractor , he Contract ward of the , check the e material at nsibility of required to n completion all materials unt shall be SU Pag 908 PPLY OF MA ge 908-4 8.7 PARTIA .1 Upo Pay of P and .1 .2 The purc unit equi calc .3 In a resp repla part .4 Part for t .1 ATERIALS AL PAYMENT on written req ment , the Ow Payment of an stored in an c The Owner m acceptably st partial paym chase price ( m of measure f ivalent to the culation would accordance w ponsible for th acement at h ial payment a tial payment m he specified It Items 302 , 30 DEPARTM T FOR MATER quest by the wner will make n Item and ma condition , loca may make pa tored at the su ment will be a materials and for the Item o purchase pri exclude the fr with section he care of the er/his own ex nd the incorpo may only be m tems as follow 04 , 341 , 342 , 3 STA MENT of TR STANDARD CO RIALS Contractor a partial payme anufactured s ation and man rtial payment upplier ’ s yard .
provisional u freight per the or by calculati ice .
In the ca reight cost .
13 ( 3 ) of the materials unt xpense of any oration of the made in the fis ws : 343 , 344 , 345 ANDARD S RANSPORT ONDITIONS nd in accord ent to the Con specifically for nner acceptab for the mate unit price for e supplier ’ s in ing the perce se of paymen e General Co til placed and y materials da materials into scal year the m 5 , 348 , 351 , an SPECIFICA TATION an ance with se ntractor for ma r the Contract le to the Engin rials prior to d the materials voice as prov entage of the nt for materia onditions , the accepted in t amaged or los o the Work .
material is to nd 555 .
ATIONS nd INFRAS ection 4 ( 2 ) of aterials identifi t , delivered to neer .
delivery , if the determined vided to the E lump sum pr als stored per e Contractor the Work , inc st between th be incorporat TRUCTUR ITEM : 90 January , 20 f the Terms ied in the Bas o the Work Sit e materials ar by dividing th ngineer ) by th rice of the Ite r 908.7.1.1 , th shall be ful luding repair o e period of th ted in the Wo RE 08 15 of sis te re he he m he lly or he rk DEPA HIRING Janua 912.1 ARTMENT G PRACTICE ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 In the e sex , ag howeve to bene Brunsw .2 Regula apply to .3 For job Docum STAN of TRANS ES TION employment o ge , marital sta er , that the fo efit groups s wick .
ation 2007-34 o this contrac bs with part ents , recruitin NDARD SP PORTATIO STA of persons on atus , nationa oregoing shall such as those of The Emplo ct. icipation by ng of labour s ECIFICATI ON and INF ANDARD CONDI n a project , th al origin , colou not prevent e defined in oyment Stand the Governm shall be condu IONS FRASTRUC ITIONS here shall be ur , religion , o the implemen the Human dards Act for ment of Can ucted through CTURE no discrimin or political aff ntation of spe Rights Act o the Province nada , as ide h Canada Em nation by reas filiation ; it be ecial measure of the Provin e of New Brun entified in th mployment Ce ITEM : 912 Page 912-1 son of race , ing agreed , es designed nce of New nswick shall he Contract ntres .
DEPA INSUR Janua 913.1 ARTMENT RANCE SCHE ary , 2015 GENERAL .1 The Co set out .2 The Ins STAN of TRANS EDULE ontract award in the Insura surance Sche NDARD SP PORTATIO STA shall require nce Schedule edule is marke ECIFICATI ON and INF ANDARD CONDI e the success e , attached to ed “ E ” and is IONS FRASTRUC ITIONS sful Bidder to o and forming attached in th CTURE comply with part of the C he Articles of terms and co ontract .
Agreement .
ITEM : 913 Page 913-1 onditions as DEPA SIGNS Janua 916.1 ARTMENT S ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 The pro Contrac Control .1 Sig .2 Sig am .2 Signs u DTI Dis .1 Cre 916 .3 Signs s NBDTI ’ .4 All Wo Contrac .5 The En the term an orde .1 The com WA .2 Any ext STAN of TRANS TION ocurement of ctor and shal l Manual '' ( WA gns shall be m gns shall be c mount shall be used in the C strict office aft edit shall be g 6.1.1.2. shall be loca ’ s WATCM .
rk associated ctor .
ngineer shall ms set out in er .
e Contractor mply with the ATCM .
y lost time re tension in the NDARD SP PORTATIO STA f all signs req ll be in accor ATCM ) with re made available charged out a deducted fro Contract shall ter completion iven on the fin ated , erected d with the sig issue an imm the NBDTI W shall immed e terms set o sulting from n Contract Com ECIFICATI ON and INF ANDARD CONDI uired pursuan rdance with th espect to the e at DTI , Fred at the Owner om the first Pr remain the p n of the Contr nal Progress E d and mainta gnage of the mediate cease WATCM and t iately make out for the p non-complian mpletion Date IONS FRASTRUC ITIONS nt to the Con he requireme Work conditi dericton , NB .
r ’ s current list rogress Estim property of the ract .
Estimate for s ained by the e Contract sh e Work order the Contracto whatever adj particular style nce shall not b e. CTURE ntract shall be ents of the NB ions prevailin ted price for t mate .
e Owner and igns returned Contractor hall be the s r for any Work or shall immed justments are e of Work as be considered e the respons BDTI `` Work A g at the site .
these materia shall be retu in good cond in accordanc sole responsib k not in comp diately compl e necessary s defined in d , by the Ow ITEM : 916 Page 916-1 ibility of the Area Traffic als and this urned to the dition , as per ce with the bility of the pliance with ly with such in order to the NBDTI ner , for any DEPA TRAFF Janua 917.1 917.2 917.3 ARTMENT FIC CONTRO ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite ( TCPs ) .2 For the approve REQUIREM .1 The Co .1 Fur TC len .2 Sup the .3 The OTHER .1 Notwith approve .1 For .2 Ext Item STAN of TRANS OL PERSONS TION em details the ) as may be re e purposes of ed by the Eng MENTS ontractor shal rther to Chapt Ps as require gth of Work A pply of all nec e Contractor .
e Stop/Slow p hstanding 917 ed by the Eng rce Account W tra Work ( of a m 812 .
NDARD SP PORTATIO S STA e Contractor' equired for va f this Item , W gineer .
l carry out the ter 5 of the W ed , based on Area and othe cessary safet paddle will be 7.1 and 917 gineer for the Work identifie a nature or st ECIFICATI ON and INF ANDARD CONDI s responsibil arious types o Work Area ma e Work in acc WATCM , the C n Roadway g er pertinent fa y equipment e available fro .2 , separate following typ d under Item tyle not identi IONS FRASTRUC ITIONS ity to provide of Work perfor ay encompas cordance with Contractor sha geometry , tra actors .
and apparel f om the Owner payment wil pes of Work : 811 in the Co fied in the Co CTURE e any and all rmed under th s more than the latest ed all be respon affic patterns , for TCPs sha r in accordanc ll be made b ontract Docum ontract Docum Traffic Contr he Contract .
one Work op dition of the W sible to provid traffic volum all be the resp ce with Item 9 by the Owne ments ; and/o ments ) carried ITEM : 917 Page 917-1 rol Persons peration , as WATCM .
de as many mes , size or ponsibility of 916. er for TCPs r d out under DEPA DETO Janua 918.1 ARTMENT URS ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 The Co Contrac .1 Suc for .2 Traffic 916 and .3 No Wo .4 The Co 24 hou operatio .5 Tempo approve .1 Co Co STAN of TRANS TION ontractor shal ct Documents ch detours ha in accordanc control device d the WATCM rk shall begin ontractor shal rs a Day from onal for the d rary construc ed by the Eng nstruction , m ntractor .
NDARD SP PORTATIO STA ll construct d s. ave been inco ce with the ap es required fo M. n on a detour l ensure that m the time imm uration of the ction detours , gineer prior to maintenance , a ECIFICATI ON and INF ANDARD CONDI etours at the orporated in t plicable Items or detours sha until approva all required t mediately pre e detour opera other than th o construction and removal IONS FRASTRUC ITIONS e location ( s ) a the Contract e s. all be in acco l is received f traffic control eceding the op ation .
ose indicated n. of such deto CTURE and to a stan estimated Qu ordance with t from the Engi devices are pening of the d in the Contr ours shall be ndard as indic uantities and the requireme ineer .
in place and detour and s ract Documen the responsi ITEM : 918 Page 918-1 cated in the will be paid ents of Item operational shall remain nts , must be ibility of the DEPA MAINT Janua 919.1 ARTMENT TENANCE O ary , 2015 GENERAL .1 The Co be mai must be .2 The Co through .3 Surface travel a STAN of TRANS F TRAFFIC F ontractor is ad ntained and e open to two ontractor sha hout the Work es subject to along it at the NDARD SP PORTATIO FLOW STA dvised that a kept open , at o-way traffic a all schedule t k Site in acco through traffi speed limit p ECIFICATI ON and INF ANDARD CONDI any existing tr t a minimum at the end of t the Work to rdance with th c shall be ma posted for the IONS FRASTRUC ITIONS raffic pattern ( of one traffic he work Day .
provide for he WATCM .
aintained in a Work Area .
CTURE ( s ) or alternat c Lane throug .
the safe and a condition su te traffic patte ghout the wo d efficient flo uch that traffic ITEM : 919 Page 919-1 ern ( s ) must ork Day and ow of traffic c can safely DEPA CONS Janua 921.1 921.2 921.3 921.4 ARTMENT STRUCTION R ary , 2015 HAUL ROA .1 Haul ro .2 Haul ro provide .3 Constru respons .1 Co Co WORK ARE .1 The Co getting trails on .1 Veh roa .2 Access to prov .3 Constru respons .4 Constru paid for ENVIRONM .1 The Co cause s .2 On any impede .3 A vege the exte ACCESS T .1 The Co roads .
later tha STAN of TRANS ROADS ADS oads are off-H oads shall be e safe and rea uction , dust sibility except nstruction of ntract Docum EA ACCESS ontractor sha permission f n private prop hicles and E adways and a s roads shall b ide safe and uction , dust sibility .
uction of acce r by the Owne MENTAL PRO ontractor shal sedimentation y new access ed , ditches sh etated buffer z ent possible .
TO PUBLIC R ontractor sha Any such ma an sunset eac NDARD SP PORTATIO STA Highway acces constructed asonable acce control and t : haul roads ments or as dir ROADS ll be respons from landown perty .
Equipment us ccess areas .
be constructe reasonable a control and ess roads ma er .
OTECTION l ensure that n of any wate roads constr all not drain d zone shall be ROADS all make ever aterials that a ch Day , and d ECIFICATI ON and INF ANDARD CONDI ss to materia in a location ess for the En maintenance on lands co rected by the sible for proc ners to build sed during c ed in a locatio ccess for the maintenance ay be directed the use of an rcourses that ructed by or f directly into w e maintained ry effort to av re tracked on during the Da IONS FRASTRUC ITIONS l sources req as approved ngineer .
e of all hau ontrolled by t Engineer , sh curing access access road construction a on as approv Engineer .
e of the acc d by the Eng ny existing pri t cross such r for the Contra watercourses , between an a void tracking nto a public r ay if so neede CTURE uired for High by the Engin ul road ( s ) sh the Owner , a hall form part s to and from s or to use e activities sha ed by the En cess road sh gineer and if s ivate or public roads .
actor , natural and erosion access road a mud , snow , road shall be ed , to the satis hway construc neer , and in a all be the C and as indica of the Work .
m the Work S existing wood all utilize only gineer , and i hall be the C so , constructi c access road water flows s shall be contr and any wate and debris scraped or s sfaction of the ITEM : 921 Page 921-1 ction .
a manner to Contractor ’ s ated in the Site , and for ds roads or y approved n a manner Contractor ’ s ion shall be ds does not shall not be rolled .
ercourse , to onto public swept off no e Engineer .
DEPA PITS A Janua 922.1 ARTMENT AND QUARR ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 Notwith sources all time Provinc .2 The Co regulato and the docume .3 Where royalty f .1 Wh cen .4 The C mainten .1 Wh Doc req .2 Wh be und .5 The Co addition .1 Sou .6 The Co Work to .1 Wh qua cas .7 The Co sufficie during d .1 Co unc fac .2 The with Ca STAN of TRANS RIES TION hstanding the s in such a m es during the p ce of New Bru ontractor shal ory requireme e Governmen ents shall be the source of fee of 25 cent here materials nts per tonne w ontractor sha nance of the s here the sourc cuments , the quirements out here the sourc considered a der 922.1.7 sh ontractor shal nal areas of th urces within t ontractor shal o achieve the here the sourc arry , process se of a pit , pro ontractor sha ntly large en drilling , blasti nsolidated Ov consolidated e. e waste mate h the laws o nada .
NDARD SP PORTATIO STA e Ownership o manner that th period of the unswick and t l be responsib ents pursuan nt of Canada provided to th f supplies for ts per tonne s are made av will not apply .
all be respo source .
ce is located o Owner shal tlined in the C ce is identified a pit or quarry hall be carried ll operate the he source in t the Work Site l make every minimum of w ce is owned o all oversize ocess all natu all clear , gru nough to ens ng and excav verburden sh Overburden erial shall be of municipaliti ECIFICATI ON and INF ANDARD CONDI of the proper he Work plac Contract and the Governme ble to ensure t to the laws a for the ope he Engineer b pits and qua hall be paid b vailable from e onsible , at h on land contro l compensate Contract Docum d in the Contra y in accordan out under the e source in su the future , by shall be ope y effort to opti waste from th or controlled b material pro urally occurrin b and strip ure that no vation .
all be strippe shall be strip removed fro ies , the Prov IONS FRASTRUC ITIONS rty the Contra ces are maint d in accordanc ent of Canada e he/she has o of municipal eration of the before comme arries is locate y the Contrac excavation wit is/her own e olled by the O e the Contrac ments , for the act Documen nce with this e appropriate uch a manner y either her/his rated as spec imize the use he mined mat by the Owner oduced during ng rocks up to the Overbur contaminatio ed back a min pped back a m the Work A vince of New CTURE actor shall op tained in a ne ce with the la a. obtained all p ities , the Pro e Work , and encing the W ed on land co ctor to the Own thin the Work expense , for Owner , and is ctor , in acco e development ts as being w Item , except bid Items .
r so as not to s own forces cified in the C e of the resou terials .
r the Contract g the course o 400 mm in g rden from the n of the sou nimum distan minimum di Area and dis w Brunswick a perate all pit eat and safe c aws of munici permits , lease vince of New d copies of th Work .
ontrolled by th ner .
Site , the roya r the develo specified in t rdance with t of the pit or q within the Work that the Wor o limit the ab or others .
Contract Docu urce and shal tor shall , in th of the Work greatest dime e source ov urce materials ce of 2 m fro stance of 7 sposed of in a and the Gov ITEM : 922 Page 922-1 and quarry condition at palities , the es and other w Brunswick he relevant he Owner , a alty fee of 25 pment and the Contract the specific quarry .
k Site , it will rk described ility to mine uments .
ll adjust the he case of a and in the ension .
er an area s will occur om the face ; m from the accordance vernment of PIT Pag 922 922 TS AND QUA ge 922-2 2.1.7 .3 .8 The acco 2.2 SULPHI .1 Agg shal thre Rati .2 The on to ARRIES The location water drainin site .
Contractor ordance with IDE-BEARING regate Base/ ll have a tota e times the A o , where NPR NPR shall b otal sulphur .
DEPARTM of the wast ng from this a shall be res the permits , l G ROCK /Subbase , Sh al sulphur con Acid-generati R=NP/AP  3 e determined STA MENT of TR STANDARD CO e disposal si area can not i sponsible to eases and ot houlder Mate ntent of less t ng Potential 3. d by the Modi ANDARD S RANSPORT ONDITIONS ite shall be s impact on an restore the ther requirem erial and Ran than 0.3 % ; or ( AP ) , as repr ified Sobec p SPECIFICA TATION an such that an ny stockpile a areas affec ents identified ndom Riprap r a Neutraliza resented by procedure ( ac ATIONS nd INFRAS J y runoff or s area ( s ) or fut cted by the d in 922.1.2. p made from ation Potentia the Neutraliz cid-base acco TRUCTUR ITEM : 92 January , 201 sediment-lade ture use of th Work and quarried roc al ( NP ) at lea zation Potenti ounting ) , base RE 22 5 en he in ck st al ed DEPA EXAM Janua 926.1 ARTMENT MINATION OF ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 Prior to Owner ’ subsurf which m .2 Any su location express conditio collecte .3 The Ow that the will be STAN of TRANS F SOILS INFO TION o submitting a s normal pla face investiga may or may n ubsurface inf ns indicated .
sed or implie ons are not ed .
wner makes e presence or representativ NDARD SP PORTATIO ORMATION STA a Tender quot ace of busin ations and so ot be shown formation ava The Owner d , with respe necessarily no guarantee r absence of w e of the actua ECIFICATI ON and INF ANDARD CONDI tation , the Bid ness , the rec oil analyses , if on the Plans .
ailable is ba r makes no ect to any suc typical and es , representa water on the al conditions a IONS FRASTRUC ITIONS dder shall hav cord of all b f any , made f . ased on the guarantees , ch information may have c ations or war site and any at the time of CTURE ve access to a borings , test for design of investigation representat n , and cautio changed sinc rranties , eithe subsurface e f construction and may exam excavations , the Work , the n made at t tions , warran ns the Bidde ce the field er expressed explorations w . ITEM : 926 Page 926-1 mine , at the and other e records of the specific nties , either r that these data were or implied , when made , DEPA ASPHA Janua 927.1 ARTMENT ALT CONCR ary , 2015 GENERAL .1 Asphalt informa .2 Any As specific either Bidder/ the field .3 Respon be that STAN of TRANS RETE CORE D t Concrete C ation .
sphalt Concre c locations in expressed o /Contractor th d data were c nsibility for int of the Bidder NDARD SP PORTATIO DATA STA Core Data are ete Core info dicated and t or implied , hat these cond collected .
terpretation a r. ECIFICATI ON and INF ANDARD CONDI e provided b ormation avai the Owner m with respect ditions are no and use of As IONS FRASTRUC ITIONS by the Owner ilable is base makes no gua t to any su ot necessarily sphalt Concre CTURE r solely for t ed on the inv arantees , repr uch informat y typical and m ete Core Data the Bidder's/C vestigation m resentations , tion , and ca may have cha a in preparing ITEM : 927 Page 927-1 Contractor 's made at the warranties , autions the anged since g a bid shall DEPA GEOT Janua 928.1 ARTMENT TECHNICAL I ary , 2015 GENERAL .1 The Ow others , .1 Ins as .1 .2 .2 In t pla sha pla .1 .2 .3 It i pro .4 The is n .5 Ge rep .1 .6 Co .1 STAN of TRANS NSTRUMEN wner may req within the Wo tallation and listed in the C Where the n construction consultation To expedite Contractor appropriate the immediat cement and c all supply fill m ced and com The placem which is to s the same ele The extent o the material to endanger s imperative oject .
e Contractor not damaged , otechnical ins placed by the The Enginee however any ntinuity of rec If instrumen restrictions o NDARD SP PORTATIO TATION STA quire that geo ork Area and other pertine Contract Docu need for geote n , locations a n with the Con e the installa shall provide by the Engine te area of th compaction d material with pacted by ha ment of hand say that the fi evation , withi of the hand p , equipment a r the integrity that this in shall organiz or rendered strumentation Engineer , at er will endea y additional c cords is essen ntation is dam on the Work w ECIFICATI ON and INF ANDARD CONDI otechnical ins during the pe ent details rel uments .
echnical instr and installatio ntractor .
ation and re e access and eer .
e geotechnic o not ensure a maximum nd around the placed mate ll elevation im n 0.5 m , of th placement of and methods of the geotec strumentation e his activitie inaccessible n damaged b the Contracto vour to effect cost due to de ntial .
maged or des within the are IONS FRASTRUC ITIONS strumentation eriod of Work ating to the g rumentation , o on details wil eading of the d other assi cal instrumen the integrity o particle size e instruments erial shall be mmediately su he surroundin fill will be de used by the chnical instrum n remain inta es to ensure t or unusable .
y the Contrac or ’ s own expe t the repairs elays will be th stroyed , the ea subject to m CTURE n be installed k under the Co geotechnical of an emerge l be determin e geotechnic stance , as d ntation , where of the instrum of 75 mm , a s. concurrent w urrounding the g work .
etermined by Contractor w ments .
act and serv that the geote ctor 's operati ense .
or replaceme he responsibi Engineer ma monitoring .
d , by the Eng ontract .
instrumentati ent nature , oc ned by the E cal instrumen deemed nece e normal met mentation , the nd this mater with the surro e instruments the Engineer which have be viceable thro echnical instr ons shall be ent as soon a ility of the Con ay impose lim ITEM : 928 Page 928-1 gineer or by ion shall be ccurs during Engineer , in ntation , the essary and thods of fill e Contractor rial shall be ounding fill , s shall be at r , based on een deemed oughout the rumentation repaired or as possible , ntractor .
mitations or DEPA SCAL Janua 931.1 931.2 ARTMENT ES AND WEI ary , 2015 WEIGHING .1 The Co Items th .2 All weig shall be .3 Belt sc Measur .1 The on .2 All .4 Truck p .5 The co weighin .6 If the O will pay WEIGHING .1 The we Work fo .2 The tru .3 Any m Vehicle or cons .4 The Co carry th .5 All hau every w request .6 Tare an case of STAN of TRANS IGHING PRO G DEVICES ontractor sha hat specify m ghing devices e installed at a cales and lo rement Canad e Engineer re approved tru costs associa platform scale ost of supplyin ng devices sh Owner require y for the cost o G PROCEDUR eighing proce or the Owner ck driver sha aterial hauled e Dimensions sidered eligibl ontractor mus he gross weig ling units use week in whic ted by the En nd gross weig f a beam scal NDARD SP PORTATIO OCEDURES STA all supply the easurement f s shall be of a a location tha oader scales da ( MC ) .
eserves the r ck platform sc ated with the es will be subj ng , setting up hall be borne b es that the Co of the move .
RES edure to be f will be carried ll be respons d in excess and Mass R e for paymen st ensure all t ghts they inten ed in the Work ch they haul ngineer .
ghts of hauling e , to a maxim ECIFICATI ON and INF ANDARD CONDI scales nece for payment b a size to safel at has been a s shall not ight to reque cales .
periodic chec ject to the req p , any adjust by the Contra ontractor mov followed by th d out for dete ible to ensure of the maxim Regulation und nt as part of th trucks and oth nd to haul on k shall be tare material weig g units shall b mum of the ne IONS FRASTRUC ITIONS essary for de by the tonne o ly and legally pproved by th be used u est periodic ch cks shall be b quirements of tments or rep actor .
ve his/her sca he Owner ’ s w ermining paym e that the lega mum weights der the NB M he Work unde her hauling u the Highway ed at the start ghed under t be recorded ty earest 50 kg .
CTURE termining the or other mass weigh loads he Engineer f nless inspec hecks to be m borne by the C f 931.4. pairs as requ ales after the weighers on ment quantitie al axle limits a s provisions Motor Vehicle er any Item of units are prop .
t of the Work the Contract , ypically to the e quantities f s unit .
as described for the scale p cted and ap made by weig Contractor .
uired , and dis initial set-up , Contract Wo es only .
are not excee of Regulatio Act , will not f the Contract perly registere and at least o , and more f e nearest 10 k ITEM : 931 Page 931-1 for Contract d herein and placement .
pproved by ghing loads smantling of , the Owner ork or other eded .
on 2001-67 , be paid for t. ed to legally once during frequently if kg , or in the SCA Pag 931 931 ALES AND W ge 931-2 1.3 LOADER .1 The .2 Mea .3 Mea Con .4 Loa as m .5 Loa conc .6 Loa .7 Loa othe .8 Loa will .9 The load whe .10 The and 1.4 TRUCK .1 The .2 The .3 Mea first mon .4 Mea Con .1 .2 WEIGHING P R SCALES P following pol asurement Ca asurement Ca ntractors are a der scales w materials unde der scales wi crete , concret der scales wi der scales wi er material pri der scales th not be accept Contractor s der scales to ether the scale Contractor , a certified the PLATFORM following pol term `` scales asurement Ca set-up of th nths .
asurement Ca ntractors are a As a result o Contractor ’ s Contractor w .1 A report office wit If the Contra released from services .
On may schedul DEPARTM ROCEDURE OLICY icy shall appl anada is the o anada will pe abiding by the ill be accepta er Item 121 , 1 ll not be acce te , and any o ll not be acce ill not be acce marily used f at do not com ted for use on shall be respo correctly wei es are owned at his/her own loader scales SCALES PO icy shall appl '' used herein anada does n he calendar y anada will pe abiding by the of a routine in scale is non will be required of the altera thin 7 Days .
ctor ’ s scale is m seizure by ce the scale e a re-inspec STA MENT of TR S STANDARD CO y to the Cont only company erform periodi e provisions o able for weigh 167 , 201 , 203 eptable for we ther material eptable for we eptable for we for landscapin mply with the n the Owner ’ s onsible for th gh , within de d by his/her co n expense , sh s. OLICY y to the Cont nafter shall me not perform re year nor ann erform periodi e provisions o nspection , if a n-compliant , a d to have thei tion or repair s placed und y Measureme has been br ction .
ANDARD S RANSPORT ONDITIONS tractor ’ s loade y that may ins ic marketplac of the Weights hing of raw m 3 , 204 , and 60 eighing manuf consisting of eighing winter eighing topso ng purposes .
equipment re s Work .
he mechanica signated tole ompany , subc hall ensure th tractor 's truck ean permane equest inspe nual inspectio ic marketplac of the Weights a Measureme a notice of n r device repa r shall be sen er seizure , re ent Canada rought back SPECIFICA TATION an er scales used spect and cert ce monitoring s and Measur materials used 08. factured road f binder comb r sand or salt .
oil , ornamenta estrictions on al condition a erances , mate contractor , a s hat Measurem k platform sca ent and portab ctions of the ons of scales ce monitoring s and Measur ent Canada I non-complian aired .
nt to the nea epairs must b prior to the into complian ATIONS nd INFRAS d on the Cont tify loader sca g inspections res Act and R d in road con d materials inc bined with agg .
al rocks and g the certificate and proper op erials used on supplier , or o ment Canada ales used on t ble truck platfo Contractor 's s left in plac g inspections res Act and R nspector dete nce will be is arest Measure be completed scale being nce , Measure TRUCTUR ITEM : 93 January , 20 tract .
ales .
to ensure tha Regulations .
struction , suc cluding aspha gregates .
gravels , or an e of inspectio peration of th n the Contrac other .
has inspecte the Contract .
orm scales .
scales for th ce over twelv to ensure tha Regulations .
ermines that ssued and th ement Canad and the sca put back int ement Canad RE 31 15 at ch alt ny on he ct , ed he ve at a he da le to da DEPA SCAL Janua 931.4 ARTMENT ES AND WEI ary , 2015 .5 Upon th random .1 The hav .2 Afte ma is c .3 The of t .4 If th pay .5 If th Co .1 .6 The ope Ow .6 The Co scales the sca .7 The Co been p bearing signatu .1 Tes .1 .2 .3 .4 .2 Tes .3 The tim .8 Scales accepte .9 A repo time tes Canada STAN of TRANS IGHING PRO he request of m checks in or e term “ Priva ving standard er being give ay continue us carried out .
e Contractor s the Engineer's he testing pro y the Private S he testing pro mpany 's char The scales carried out a Contractor's e cost assoc eration as a wner , nor will i ontractor sha to correctly w ales are owne ontractor sha roperly instal g the Private ure , and any p sting shall be For the first For each su Prior to the f Every twelve sting per 931 e Private Sca e testing is pe that do not ed for use on rt ( statement sting is perfo a , and a copy NDARD SP PORTATIO OCEDURES STA f the Enginee rder to verify c te Scale Com test weights en notice by t sing the scale shall have the s notice .
oves the scale Scale Compa oves the scale rge for the tes shall not be and the scale s expense .
ciated with an result of the t form the bas ll be respons weigh , within d ed by his/her c ll ensure tha led and calib e Scale Com pertinent rema carried out fo set-up of the bsequent set first use in the e months if th .4.7.1 will be ale Company's erformed as p have a dated the Owner ’ s of accuracy rmed per 931 y to the Engin ECIFICATI ON and INF ANDARD CONDI er , the Contra calibration of mpany ” shall meeting the he Engineer es but shall m e testing carr es are accura any 's charge f es are not ac sting .
used again u es have been ny delay to t testing requ sis of any cla sible for the m designated to company , a s t a Private S rated as per mpany 's name arks .
or each set of calendar yea t-up that same e following ye he scales are at the Contra s test sticker per 931.4.7.1 d sticker stat Work. )
shall be co 1.4.7.1 and d eer or posted IONS FRASTRUC ITIONS actor shall eng certain scale mean any of requirements that the scale make no adjus ied out by a P ate without ad for the testing ccurate , the C until necessa n determined he Contracto uested by the aim .
mechanical c olerances , ma ubcontractor , Scale Compa r 931.4.7.1 an e or logo , th f scales in the ar .
e year if move ear if not mov a permanent actor 's expens shall not be r . ting that they ompleted by t distributed as d in the scales CTURE gage a Privat es .
f the compan s of 931.6. es are to be stments to th Private Scale djustments or g. Contractor sha ry adjustmen to be accura or for the tim e Engineer s condition and aterials used o , a supplier or ny has verifie nd have affixe he date of t e following ca ed .
ved .
t installation .
se .
removed unti y are in prope the Private S follows : the o s. te Scale Com ies listed in T checked , the e scales until Company wi repairs , the O all pay the Pr nts or repairs ately calibrate me the scales shall not be p proper opera on the Contra r other .
ed that the s ed thereon a testing , the t ases : l superseded er calibration Scale Compan original to Me ITEM : 931 Page 931-3 mpany to do Table 931-1 e Contractor l the testing ithin 7 Days Owner shall rivate Scale have been d , all at the s are out of paid by the ation of the act , whether scales have test sticker technician 's d at the next will not be ny for each easurement SCA Pag 931 931 931 ALES AND W ge 931-4 1.5 OPERA .1 Whi prev widt App .2 Extr scal .3 Sca whe Sec .4 The Sca weig .1 .5 Eac dista .6 Sca othe read 1.6 TEST W .1 Test requ Mea app Spe 1.7 SCALE .1 The .1 .2 .3 .4 .2 The WEIGHING P TION OF TR le it is accep vent vehicles th of a scale proval issued f ra-wide vehic es , designed les with a de eels of Equipm tion 32.1 of th Contractor s les must be ghed .
Split weighin h approach to ance of at lea les shall not erwise improp ding erratically WEIGHTS AN ting of scales uire a minim asurement C licable limit ecification .
HOUSE Contractor s A minimum containing a A minimum r Sufficient ligh type of Struct An approved the interior of Contractor s DEPARTM ROCEDURE UCK PLATFO ptable to affix from running e deck beyo for the particu cles ( off-road and built to w eck having no ment being w he Occupatio shall not `` spli provided whi g is acceptab o the scales s ast 3 m from t be used at a perly installed y shall be shu D TOLERANC s , regardless o um of 10 00 anada within of error as hall provide a work area o functional de oom tempera hting to the le ture defined a d and maintai f the house .
hall provide a STA MENT of TR S STANDARD CO ORM SCALES x guiderail , c g off the edge nd the width ular device ty d trucks , scra weigh such ve o guiderail or weighed protru nal Health an it-weigh '' veh ch are long e ble only as a m shall be maint he end of the any time whic d. Scales wh ut down imme CES FOR SC of type of sca 00 kg ( 20 00 n the previou s specified b a scale house of 2.5 m by sk and chair .
ature of 20 °C evel of intensi and the Work ned first-aid a safe means ANDARD S RANSPORT ONDITIONS S curbing or oth es , the use o h specified in pe , is not per apers or loa ehicles .
curb on the ude over the e nd Safety Act .
icles to deter enough to ful means of esti tained level a e deck .
ch are poorly hich have be ediately , notw CALES ale or type or 00 lb ) of tes us twelve mo by the Non- e meeting the 1.8 m with a , and adequa ity and of the k being perform kit mounted o of access to SPECIFICA TATION an her edge bar of timbers or n the Measu rmitted .
ders ) must b scale house edge ( s ) , will .
rmine the we lly support al mating the ax at the same p y set up , dam een struck or withstanding 9 value of mate st weights th onths .
Test r -Automatic W following min a minimum h ate ventilation e quality defin med .
on the wall a and egress f ATIONS nd INFRAS rriers , to the other means urement Can be weighed side , or so n be subject to eight of a load l axles of the xle weights .
lane as the s maged and/or r jarred or ar 931.4.5. erial weighed hat have bee results shall Weighing De nimum require height cleara n. ned by the sta at an accessib from the scale TRUCTUR ITEM : 93 January , 20 scale deck t s to extend th ada Notice o on extra-wid narrow that th o closure unde d for paymen e vehicle bein cale deck for r inaccurate o re jamming o on them , sha en certified b be within th evice ( NAWD ements : nce of 2.1 m andards for th ble location o e house .
RE 31 15 to he of de he er nt .
ng a or or all by he D ) m , he on DEPA SCAL Janua 931.7 931.8 931.8 ARTMENT ES AND WEI ary , 2015 .3 All road vehicle .4 The Co PRIVATE S .1 Table Measur scales .
pursua Advat Aggre All We Fleetw Mettle Weigh .2 This lis certified .3 Any of no long .4 Contrac appear .5 The Ow one inc review .6 The Co provide Canada .7 Measur Measur 50 Brow Dartmo B3B 1X phone : STAN of TRANS IGHING PRO ds leading to s , and dust co ontractor shal SCALE COMP 931-1 lists t rement Cana The listed nt to the Weig tek Systems I egate Equipm eigh Systems way Inc. er-Toledo Inc. h-Tronix Cana t may be exp d by Measure the Private S ger capable of ctors are ad ring or not app wner shall ma cluded in this this informati ontractor 's ow ed these weig a and the test rement Canad rement Canad wn Avenue outh , NS X8 902-426-99 NDARD SP PORTATIO OCEDURES STA the scale ho ontrol shall be l provide toile PANIES the Private S ada have cer accredited P ghts and Mea Accred nc .
ment ( Atlantic ) s ( 2002 ) Inc. . ada panded as add ement Canada cale Compan f providing ins dvised to ver pearing on th aintain a curr s section .
Thi on for tender wn standard te ghts have bee ting or inspec da may be co da Atlantic Di 982 ECIFICATI ON and INF ANDARD CONDI ouse shall be e maintained et facilities in c Scale Compa rtified for cali Private Scale asures Act .
Table dited Private M Limited Tr Fr Sa C At Fr Q ditional scale a. nies listed abo spection serv rify the acce is list prior to rent listing of s list will be ing or Contra est weights m en certified w ction is perform ontacted as fo istrict IONS FRASTRUC ITIONS e maintained within 30 me close proximit anies which ibrating and e Companies 931-1 e Scale Comp Moncton , NB ruro , NS redericton , NB aint John , NB anada tlantic Canad redericton , NB Quebec , QC companies a ove who are f vices will be s eptability by tendering on all qualified made availab ct purposes .
may be used f ithin the prev med by a Priv ollows : CTURE so as to pro etres of the sc ty to the scale have test s checking co s are author panies 506-85 902-89 B 800-56 B 506-64 800-66 da B 800-56 506-45 888-49 acquire test s found by Mea truck from the the Owner the basis of t firms and tha ble to any Co for the testing vious twelve m vate Scale Co vide a safe p cale house .
e house for th standard wei ntractors ' tru ized to perfo 57-0909 6-8943 3-9344 8-2226 3-5456 5-7889 54-4010 6-9019 tandard weig asurement Ca e list .
of any comp that company at list may va ontractor who g or inspectio months by Me ompany techn ITEM : 931 Page 931-5 passage for he weigher .
ghts which ck platform orm testing hts that are anada to be pany either y. ary from the o wishes to n of scales , easurement nician .
DEPA PRIVA Janua 932.1 932.2 932.3 ARTMENT ATE TRUCKS ary , 2015 GENERAL .1 The pu Contrac availab in Divis .2 The Co DEFINITIO .1 For the .1 `` Tr .2 “ Co Sub .1 .2 .3 .4 .3 “ Pr lea .1 .4 “ Lo pla mo .5 “ Pa the con APPLICAT .1 This Ite materia Contrac .2 This Ite stockpi .3 This Ite not limi STAN of TRANS S urpose of this ctor to ensure ble Work and sion 800 of the ontractor shal NS e purpose of th uck '' means a ompany Truc bcontractor a any truck , le spouse of an any truck lea any truck lea any truck , th Resident ” ( th rivate Truck ” se arrangeme In the case direct payme ocal Resident ce of busines onths or more ay Period ” me e Monday of ntinuing in two ION em applies al , blending s ct. em also appli le , to be reloa em does not a ted to excava NDARD SP PORTATIO STA Item is to sp e that the own that they are e Contract Do l do all that is his Item , the f a straight truc cks ” means nd includes : egally owned n officer of th ased by the C ased by the C he registration his includes f means a truc ent within the that the `` Pr ent , the paym t ” means a p ss , in the are prior to the d eans each two the week in o-week period to the haulin sand , topsoil es if the Con aded for incor apply to the m ation , Borrow , ECIFICATI ON and INF ANDARD CONDI pecify the Co ners of “ Priva paid for that ocuments .
necessary to following defi ck , or a truck-t a truck leg d or registere e Contractor , Contractor for Contractor to a n of which ha franchise tran ck legally own e definition of ivate Truck '' ments shall be person having a in proximity date of the Co o week period n which the f ds thereafter .
ng of filter m and asphalt c ntractor choos rporation into movement or , backfill , ripra IONS FRASTRUC ITIONS ontractual pro ate Trucks ” re Work in a tim o ensure that nitions shall a tractor with or gally owned ed in the nam r or on behalf a “ Local Resi as been transf nsfers ) .
ned or leased “ Company Tr is registered e made to the g residence y to the limits ontract .
d , during the first Private T material , Agg concrete both ses to haul a the Work at a hauling of an ap , or reclaim CTURE ovisions which eceive a reaso mely manner a the purpose apply : r without a tra or leased me of an offi of a “ Local R ident ” , and ferred from th d by a “ Local ruck ” .
with a truck e trucker 's age or a corpora s of the Contr term of the C Truck worked gregate Base h within and any of the abo a later date .
ny other type med asphalt co h will be follo onable distrib and at rates a of this Item is ailer .
by the Co icer or the n Resident ” , he Contractor Resident ” , o ker 's agent th ent .
ation having i ract for a per Contract , comm d on the Co e/Subbase , s outside the l ove-noted ma of material in oncrete .
ITEM : 932 Page 932-1 owed by the bution of the as specified s achieved .
ontractor or ame of the r to a “ Local other than a hat requires its principal iod of three mencing on ontract , and shouldering imits of the aterials to a ncluding but PR Pag 932 932 IVATE TRUC ge 932-2 2.3 .4 The tend .1 .5 The app “ Com .6 The viola 2.4 CONDIT .1 Whe .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 CKS Contractor s dered Quantit The remaind “ Private Truc Contractor lies when 25 mpany Trucks Owner shal ation of this c TIONS en “ Private Tr The Contrac Contract .
The Contract for trucks on “ Private Truc they are hired The Contrac requirements .1 Operator  Occu  Work  Work .1 OHS Cons or a ( ASH .2 WAT .2 Operator material .
.3 Operator “ Private Truc Contract for o or “ Company “ Private Truc membership not distributin direct the Co DEPARTM shall carry out y of each ma der ( 75 % ) of cks ” , regardles shall stop us 5 % by weight s ” .
l refuse to w lause .
rucks ” are hire ctor shall be tor shall give the Contract .
cks ” must be d. ctor shall ens s : r has success upational Hea kplace Hazard k Area Traffic S and WHMI struction Safe member of HCAT ) .
TCM awarene r has met the r has carried o cks ” not avail other work , d y Trucks ” hau cks ” shall be in any organ ng the Work ntractor to hir STA MENT of TR STANDARD CO t the Work in terial to which each materi ss of the tend sing “ Compa t of the tend weigh and pa ed the followi responsible Private Truck .
properly equi sure that ope sfully complet alth and Safet dous Materia Control Man IS training c ety Associatio the Associat ess training is required driv out a pre-trip lable at the t do not later ha ling the 25 % e hired in a nization .
In th under this Ite re “ Private Tr ANDARD S RANSPORT ONDITIONS such a way h this clause a ial to which dered or actua ny Trucks ” to dered Quantit ay for any m ng conditions for the hirin k owners at le ipped , registe erators of “ P ed the followi ty ( OHS ) Awa l Information ual ( WATCM courses shall on ( NBCSA ) ; S tion of Safety available on ver ’ s licence f inspection ea time of reque ave the right t allotted to the fair and reas he event the O em in a fair a ucks ” in acco SPECIFICA TATION an that no more applies is hau this clause a al Quantity of o haul a ma ty of that ma aterial hauled s shall apply : ng of “ Private east 24 hours ered , and insu Private Truck ing safety trai areness ; System ( WH ) Awareness .
l be provide Safety Servic y and Health the NBDTI w for the type of ach Day that t est by the Co to “ bump ” “ P e Contractor .
sonable man Owner determ and reasonab ordance with t ATIONS nd INFRAS e than 25 % by uled by “ Com applies is to f material .
aterial to whi aterial has be d by “ Compa e Trucks ” re s notice of the ured for the W ks ” have met ining : MIS ) training .
ed by the N ces New Brun h Consultants website .
f “ Truck ” bein the “ Truck ” is ontractor , or w rivate Trucks nner and with mines that the ble manner , th this clause .
TRUCTUR ITEM : 93 January , 20 y weight of th mpany Trucks ” be hauled b ch this claus een hauled b any Trucks ” equired on th e requiremen Work for whic t the followin ; and ew Brunswic nswick ( SSNB s and Traine ng used to ha s used .
who leave th ” already hire hout regard t e Contractor he Owner ma RE 32 15 he ” .
by se by in he ts ch ng ck B ) ; rs ul is ed to is ay DEPA PRIVA Janua 932.4 .
ARTMENT ATE TRUCKS ary , 2015 1 .7 On Priv .8 The Priv “ Pa .9 The hau wh and 931 to b ove per .10 In t tim pro Priv und adm dis .11 The ma the Ow the .12 The pay inc .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .13 The GC STAN of TRANS S e Private Tru vate Truck is e Contractor vate Truck , in ay Period ” .
e Contractor ulage rates s atsoever from d except dedu 1 , fuel supplie be deducted erweight mus riod that “ Priv the event the ely manner a ovisions of G vate Truck , th der the Con ministration c charge of the e Contractor s aterial on the C event that th wner may pay terms of the a e Owner may yment by the lude but not b the amount the date ( s ) t the distance the total am the amount the Private T e Owner may C 47 to verify p NDARD SP PORTATIO STA uck shall , if av hired from th shall , within n full , for the shall pay the set out in Ite m the amount uctions for ov ed by the Con by the Contr st be posted i vate Trucks ” a e Contractor as stated ab C 20 .
In the he Owner sha ntract , the a cost of 20 % e Owner ’ s liab shall not ente Contract at a e Owner dete the owner of agreement be y at any time Contractor t be limited to : and type of m the material w e of the haul o ount paid by of any deduc Truck .
y at any time payment to th ECIFICATI ON and INF ANDARD CONDI vailable , be h e same “ Loca one week a e Work done , e owner of ea ms 801 and t paid to the o verweight mat ntractor and/o actor from th n a visible lo are hauling an does not pay ove , the Ow e event of dir all deduct fro amount paid of that amo bility under the r into an agre rate less than ermines that th f the Private T etween the Co or on a regul o the owner material haule was hauled , or hours of Wo the Contracto ctions made b carry out an he owner of a IONS FRASTRUC ITIONS hired from ea al Resident ” .
after each “ P by the Priva ach Private T 802 .
There owner of the terial in accor or Workers Co e owner of th ocation at the ny materials o y the owner wner may pay rect payment m any amoun to the own ount , which is e Contract to eement with th n the haulage he Contractor Truck in accor ontractor and t ar basis requ of any Privat ed by the Priv ork , if hired o or to the owne by the Contrac audit on the a Private Truc CTURE ach “ Local Re Pay Period ” , ate Truck on Truck haulage shall be no Private Truck rdance with th ompensation he Private Tr e Scale Hous on this Contra of the Privat y the owner t by the Own nt due and p ner of the s to the exte the Contracto he owner of a rates set out r has entered rdance with 9 the owner of t uire the Contr te Truck .
The ate Truck , on an hourly b er of the Priva ctor from the records of the ck .
esident ” befor pay the own the Contract e rates not le deductions o k by the Cont he provisions deductions .
T uck for mater e at all times act .
te Truck in fu directly purs ner to the ow ayable to the Private Truc ent of the de or .
any Private T in Items 801 into such agre 32.4.1.9 , notw the Private Tru ractor to prov e proof of pay basis , ate Truck , and payment to th e Contractor ITEM : 932 Page 932-3 re a second ner of each t during the ss than the of any kind tractor save under Item The amount rials hauled s during the ull and in a uant to the wner of the e Contractor ck plus an eduction , a ruck to haul and 802 .
In eement , the withstanding uck .
vide proof of yment shall d he owner of pursuant to DEPA HEAVY Janua 933.1 933.2 933.3 ARTMENT Y EQUIPMEN ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 The pu highwa DEFINITIO .1 For the .1 He fron .2 Ro con .3 Co exc mix mo .4 Sub top dep .5 Bac Do em USAGE OF .1 Heavy rock cu .2 Heavy such us .1 Da wo .3 Heavy emban or pum .1 Afte hau the .1 STAN of TRANS NT TION rpose of this ay and bridge NS e purposes of avy Equipme nt-end loader ck means fr nstruction , wh mmon mater cavated unde xture of soil a ore competent b-subgrade m p of embankm pth depending ckfill means cuments , pla mbankments .
F HEAVY EQU Equipment m ut , or any fill th Equipment m sage does no mage to the rse , or contam Equipment m kment as long ping occurs , er completing uling if using e subgrade is The surcha placed alon subgrade an NDARD SP PORTATIO STA Item is to ide construction .
this Item the ent means sc rs and like Eq actured rock hether excava rial means a er Item 106 , and rock , eith t bedrock , or means the sur ments .
The sp g on the natu the layer of aced on the UIPMENT may be used hat has rock c may be used ot damage the Roadbed is d mination such may haul over g as there is hauling with H g repairs , if a trucks that m surcharged to rge shall con g the Subgra nd sufficient w ECIFICATI ON and INF ANDARD CONDI entify under w following def rapers , rock t uipment used k produced fr ated under Ite any type of s 107 or 161 , er naturally o mixed by the rface at a spe ecified depth re of the unde f Borrow A/A e sub-subgra to build and/o comprising at to build and/ e Roadbed .
defined as , b h as waste ma backfill mate no rutting or Heavy Equipm any , in accord meet the axle o allow haulin nsist of the s ade Shoulder width for at lea IONS FRASTRUC ITIONS what condition finitions apply trucks , overw d to transport rom any typ em 108 or 161 soil suitable or imported occurring as i Contractor ’ s ecified depth b is usually 60 erlying mater A1-quality ma ade surface or haul mate t least the top /or haul on c but is not limit aterial spilling erial that form pumping of th ment shall cea dance with 93 e mass requir ng with Heavy same materia r to provide ast one-way t CTURE ns Heavy Equ y : weight straigh materials .
e of bedrock 1 or imported for Roadbed under Item 1 in the zone o method of ex below Subgra 00 mm but ma ial .
aterial , as ind to Subgrade rials on rock p 1 m of Subg common mate ted to , rutting g from the hau ms the top laye he underlying ase immediat 33.3.3.1 , the rements of R y Equipment .
al as used fo at least 1 m travel for a loa uipment may ht or trailer du k suitable fo under Item 1 d constructio 21 .
It can al of weathered xcavation and ade in underc ay be a lesse dicated in th e elevation Subgrade , a rade .
erial Subgrad g that gets pr uling units .
er of a comm g material .
If s tely .
Contractor m Regulation 20 or backfill , an of cover ove aded vehicle .
ITEM : 933 Page 933-1 be used in ump trucks , or Roadbed 21. on , whether so mean a rock above d loading .
cuts and the r or greater he Contract in cuts or s in a solid de provided rogressively on material such rutting may resume 01-67 , or if nd shall be er the sub- .
HEA Pag 933 933 AVY EQUIPM ge 933-2 3.3.3.1 .4 Hea plac thro .5 Hea Sub .1 .6 The less .1 3.4 OTHER .1 The ope .2 Failu ope .3 Any be c Spe MENT .2 When h incorpora Equipme .3 The surc when in surcharg avy Equipmen cement of ba ugh 933.3.3.1 avy Equipmen bgrade elevati If the Contra above Subgr .1 Only on calendar .2 Only if th does not approval of s than 3 m of f The Contrac Engineer , in Contractor rations , and c ure of the C rations in acc delays and c considered a ecified Work D DEPARTM hauling over ated as bac ent .
charge mater corporated a e as the back nt is prohibite ckfill materia 1.3. nt is prohibite on , including act consists o rade may be a sections of th r year to form he existing Ro become uns the Engineer fill .
ctor shall sub support of su shall make complete such ontractor to cordance with costs to the C as a basis of Date or Comp STA MENT of TR STANDARD CO the surchar kfill to Subg rial will be m as backfill .
T kfill layer will n ed from haulin l , unless a s ed from haul Aggregate S of upgrading a allowed , as fo he existing ro a new Subgr oadbed does afe .
r is required p mit detailed ch request at all necessa h repairs to th stop hauling GC 18 .
Contractor res f claim for ex pletion Date , a ANDARD S RANSPORT ONDITIONS rge is finish grade elevatio easured for The operatio not be measu ng over comm urcharge is c ing along an Subbase , Agg an existing H ollows : oad that will b rade ; and s not start to d prior to Heav calculations t least 7 Days ary repairs to he satisfaction when so or sulting from p xtra costs or as the case m SPECIFICA TATION an hed , the sur on by mean payment und on of removi ured for paym mon material constructed a ny Roadbed regate Base a Highway , hau be excavated deteriorate a vy Equipment stamped and s before hauli o the Road n of the Engin rdered may r performing rep r extension o may be .
ATIONS nd INFRAS rcharge mate ns other tha der the appro ing and inco ment .
undercuts du as described surface cons and Pavemen ling with Hea or built up w nd/or the hau t hauling over d signed by a ng is due to c bed damage neer .
result in susp pairs or susp of the Limited TRUCTUR ITEM : 93 January , 20 erial shall b n with Heav oriate bid Item orporating th uring and afte in 933.3.3.1. structed abov nt .
avy Equipmen within the sam uling operatio r Culverts wit a Professiona commence .
ed by haulin pension of h ension will no d Funds date RE 33 15 be vy m he er .1 ve nt me on th al ng is ot e , DEPA BACK Janua 934.1 ARTMENT K-UP ALARM ary , 2015 GENERAL .1 All truc kilogram STAN of TRANS S cks Working o ms are to be e NDARD SP PORTATIO STA on the Contr equipped with ECIFICATI ON and INF ANDARD CONDI ract and havi h a properly f IONS FRASTRUC ITIONS ing a registe functioning , au CTURE red vehicle m udible , autom P mass greater matic back-up ITEM : 934 Page 934-1 r than 4535 alarm .
DEPA COMP Janua 936.1 936.2 ARTMENT PACTION ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite aggreg SOIL and A .1 All Roa in the I specifie .1 Fro not .2 For mo determ .1 If th ove cor .2 If th 5 % den AS .3 For det .3 For Ag ensure 936.2.1 .1 For ach gra ran .1 .2 For be sat as STAN of TRANS TION em details the ate and RAP AGGREGATE adbed materia Item under w ed percentage ozen material t be placed on ost soils , and f ined by ASTM he sample us ersize particle rrected value he material b % higher or lo nsity will be t TM D4718 .
r coarse gran termined as p ggregate Base that the mo 1 and the follo r Aggregate hieved withou adation falls o ndom samples The average time of comp r soils placed a value not g turated moistu defined in 93 NDARD SP PORTATIO STA e general req construction E als shall be pl which the mat e of maximum s shall not be n a frozen Ro for Aggregate M D698 .
sed in carryin es ( retained determined a being placed ower than th the value cal nular materia per ASTM D42 e/Subbase a oisture conte owing : Base/Subba ut adversely outside the s s of the comp e moisture co paction .
d in the top 1 greater than th ure content a 3.3 , occurs u ECIFICATI ON and INF ANDARD CONDI uirements to materials , by laced in lifts o terial is excav m dry density e incorporate oadbed surfac e Base and S ng out ASTM on the 19 m as per ASTM in the Work h e percentage lculated using als and Aggre 253. nd soil , the nt is such th se , the mois breaking do specified grad pacted in-plac ontent of Aggr .2 m to Subg he optimum m as defined by pon completio IONS FRASTRUC ITIONS be carried o y the Contract of a loose thic vated or sup uniformly thro d into the Ro ce without prio Shoulder Mate D698 has g mm sieve ) , th D4718 .
has a percen e in the sam g the actual egate Subbas Contractor sh hat compact sture content own or segre ding limits , a ce material ) .
regate Base/S grade in emba moisture cont y ASTM D425 on of compac CTURE ut with respe tor .
ckness not gr plied , and co oughout the l oadbed , and or approval of erial , the max reater than 5 he maximum ntage of over mple of 936.2 field percent se the maxim hall take all ion is achiev t shall be su egating the a as determined Subbase sha ankments , th tent as define 53 , and such ction .
P ect to compac reater than th ompacted to ift .
Roadbed ma f the Enginee ximum dry de 5 % but less th dry density size particles 2.2.1 , the ma tage of overs mum dry den necessary m ved in accor uch that com aggregate ( su d by sieve a all not be less e moisture co ed by ASTM D that no ruttin ITEM : 936 Page 936-1 ction of soil , at specified at least the terials shall er .
nsity will be han 30 % of will be the s more than aximum dry size , as per nsity will be measures to rdance with mpaction is uch that its analyses on than 3 % at ontent shall D698 or the ng damage , CO Pag 936 936 936 OMPACTION ge 936-2 6.2 .4 The optim com the cont .1 .2 .5 The dete .6 No mini .7 A te com .1 .2 .3 6.3 RAP .1 Com cons 6.4 APPLIC .1 All a Contractor mum moistur mpactive effort Contractor sh tent for comp In the event apply water t or aggregate In the event decrease the energy imp ermined by on subsequent l imum compac est strip may mpaction equip The test strip each pass of This procedu strip determin The compac density throu at least 1500 .1 Smaller c Lifts shall be mpaction of R sidered to be ATION of WA application of DEPARTM shall note t re content ) , a t , is a unique hall be respon action efficien material is t to the area to .
material is t e moisture con parted to the ne of the follo lifts shall be ction criteria d y also be use pment require p shall be pe f a compactor ure will contin nes the maxim ction equipme ughout the lift 0 vpm .
compactors w compacted to RAP placed as achieved upo ATER water shall b STA MENT of TR STANDARD CO hat the mois nd more prec e parameter fo nsible for the ncy .
too dry for c be compacte too wet for co ntent of the so e soil shall wing ASTM te placed until defined .
ed to determ ed to achieve erformed on a r until an insit ue until the d mum number ent to be use and have a m will be allowed o a minimum s Aggregate S on completing e carried out ANDARD S RANSPORT ONDITIONS sture density cisely the mo or each soil a placement of compaction as ed in order to ompaction , a oil or aggrega be sufficient ests : D1556 , the precedin ine a control this result .
a lift of placed tu maximum d ensity result of passes , co ed for test str minimum mas d for test strip of 97 % of the Subbase , Agg g the roller pa in accordanc SPECIFICA TATION an y relationship oisture density and/or aggreg f the material s specified h increase the as specified h ate .
to achieve D2167 or D2 ng lift has be l density and d material wi dry density ( c remains cons ontrol density rips shall be ss of 9 tonne ps at Culverts e control dens gregate Base attern approve ce with Item 1 ATIONS nd INFRAS p ( maximum y relationship gate matrix co at the approp herein , the C moisture con herein , the C the specifie 2922. een verified a d the number ith density te control densit stant or decre y and field mo able to prod e and a vibrat .
sity .
or shoulder m ed by the Eng 91 .
TRUCTUR SECTION : 93 January , 20 dry density p at a specifie onsidered , an priate moistur ontractor sha ntent of the so Contractor sha ed density , a as meeting th r of passes o sts taken afte ty ) is achieved eases .
The te oisture conten duce a unifor ory capacity o material will b gineer .
RE 36 15 - ed nd re all oil all as he of er d. st nt .
m of be DEPA LINES Janua 941.1 941.2 ARTMENT S AND GRAD ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 Unless deemed .2 Before all stak .3 Claims Engine measur .4 The Co Days in .5 The pre and/or Contrac .6 Constru be repla .1 The exp .7 The Co require .8 The Co .9 The Co grades .10 If , durin control Engine with the .1 If it sha .11 Standa EMBANKM .1 In emb centreli .2 The Co specifie STAN of TRANS DES TION otherwise no d necessary t commencing es , marks an will not be co er , in writing , rements by th ontractor shal n advance of s eservation of the guidance ctor .
uction stakes aced by the E e cost of repla pense .
ontractor shal d. ontractor shal ontractor shal .
ng the const point stakes er , in writing , e control poin t is determine all relocate the ard stake mark MENT CONST bankment con ine and Shou ontractor sha ed Foreslope NDARD SP PORTATIO STA oted , the Eng to establish li g the Work , th d measureme onsidered bec in sufficient t he Engineer .
l notify the En starting each stakes and m e of the Eng or marks car Engineer .
acing or resto ll furnish , set l furnish and s ll ensure acc ruction opera s or marks w , at least 7 D t locations .
ed by the Eng ese stakes an kings shall be TRUCTION nstruction the lder elevation all supply all up to Subgra ECIFICATI ON and INF ANDARD CONDI gineer shall fu nes and grad he Contractor ents .
cause of alleg time to allow ngineer of the operation req marks that ha gineer and th relessly or wil oring such sta t and paint ba set all batter ess for the E ation , the Co would interfer Days in advan gineer that th nd /or marks e as indicated e Engineer sh ns .
other stakes ade .
IONS FRASTRUC ITIONS urnish and se des required fo r shall satisfy ged inaccurac for the verific e requiremen quiring stakin ave been set he Contracto lfully destroye akes and/or m arricades aro boards .
Engineer for t ntractor finds re with the W nce of starting hese stakes o as identified b d on Standard hall supply st s , marks and CTURE et stakes , ma for the Work .
y himself/hers cies unless th cation or chec nts for stakes g or marks .
by the Engin or , shall be t ed or disturbe marks shall be ound stakes a the checking s that the loc Work , the Co g the operatio or marks are by the Contra d Drawing 941 takes for toe d grades nec arks and furn self as to the he Contractor cking of stake and/or marks neer for the c the responsib ed by the Con e at the Contr and marks wh and control o cation of the ontractor shal ons which are in conflict , th actor .
1-1. of Slope and cessary to m ITEM : 941 Page 941-1 ish data as meaning of notifies the es , marks or s , at least 3 onvenience bility of the ntractor , will ractor ’ s own hen and as of lines and Engineer ’ s ll notify the e in conflict he Engineer d Subgrade maintain the LIN Pag 941 941 941 941 NES AND GR ge 941-2 1.3 HIGHWA .1 The the t .2 The with 1.4 DEEP F .1 The elev mea .2 The .1 .2 1.5 STRUCT .1 The build Stru .1 .2 The cons .3 The and 1.6 TOLERA .1 The meth the p .2 This cros .3 Area on t RADES AY CUTS Engineer sh top of Backslo Engineer sha grades indic FILLS OR CUT Engineer sh vation as a ch asurement an se stakes sha Cuts : a ba at the Fills : a sta lift of ensu TURES Engineer sh ding line or w ucture .
The Contract required .
Engineer sh struction prog Engineer sh other Contra ANCES graded surfa hod or other m presence of th s measureme ss Slope locat as which are he ground wit DEPARTM all supply sta ope .
all provide fo ated for the S TS hall set inter heck on the i d staking .
all be set as f ck of ditch st e point of me ake will be se f fill being plac ure that the Fo hall provide working point tor shall refer all provide be gresses .
all provide la act Items in ac ace of materia method appro he Engineer .
ent shall be ta tions .
determined t th the words “ STA MENT of TR STANDARD CO akes for the S r the Contrac Shoulder ( on f rmediate stak inclination of follows : ake will be se asurement .
et in such a lo ced and at th oreslope is m pile layout , c ts as designa rence and ma enchmarks fo ayout for foun ccordance wit al placed sha oved by the En aken along th o be outside “ cut ” or “ fill ” , w ANDARD S RANSPORT ONDITIONS Subgrade cen ctor ’ s use , offs front ) and the kes at appro the Slopes e et to ensure t ocation as to e extreme ed aintaining the centreline of ated on the P aintain these or grades whi ndation excav th this Item .
all be checked ngineer and s he centreline a the specified whichever is a SPECIFICA TATION an ntreline and S set stakes on e back of ditch oximately eve excavated or that the Back be represent dge boundary e specified lin Roadway , c Plans for eac marks and ca ch will be tra vation , approa d with a 3 m shall be condu and Shoulde tolerances w applicable .
ATIONS nd INFRAS Shoulders , bac n each side of h ( on back ) .
ery 3 metres constructed kslope is not ative of the e y of the standa ne and grade .
centreline of ch major com arry out addit ansferred to th ach Roadway m straight edg ucted at select r of the Work will be spray p TRUCTUR ITEM : 94 January , 20 ck of ditch an f the alignme of change at the point o overexcavate elevation of th ard lift so as t bearings , an mponent of th tional layout a he concrete a y cuts and fill e , by stringlin ted locations k , as well as a painted direct RE 41 15 nd nt in of ed he to nd he as as s , ne in at tly DEPA LINES Janua 941.6 ARTMENT S AND GRAD ary , 2015 .4 For Agg .1 The a m .2 Sho me 941 .5 For fine .1 Fin out .6 The Co 941-1. toleranc .7 The loc Should specifie .8 Transve same l specifie .9 The loc toward the spe .10 All lines continu toleranc .11 The fin Contrac .12 All hum Contrac materia .13 When t be refe .14 The Co until su STAN of TRANS DES gregate Base e criterion for minimum sam ould the requ eet the specifi 1.6 , at his/her e grading , che e grading of t to the grades ontractor shal The varianc ce .
cation of the c er point to S ed in Table 94 erse checking location poin ed in Table 94 cation of the the Shoulde ecified materia s and grades uous transition ces over the e ished surface ct Documents mps or depr ctor by resha al as required the material i renced to the ontractor shal ch time as th NDARD SP PORTATIO STA e/Subbase che r acceptable p ple size of 20 uirements of ed tolerances r own expens ecking shall b Shoulders or s , slopes , dim l meet the de ce at any po checking shal houlder point 41-1. g shall be pe t ( station ) ba 41-1. checking dia r at the next al , specified in intermediate n for any one entire referen e at any plac s by more tha ressions exc aping or remo .
s to be place e edge of Pav ll be respons e Work is acc ECIFICATI ON and INF ANDARD CONDI ecking shall b placement sh 0 locations , sh 941.6.4.1 not s and shall co e. be performed r other restric mensions and esign lines an int checked l be longitudi t and based erformed from ased on the agonally , whe location poin n Table 941-1 to the points e point to ano nce distance l ce shall not d an the toleranc eeding the s oving the defe ed adjacent to ement .
sible to mainta cepted by the IONS FRASTRUC ITIONS be conducted all be that 90 hall be equal t be met , the onduct a new by stringlining cted or narrow tolerances a nd grades wit to any othe nally from ce on the speci m the centrel specified m en requested nt as defined 1. s of measurem other shall ex ength .
deviate from t ces specified specified tole ective area ( s o a Pavemen ain the lines e Engineer or CTURE by stringlinin 0 % or greater to or within th e Contractor s w stringline su g between ev w areas to be as directed by thin the tolera r point shall ntreline point ified material ine point tow material type d , shall be fr by the refere ment shall be xist and shall the lines and in Table 941 erances sha ) and/or repla nt the finished and grades the area is pa ng on a rando of the results he specified to shall repair th urvey of the W very stake loc e paved shal y the Enginee ances as show not exceed t to centreline and referenc ward the Shou and referenc rom the cent ence distance such that a s be within the d grades spec -1. all be correct acing the are d surface ele of the Roadw aved .
ITEM : 941 Page 941-3 om basis .
s , based on olerances .
he Work to Work as per cation .
l be carried r. wn in Table the stated e point , from ce distance ulder at the ce distance treline point e , based on smooth and e prescribed cified in the ted by the ea with new vation shall way surface LIN Pag NES AND GR ge 941-4 Su S S S Aggr Aggre Aggre NOTE : RADES urface Being ubgrade or un ubgrade or un ubgrade or un regate Subbas egate Base ( p egate Base ( fi Grade stakes except for fin Undercut me DEPARTM Graded ndercut ndercut ndercut se ( top lift ) placement ) ne grading ) s shall be plac ne grading , for eans the surfa STA MENT of TR STANDARD CO Table 9 Grade Tol roc friable ro A ced at station r which the st ace at the spe ANDARD S RANSPORT ONDITIONS 941-1 lerances Material Ty k ( except fria ock ( sandston soils Aggregate Su Aggregate B Aggregate B ns ( longitudina tations shall b ecified depth b SPECIFICA TATION an ype ble rock ) ne , shale , etc .
ubbase Base Base al reference d be at 12.5 m s below Subgra ATIONS nd INFRAS To 75 m ) 5 3 2 2 1 distances ) of 2 spacing .
ade in a cut o TRUCTUR ITEM : 94 January , 20 olerance mm/50 mm 50 mm 30 mm 25 mm 20 mm 12 mm 25 m spacing r fill .
RE 41 15 g , DEPA WORK Janua 946.1 946.2 946.3 ARTMENT K PROGRESS ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite effectiv emban with ap .2 Erodibl WORK ARE .1 For the or othe .1 A W the .2 A W or suc 946 .2 The ex therein .3 The Co have its .4 The 30 STABILIZA .1 Stabiliz is not p .2 For Wo expose Item 61 .1 Suc cut dis .3 Work A too larg by the E .4 Stabiliz Contrac erosion .5 Stockp STAN of TRANS SION TION em describes ve protection kment Work pproved Work e material inc EAS e purpose of t rwise unstabi Work Area ma e 30-Day perio Work Area ma one large fill ch large Work 6.3.3 applies .
xtent of each ) shall be as i ontractor may s own 30-Day -Day period s ATION zation shall m practicable to ork Areas tha ed areas shal 14. ch Work Area t-off date for cretion of the Areas that ca ge ( per 946.2 Engineer .
zation is not ctor shall add n control meas iles , including NDARD SP PORTATIO STA s the proced of the env in erodible m Schedule ( s ) cludes any ma this Item , a W ilized on a giv ay encompas od ; or ay be part or a requiring ma k Area in whic Work Area ( s indicated on t y work on mo y period .
shall begin the mean hydrosee do hydroseed at can be com l be acceptab as shall be mu hydroseeding Engineer .
nnot be com 2.1.2 ) , shall h required on t dress the rele sures .
g topsoil piles ECIFICATI ON and INF ANDARD CONDI dures and tim vironment an materials , by p submitted pe aterial that ha Work Area is a ven Day , it is s several sm all of a large aterial from s ch the cut/fill station limits , the approved ore than one e day that gru eding of all e ding , mulchin mpleted within bly shaped , to ulched under g per 614.4. pleted within ave all erodib the top surfa ease of suspe , shall be mu IONS FRASTRUC ITIONS meframes the nd orderly p performing th er Item 906. as the potenti an area of the date specific .
all cuts and f cut and fill ; on several cuts a Work is not a estimated q initial and su Work Area ubbing , stripp erodible mate g of such ma n the 30-Day opsoiled whe Item 616 if th Placement of the 30-Day ble materials ace of a fill o ended solids lched under I CTURE e Contractor progression o he Work dilige al to release e Work Site w . fills if they all ne large cut t and/or borrow able to be co uantities and ubsequent Wo at a time , bu ping , cut , fill co rials , or , whe aterials .
period , all d ere specified , he 30-Day pe f topsoil in su period becau mulched und or on the floo through the tem 616 .
P r shall follow of the exca ently and in a sediment .
which has be can be comp that satisfies s w to complete ompleted with duration of c ork schedules ut each Work onstruction be n the Engine itches , slopes and hydrose eriod extends uch cases wi use cut/fill qu der Item 616 or of a cut h installation of ITEM : 946 Page 946-1 w to ensure vation and accordance en grubbed pleted within several fills ; e. For each in 30 Days , cut/fill Work s. k Area shall egins .
eer deems it s and other eded under beyond the ill be at the uantities are as directed owever the f applicable WO Pag 946 946 ORK PROGR ge 946-2 6.4 UNCOM .1 Wor the shal hydr .2 Wor with the .1 .3 Wor 616 616 6.5 OTHER .1 Eros in ac .2 Eros cont 605 .3 Area failu Con .4 Area prec 812 .5 If sta Item Sun .6 The work .7 Roc Eng plac rock und .1 ESSION MPLETED WO rk Areas that 30-Day perio ll be stabiliz roseeding are rk Areas that cuts/fills unc end of the 30 Abandonmen valid cause .
V order by the Work for reas rk Areas that , except any .2 and 616.4 sion-prone em ccordance wi sion-prone cu trolled by Sed , respectively as that have ure before hyd ntractor ’ s expe as that have cipitation , run and hydrose abilization of m , the Contra days and Sta “ Item 946 W k progression ck cuts shall ineer agrees ce for use at k cut foreslop er 946.1.2 or Rock fills sha stabilization i 946.1.2 or ot DEPARTM ORK AREAS have been u d shall be sta zed as direc e completed .
have not be completed sha 0-Day period o nt shall mean Valid cause w Engineer or sons not attrib are not comp Work Areas at the Contra mbankments c th Item 948 a uts shall be ex diment Contro y or as otherw been accep droseeding h ense and then been accepta noff or slope eded under It erodible mate actor shall pa atutory Holida Work Progres n. be subject to that some of a later date .
pes and ditch otherwise rel all be subjec if the slopes a herwise relea STA MENT of TR STANDARD CO nder continuo abilized per 9 cted by the een under con all be mulched or by the 7th D n ceasing con would include r officials from butable to the pleted at the t the Contracto actor ’ s expens constructed w and as elsewh xcavated such ol Fence and wise directed b ptably shaped has been don n hydroseede ably shaped a failure , shall tem 614. erials has not ay to the Ow ays ) that the re sion Tracking o the Work A the in situ roc The stabiliza es are to be lease sedime ct to the Work are to be tops ase sediment .
ANDARD S RANSPORT ONDITIONS ous construct 946.3.3 .
Work Engineer p ntinuous cons d per 616.2 a Day after aba nstruction on t unworkable s m DFO , DEL e Contractor ’ s time of winter or failed to m se .
within 30 m of here specified h that runoff i /or Erosion C by the Engine d but are dam e , shall be a ed under Item and hydrosee be repaired , t been perform wner a penal equired Work g Report ” is Area and 30- ck and/or blas ation requirem topsoiled or ent .
k Area and 3 soiled or are d . SPECIFICA TATION an tion but are n k shall continu per Item 616 struction , or t and 616.4 at t andonment , w the cuts and site condition LG or other r s actions or fa r shutdown s ulch under 94 f natural wate d in the Contra s directed to Control Struct eer .
maged by pr acceptably rep m 614. eded , but are reshaped un med by the 30 lty of $ 1000 k remains uns considered a -Day require sted but unex ments of 946 are deemed 30-Day requir deemed to be ATIONS nd INFRAS not completed ue on the cut 6 , until final that have be the Contracto whichever is s fills in a Wor ns due to prec regulatory ag ailure to act .
hall be mulch 46.4.2 shall b ercourses sha act Documen one or more ures per Item recipitation , r paired and re e subsequentl nder the prov 0th Day as de 0.00 for each stabilized .
as official doc ments of 946 xcavated rock 6.3 do not ap d to be an ero rements of 94 e an erodible TRUCTUR ITEM : 94 January , 20 d by the end o s and fills , an shaping an en abandone or ’ s expense b sooner .
rk Area witho cipitation , or a ency to ceas hed under Ite be mulched pe all be stabilize nts .
exit points an m 602 and Ite runoff or slop eshaped at th ly damaged b visions of Ite escribed in th h Day ( exce cumentation o 6.2 unless th k may be left pply unless th odible materi 46.2 , includin material unde RE 46 15 of nd nd ed by ut an se m er ed nd m pe he by m his pt of he in he al ng er DEPA DISPO Janua 947.1 ARTMENT OSAL AREAS ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 Disposa all othe .2 In case Impact .3 For dis during t .4 Disposa Docum shall n waterco .5 Contrac disposa .1 If th res law pro .2 The and .1 .6 Disposa 101.4 , .7 The mi Highwa .8 Entranc at an a .9 Entranc perpen distanc shall be and oth .10 Disposa finished erosion and to entranc STAN of TRANS S TION al areas are f er surplus exc es where soil Managemen posal of know the Work , the al areas sha ents , where t ot be within ourse .
ctors shall be al areas , and he Contracto sponsible for a wns , buildings oven to have b e Contractor d rehabilitatio Stabilization al areas shall prior to the pl nimum distan ay shall be 15 ces to dispos ngle opposing ces shall not dicular to , or ce of 15 metre e placed at le her debris sha al areas sha d appearance n , obtaining g the satisfac ce shall be eit NDARD SP PORTATIO STA for the dispos cavation mate or rock is s t Branch of D wn contamina e Contractor s all be located the materials 30 metres o e responsible are responsib r places a dis any damages s or any othe been caused shall be resp n of disposal n of disposal a l be cleared o acement of a nce between 50 metres unle sal areas shal g the flow of t t exceed 10 r at the ang es .
All mater east 15 metres all not be left all be constru e , and shall guidance from tion of the E ther removed ECIFICATI ON and INF ANDARD CONDI sal of waste f rials not iden uspected of DELG at ( 506 ) ated soil or ro shall apply to d outside the placed in the of any water to obtain per ble for all cos sposal area o s to septic tan er part of th by placemen ponsible for a areas .
areas shall be of all Merchan any waste .
the entrance ess specifical ll be at right a traffic on divid metres in op le defined in rials being pu s beyond the in the disposa ucted such th be hydrose m the describe Engineer .
Win or shaped to IONS FRASTRUC ITIONS from clearing tified for stoc being contam ) 453-7945 fo ock and const DELG for an e Right-of-W em shall not b rcourse or b rmission from sts thereof .
on private pro nks , wells , or e property , w nt of the dispo all costs asso e carried out i ntable Timber es of two disp lly altered by angles to the ded Highways pening width n 947.1.8 fro ushed or othe Right-of Way al area entran hat the slope eeded , mulch ed work prog ndrows of ea o a uniform an CTURE g , grubbing an kpiling .
minated , the or advice .
truction or de '' Approval To Way or as sp block or impe e allowed to m property ow operty , the O namental tree whether such osal area mate ociated with t in accordance r in accordanc posal areas o the Engineer centreline of s. and shall ex om the Right- erwise depos y , i.e .
beyond nce .
es are stable hed or other gression deta arth or debri nd level condi nd/or excavat Contractor sh molition wast o Operate '' .
pecified in th ede natural dr o cause siltat ners to use th wner shall in es or shrubs , h damage is erial .
the supply , m e with 947.1.1 ce with 101.1 on the same r , in writing .
f two-way Hig xtend back a -of-Way for a ited in the dis d the entrance and left in rwise stabiliz ils as noted s on either ition .
ITEM : 947 Page 947-1 tion and for hall call the te produced he Contract rainage and tion of any heir land as no way be driveways , alleged or maintenance 10. , 101.3 and side of the ghways and along a line a minimum sposal area e. Boulders a neat and zed against in Item 946 side of the DIS Pag 947 SPOSAL ARE ge 947-2 7.2 LICENC .1 For Natu .2 The be r .3 Inqu EAS CE OF OCCU waste dispos ural Resource licence will b responsible fo uiries should b DEPARTM PATION sal areas on C es ( DNR ) for a be issued for a or approving t be made to th STAN MENT of TR STANDARD CO Crown Land th a Licence of O all Crown Lan he locations o he Crown Lan DARD SPE RANSPORT ONDITIONS he Contractor Occupation .
nd adjacent to of individual w nds Branch at ECIFICATIO TATION an r shall apply t o the Work Si waste disposa t ( 506 ) 453-24 ONS nd INFRAS to the NB Dep ite .
DNR dist al sites on the 437 .
TRUCTUR ITEM : 94 January , 20 partment of trict staff shall e Crown Land RE 47 15 l d. DEPA ENVIR Janua 948.1 948.2 ARTMENT RONMENTAL ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 The C Specific Regula concern the Con .1 Ref .2 Measur of wate practica approp .3 Environ comme .1 If n the ava me .4 If any s plant o Contrac represe Work .
.5 The Co .1 Gu but app ENVIRONM .1 The Co who ha address for wate .2 The Co rainfall deficien .3 The Ow technic the Plan STAN of TRANS L REQUIREM TION ontractor sh cations and ations of the n the protecti ntractor in acc ferences to `` W res determine ercourses aff al and not ne riate bid Item nmental prot encement of th ot possible to Contractor sh ailable on site easures as soo suspected arti or animal sp ctor shall cea entatives of th ontractor shal idance to the t not limited to proval and mit MENTAL INSP ontractor sha as completed s environmen er and runoff ontractor 's rep events the en ncies immedia wner may reta ians , will mon ns and Specif NDARD SP PORTATIO MENTS STA all carry out in such a m Province of on of the env cordance the Watercourse '' ed by the app fected directl ecessarily all s. tection meas he Work .
provide the e hall as a mini e prior to the c on as practica ifacts of histo pecies or an ase Work , in he appropriat l follow sound Contractor in the Environm tigation specif PECTION all be respons Environment ntal issues , a issues , includ presentative s ntire site shall ately addresse ain an environ nitor the Work fications as w ECIFICATI ON and INF ANDARD CONDI t the Work manner so a f New Bruns vironment , and rewith. ''
in this Item m propriate regu ly or indirect l inclusive , o sures shall environmental mum have all commenceme al in the Work orical or archa y contamina accordance te agencies a d environmen applying thes mental Manage fied in the app sible for des tal Managem cquire staff , a ding holidays shall monitor l be inspected ed .
nmental inspe k with regard ell as any app IONS FRASTRUC ITIONS on the Con as to be in swick and/or d any approv mean `` Waterc ulatory autho tly by the W n the Plans be installed protection pr l materials req ent of any Wo progression .
aeological val ated soil ( s ) a with GC 18 , and the Engin ntal constructi se practices to ement Manua plicable Enviro signating an o ment Manual ( and procure and weekend the weather d for environm ector who , alo to complianc plicable acts a CTURE ntract accord compliance the Governm vals or permits course/Wetla orities as nece Work will be and in the S d whenever rior to the com quired for the ork and shall ue are uncov are identified until the site neer has app on practices .
o his/her Work al , the recomm onmental Asse on-site enviro ( EMM ) trainin materials wh ds .
forecasts and mental mitigat ng with the E ce with enviro and regulation ding to the with various ment of Can s issued to th ands '' .
essary for the detailed , to Specifications possible pr mmencement o environmenta install the en vered or any e d during the e has been r proved resum k shall be deriv mendations , co essment ( EA ) onmental rep ng , and has th en there is th d prior , during ion deficiencie ngineer and c onmental requ ns .
ITEM : 948 Page 948-1 Plans and s Acts and nada which he Owner or e protection the degree s under the rior to the of the Work , al protection nvironmental endangered Work , the eviewed by ption of the ved from , onditions of .
presentative he ability to he potential g , and after es , and any construction uirements of ENV Pag 948 VIRONMENT ge 948-2 8.3 ENVIRO .1 The and .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 TAL REQUIR ONMENTAL M Contractor s the following Sediment an included in th .1 Sedimen prior to a Debris and e and adjacent the watercou Precautions material into fertilizers , ce Machinery an No grubbing shall take pl indicated in measures are does not hav  25 mg/L  5 mg/L f  Other lev .1 Installatio accordan Within a buf constructed f mm of clean the soil expo No blasting DFO .
In dewaterin quarry , the C suspended s background background by DELG .
.1 Erosion when de construct payment DEPARTM REMENTS MITIGATION shall complete conditions : nd erosion co he Specificatio nt and erosion and after rainf excavated ma t areas for dis urse .
shall be take a watercour ment , lime , p nd pollutants , excavation , lace within th the Contract e installed in ve a suspende over backgro from backgrou vel approved on , inspectio nce with the a ffer zone , an for the install gravel or roc sed so as to p shall take pla g an excava Contractor sh solids level , by levels during levels for lon and sedimen ewatering is ted , inspecte under the ap STA MENT of TR STANDARD CO e the Work in ntrol measure ons .
n control mea fall events to t terial within th sposal or plac en by the Co rse including aint or fresh c shall be locat embankmen he buffer zon Documents , order to ensu ed solids leve ound levels du und levels for by DELG .
on , maintena applicable Item y temporary ation of a dra ck placed the provide enviro ace in or nea ation , whether hall ensure th y the time it re any short te ger term exp nt control me conducted d , maintained ppropriate Item ANDARD S RANSPORT ONDITIONS n accordance es shall be c asures shall the satisfactio he Work Area cement in a m ntractor to pr but not limite concrete .
ted or stored nt constructio nes on both until the ap ure that run-o el in excess of uring any sho r longer term ance and re ms from the C Work Area a ainage Struct same day the onmental pro ar a waterco r a Roadway hat any turbid eaches a wat erm exposure osure ( 24 ho asures requi for Roadway d and repaire m ( s ) pertainin SPECIFICA TATION an e with the me carried out as be inspected on of the Eng a shall be rem manner such t revent discha ed to creosot in areas not i on or installat sides of eac ppropriate sed off , by the tim f : ort term expos exposure , 24 epair of thes Contract Docu access roads ture , shall be ey are built , to otection to the ourse without y cut , founda d water pum tercourse , of e ( less than 2 ours to 30 Da red to achiev y or founda ed in accorda ng to the Work ATIONS nd INFRAS asures identi s detailed on d , maintained ineer .
moved from th that it can not arge or loss o te , hydrocarb in danger of f tion of draina ch natural wa diment and e me it reaches a sure , less than 4 hours to 30 se structures uments .
s , haul roads e surfaced wit o provide suf e watercourse prior written ation excavat ped out or re no more than 24 hours ) and ays ) or other l ve this level ation excavat ance with and k. TRUCTUR ITEM : 94 January , 20 fied in 948.1 the Plans an , and repaire he watercours be returned t of any harmf bons , biocide floodwaters .
age Structure atercourse , a erosion contr a watercourse n 24 hours .
Days ; or s shall be s and/or area th at least 10 fficient cover t e from runoff .
n consent fro ion , a pit or eleased has n 25 mg/L ove d 5 mg/L fro level approve of complianc tions shall b d measured fo RE 48 15 .2 nd ed se to ful s , es as rol e , in as 00 to m a a er m ed ce be or DEPA ENVIR Janua 948.3 .
ARTMENT RONMENTAL ary , 2015 1.8 .2 .3 .9 The pur and .10 Ins sha com .11 Wa a s sha .1 .2 .3 .12 If it cof bet .13 The act and .1 .14 Ear be add app .15 Nat con tha env exp STAN of TRANS L REQUIREM It shall be th expense , to that may be properties a The Contra damage res e Contractor rpose of creat d the appropr tream Work s all notify the mmencement ater control fo site-specific m all be accomp Installing th completion ; Constructing or Stemming th pump runs w stream imm t is necessary fferdams con tween an oute e Engineer , tually comme d the Contrac No Work sh jurisdiction t rthwork shall as detailed dition to thos propriate Item tural material ntain any friab at would mak vironmental h posed to the n NDARD SP PORTATIO MENTS STA he Contractor the satisfacti required , and butting and b ctor shall be ulting from th shall not pl ting a tempor riate regulator shall be carri Engineer , in t of instream W or all Culvert i method and/o plished using e new Culve g a temporary he flow upstre whenever the ediately below y to isolate th sisting of , as er ( stream-sid upon receivin nce , will arra ctor , prior to co all commence that the Work be carried ou in the Cont se indicated , ms. s produced a ble , soluble o ke the mater hazard , from natural eleme ECIFICATI ON and INF ANDARD CONDI r ’ s responsibi on of DELG a d to obtain pe beyond .
e responsible he dewatering ace an earth rary access S ry authority ( ie ied out betwe writing , at le Work .
nstallations in r sequence is one of the fol ert in the dry y clear/light c eam and pum ere is sufficie w the Work A he stream fro s a minimum de ) wall of san ng notice fro nge an on-sit ommenceme e until the En Site is appro ut in accordan ract Docume the Enginee and/or supplie r reactive min ial prone to the presence ents after plac IONS FRASTRUC ITIONS lity to install , any erosion c ermission to p to repair , a g. h or rock ca Structure , with es ) , in writing .
een June 1st ast 7 Days in n natural wate s indicated in llowing metho y and divertin coloured plas mping the flow ent water , and Area .
om the Work , a layer of 6 ndbags and a om the Contr te meeting w ent of the instr gineer verifie oved for the co nce with Item ents and if a r shall order ed by excavat nerals , or oth decompositio e of the pare cement in the CTURE inspect , and control measu pump or relea at her/his own auseway in t hout specific a and Septemb n advance of ercourses , ot n the Plans , o ods : ng the water tic-lined diver w around the W d having the k Area , the C 6-mil clear p an inner wall o ractor as to w with represent ream Work .
es with the reg ommenceme 946 .
Erosion additional me r and approv tion or from p er deleterious on or disinte ent material o Work .
maintain , at ures for pits a ase any turbid n expense , a the watercou approval of th ber 30th .
The f the anticipa ther than thos or Item 621 i rcourse throu rsion channe Work Area , e discharge ba ontractor sha olyethylene s of earth fill .
when constru tatives from D gulatory agen nt of instream n control mea easures are e such Work its and quarri s materials o egration , or p or its by-prod ITEM : 948 Page 948-3 his/her own and quarries d water onto any and all rse for the he Engineer e Contractor ated date of se for which s specified , ugh it upon l in the dry ; ensuring the ack into the all construct sandwiched uction shall DELG , DFO ncies having m Work .
asures shall required in k under the es shall not r conditions present any ducts , when ENV Pag 948 VIRONMENT ge 948-4 8.3.1 .16 .17 .18 .19 .20 .21 .22 TAL REQUIR Additional co by the Contra A copy of the the duration designated to Any ruts crea smooth and b In order to p occur within 3 Equipment s and Equipme new Roadbe All exposed with hay mulc Temporary B .1 Whereve installed .2 The brid enough clearance .1 At le .2 At le .3 Suffi .3 Approved .1 A flat .2 Two outer be tr .4 Tempora channel .5 Approach evergree .6 Felled tim .7 Tempora required .
DEPARTM REMENTS onditions of ap actor .
e Watercourse of the Contr o act on beha ated by Equip blanketed wit prevent the s 30 m or a wat hall not be st ent operation d being const erodible mat ch at the end Bridges er crossing a so as to clea ge shall have landward of e below the u ast 0.75 m ab ast 0.45 m ab ciently high a d types of tem tbed trailer bo or more pre r two of whic avelling over ary bridges s is straight and h ramps sha en boughs tha mber shall not ary bridges sh .
All exposed STA MENT of TR STANDARD CO pproval as de e and Wetlan ract , and sha alf of DELG or pment within h hay/straw m pread of inva tercourse of w ationed and m ns shall be lim tructed .
erial within 3 of each work stream is ne r-span the wa e foundations the stream underside of t bove the bed bove the ice o above the grou mporary bridg ody frame dec fabricated lam h are aligned them .
shall be insta d narrow and all consist o at are trample t be skidded o hall be remov d erodible soil ANDARD S RANSPORT ONDITIONS etailed in the C nd Alteration P all be made r an employee 30 m of a w mulch .
asive plants , wetland .
materials sha mited to the f 30 m of a wa k Day .
ecessary , a p atercourse .
s of skids or bank shoul he stringers m of the waterc or water surfa und at both e es include the cked with ste minated squa d collinear wit alled over a the banks ar of rock or c ed in place .
or dragged ac ved as the W shall be stab SPECIFICA TATION an Contract Docu Permit shall b available upo e of DFO .
watercourse s no washing all not be store footprint of th tercourse or prefabricated logs placed lders and hi meets the foll course ; ace the day of ends to have D e following : el or squared ared-timber s th the wheels section of th re high and st lean , coarse cross any tem Work progress bilized immed ATIONS nd INFRAS uments , shall be kept on the on request o hall be imme of tools or m ed in a wetlan he existing R wetland sha temporary b on undisturb gh enough owing criteria f installation ; Daylight visib d timbers ; and swamp mats s of the Equip he watercour teep .
e , free drain mporary bridg ses and they iately after re TRUCTUR ITEM : 94 January , 20 l be carried o e Work Site fo of an inspecto ediately grade machinery sha nd at any time Roadbed or th ll be stabilize bridge shall b bed ground fa such that th a : and le .
d of girders , th pment that w rse where th ing gravel , o e. are no longe emoval .
RE 48 15 ut or or ed all e , he ed be ar he he will he or er DEPA ENVIR Janua 948.3 .
948.4 948.5 948.6 ARTMENT RONMENTAL ary , 2015 1.22 .8 .9 COMPLIAN .1 Failure will res environ of Can comme any env Work .
.2 Delays the req any ext .3 In orde environ and pai POLLUTIO .1 The Co product basin , system .2 It shall and reg WATER AN .1 The Co drainag .2 The Co public a .1 The reg STAN of TRANS L REQUIREM Unless temp weather fore As soon as melt and/or All tempora Documents .
NCE AND DE by the Contr sult in the C nment-related nada , and m ences the Wo vironmental d to the Contra uirements of tension of the er to comply mental repres d according to N CONTROL ontractor sha ts , camp refu or into any s and/or grou be the Contr gulations and ND RUNOFF ontractor shal ge or natural w ontractor sha and private pr e Contractor gulatory agenc NDARD SP PORTATIO MENTS STA porary bridge ecast and the the integrity rain events , t ry bridges sh .
LAYS ractor to carry Contractor b Acts or Regu may result in ork as specifie damage result actor 's Work o this Item wil e Contract Co with this Item sentative may o the applicab L all not dump , use or other area which m undwater .
ractor ’ s respo to obtain all n CONTROL ll perform the watercourses .
ll dispose of roperty , or an shall comply cies having ju ECIFICATI ON and INF ANDARD CONDI es are designe e water level of any bridg the bridge sha hall be remo y out the Wor eing liable f ulations of the n suspension ed and/or take ting from his/ operation res l not be cons mpletion Date m and applica y direct that a ble Items in the spill or disp debris into a may ultimate onsibility to fam necessary pe e Work in a m water resultin y portion of th y with all req risdiction rega IONS FRASTRUC ITIONS ed to accomm beneath eac ge is threaten all be immedi oved prior to rk in accordan for any fines e Province of n of Work , u es remedial m her inaction o ulting from su sidered as a b e. able permits additional env e Contract Do pose of any O any watercour ely cause pol miliarize her/ ermits and ap manner so a ng from the W he Work com quirements of arding the disp CTURE modate a 1:1 ch bridge sha ned by increa ately remove the dates s nce with the r s , levies or f New Brunsw under GC 1 measures to r or improper a uspension of basis of claim and regulati vironmental m ocuments .
Overburden , rse , reservoir llution to wat himself with t provals for th as to not obs Work in a ma mpleted or und f DELG , mu posal of wate 00-year flood all be closely ased runoff d ed .
pecified in th requirements penalties m wick and the G 8 , until the repair or com ctions in carry Work for failu m for extra co ons , Contrac mitigation be trees , brush , r , or other na ter drainage the applicable e operations .
truct the flow anner not de der constructio nicipal codes r from excava ITEM : 948 Page 948-5 d event , the monitored .
ue to snow he Contract of this Item made under Government Contractor mpensate for ying out the ure to follow osts , nor for ctor 's on-site carried out , , petroleum atural water or storage e legislation .
w of surface etrimental to on .
s and other ations .
ENV Pag 948 948 948 VIRONMENT ge 948-6 8.7 RELEAS .1 The any fuel .1 8.8 FUEL ST .1 The up a .2 Equ ( priv .3 Fue grou 8.9 WETLAN .1 To m ensu vege .1 .2 In w cons .3 Veh road TAL REQUIR SE OF FUEL Contractor , aspect of the and/or other This shall app of the Owner TORAGE AN Contractor s and absorption ipment shall vate well ) .
l and other ha undwater sour NDS minimize the ure that all E etation , and a The cleaning shovels or sim wetland areas struction-relat icles and equ dways and ac DEPARTM REMENTS AND OTHER including any e Contract , sh hazardous ma ply to the Wor , and/or any C D HANDLING shall take prop n materials at not be fuelle azardous mat rce ( private w spread of inv Equipment en again before th g shall consis milar tools , to there shall b ted activities s uipment used cess areas .
STA MENT of TR STANDARD CO R HAZARDOU y subcontracto all be respons aterials , regar rk Site , all lan Crown Land b G per environm the Work Are ed within 30 terials shall no ell ) .
asive plant sp ntering areas he Equipment st of digging o the extent pra be no grubbin shall be confin during const ANDARD S RANSPORT ONDITIONS US SUBSTAN ors and/or an sible for all co rdless of the c ds being used being utilized f ental protectio ea , during fue m of a water ot be stored w pecies such a near , or in , t leaves such or scraping o acticable .
ng or ditching ned to the clea truction activit SPECIFICA TATION an NCES ny agent ( s ) of ontainment an cause of the re d by the Cont for the Work u on measures lling and main rcourse , wetla within 100 m o as purple loos wetland hab areas .
off the vegeta g , except for aring limits .
ties in wetlan ATIONS nd INFRAS f the Contrac nd cleanup of elease .
tractor and un under the Con s , such as hav ntenance of th and or groun of a watercou sestrife , the C itat is cleane ation and mud culvert instal nds shall use TRUCTUR ITEM : 94 January , 20 ctor involved f any release o nder the contr ntract .
ving spill clea he Equipment ndwater sourc rse , wetland o Contractor sha ed of mud an d by means lations , and a only approve RE 48 15 in of rol an t. ce or all nd of all ed DEPA WORK Janua 951.1 951.2 ARTMENT KING CONDIT ary , 2015 CLEAN PR .1 During conditio .2 The Co clear a leave th .1 If th req .2 If th Eng mo DAMAGE T .1 The Wo Work u .2 If any s repair , thereof STAN of TRANS TIONS REMISES the course o on satisfactor ontractor sha way all rubb he premises i hese requirem quiring him to he Contracto gineer may ca oney owing to TO WORK ork shall be a ntil the Work such loss or d restore and f , shall be com NDARD SP PORTATIO STA of the Work ry to the Engin ll upon the c ish , surplus a n a neat and ments are no remedy the s or fails to rem ause the situa the Contracto at the risk of t is accepted b damage occur re-execute th mpleted within ECIFICATI ON and INF ANDARD CONDI the Contract neer .
completion of and waste m tidy condition ot met , the En situation .
medy the situa ation to be re or .
the Contracto by the Owner rs before the he lost or da n the specified IONS FRASTRUC ITIONS tor shall keep f the Work , r material remai n satisfactory ngineer may ation within 1 emedied and m or arising from r. final accepta amaged Work d time .
CTURE p the Work A remove all te ning on or a to the Engine give written 14 Days of re may deduct t m any cause , nce , the Con k , so that the Area in a ne emporary Stru about the Wo eer .
notice to the eceipt of the he cost there which may o tractor shall i e Work , or t ITEM : 951 Page 951-1 eat and tidy uctures and ork Site and e Contractor notice , the eof from any occur to the mmediately he portions DEPA SAFET Janua 952.1 952.2 952.3 ARTMENT TY SUPPORT ary , 2015 GENERAL .1 The Co the Nat municip discrep .2 The Co .3 The Co that wil PLATFORM .1 Constru the Con .2 The Co accorda .3 Safety working .4 Constru displac .5 All wor constru safety l SAFETY N .1 A safet Contrac .2 In orde constru and 952 .1 The NB .3 Where require section 952-1 a .1 All .2 The and STAN of TRANS T SYSTEMS ontractor shal tional Building pal or local pancy the mor ontractor shal ontractor shal l cause perm MS uction safety ntract Docum ontractor sha ance with Item platforms sh g surface at th uction platfor ement .
rkers employ uction activity ines at all tim ET SUPPOR ty net support ct Documents er to provide uct the suppo 2-2. e anchor asse B. the Contrac ments for th s , the 10 ton and 952-2. structural ste e safety net s d the diaphrag NDARD SP PORTATIO STA ll observe con g Code , the p regulations re stringent re l Work specif ll ensure at a anent deform platforms sh ents .
all be respon m 956. hall be desig he level of the rms shall be ed in the ins y on or outsid mes .
RT SYSTEM t system shal s. e support for rt system for emblies shall ctor chooses he Work ; the ne clevises a eel fabrication support syste gm forming s ECIFICATI ON and INF ANDARD CONDI nstruction saf provincial reg having auth equirements s ically in refere all times that mation .
all be provide sible for the ned and con e girder botto e adequately stallation or r de of the spa l be provided r safety nets safety net lin be made ava to employ e Contractor and the 16 mm shall conform em and the s hall commenc IONS FRASTRUC ITIONS fety measure ulations perta hority provide shall apply .
ence to CAN/ no part of the ed by the Co design and nstructed to m flange .
y fastened a removal of s andrel girders d by the Contr s , the Contra nes as indica ailable by the safety nets shall supply m steel cable m to CAN/CS safety nets m ce .
CTURE es as referenc aining to work ed that in a /CSA S269.1 e Work shall ontractor at th the construc provide a co and secured lab overhang s shall be pr ractor at the l actor shall s ated on the S Owner from s as a mean y and instal e indicated on A S6 and S16 ust be in pla ced in but no kplace safety any case of and CAN/CS be subjected he locations ction of the p ontinuous and to prevent g brackets or roperly secure ocations indic upply all ma tandard Draw stock at DTI F ns to satisfy l the HP310 n the Standar 6.1. ace before the ITEM : 952 Page 952-1 ot limited to , y and/or any conflict or SA S269.2 .
d to loading indicated in platforms in d unbroken accidental r any other ed to static cated in the aterials and wings 952-1 Fredericton , the safety 0x132 steel rd Drawings e deck slab SA Pag 952 FETY SUPPO ge 952-2 2.3 .4 Onc net , .1 .2 .5 Whe the asse ORT SYSTEM ce the safety cables , clevis With the exce remain the pr The anchor b the end of the ere the Contr safety requir embly and sh DEPARTM MS net system is ses and the H eption of the roperty of the bolts shall be e Work .
actor choose rements for t all remain in STA MENT of TR STANDARD CO s no longer re HP310x132 st anchor bolts , e Contractor .
installed in th s to employ a the Work , the place at the e ANDARD S RANSPORT ONDITIONS equired in the teel sections .
, all removabl he anchor bo a system othe e anchor bol end of the Wo SPECIFICA TATION an e Work , the C . le portions of olt assembly a er than safety lts shall be i ork .
ATIONS nd INFRAS Contractor sh f the safety ne and shall rem y nets as a m nstalled in th TRUCTUR ITEM : 95 January , 20 hall remove th et system sha main in place a eans to satis he anchor bo RE 52 15 he all at fy olt DEPA AUDIT Janua 953.1 953.2 ARTMENT TED SAFETY ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite Work p DETAILS .1 The Bid the Cer ( NBCSA .1 Ten .2 The Co “ Letter provide .1 Evi Co .2 Evi eva aud .3 The Co STAN of TRANS Y PROGRAM TION em outlines th performed on dder shall sub rtificate of Re A ) , or approv nders without ontractor sha of Good Sta e the following dence of CO nstruction Sa dence of an aluated by th dited safety p e Contractor ntract .
NDARD SP PORTATIO STA he Contractor this Contract .
bmit , as part o ecognition Pro ved alternative t certification ll maintain a nding – In P g : OR status fro afety Associat audited safe he Engineer u rogram will be shall mainta ECIFICATI ON and INF ANDARD CONDI r ’ s responsibil .
of their tende ogram by the e. at tender ope valid COR , rocess ” certif m other mem tions using the ety program c using the NB e at the discr ain a valid C IONS FRASTRUC ITIONS lities with res er , a Certificat e New Brunsw ening will be r as evidenced fied by NBCS mber associa e NBCSA Re certified by an BCSA Safety retion of the E COR until fina CTURE pect to an au te of Recognit wick Constru rejected .
d by a Letter SA .
Alternativ ations of the eciprocal Proc n independen Audit Instrum Engineer .
al completion udited safety p tion ( COR ) is ction Safety A r of Good Sta vely , the Con Canadian Fe cess ; or nt agency , w ment .
Accept n of all Work ITEM : 953 Page 953-1 program for ssued under Association anding or a tractor may ederation of hich will be tance of an k under the DEPA CONS Janua 956.1 ARTMENT STRUCTION D ary , 2015 GENERAL .1 The Co includin .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9 .10 .11 .12 .13 .14 .15 .2 Six cop Profess schedu above- .1 The des .3 Drawin .4 The Co .1 The .1 .2 .3 .2 The per .3 At dev .5 No fab drawing Engine STAN of TRANS DRAWINGS A ontractor sha ng , but not lim Bridge bearin Bridge expan Cofferdam in Removal of O Falsework ; Formwork ; Shop Drawin Shop Drawin Shoring ; Temporary d Filter Screen Shop Drawin Overhead sig Large Concre Precast Conc pies of the dra sional Engine uled construct listed items .
e Engineer s sign calculatio gs and desig ontractor shal e Contractor r The Contra construction The produc specified req That the C requirement e Contractor s rson responsi the time of viations in the brication and/ gs and design er , as per 956 NDARD SP PORTATIO AND CALCU STA all supply the mited to , the fo ngs ; nsion joints ; cluding bracin Obsolete Brid gs of all meta gs for prestre etour Structu ; gs for Culvert gn structures ; ete Pipes ; and crete Box Cul awings and tw eer , shall be s tion , demolitio shall , in writi ons .
n calculations l review all sh represents by actor has d n conditions , o t requiremen quirements ; a Contractor ha ts of the Work shall confirm ible .
submission , e shop drawin /or construct n calculations 6.1.2 , 956.1.3 ECIFICATI ON and INF ULATIONS ANDARD CONDI e Engineer w ollowing : ng ; ge Structures alwork ; essed concret res ; ts per 130.3 , d lverts .
wo copies of submitted to on and/or fabr ng to the Co s shall be spe hop drawings y this review t etermined a or will do so ; nts , catalogue and as checked k and the Con this review o the Contrac ngs from the r ion shall com s are required 3 and 956.1.4 IONS FRASTRUC ITIONS with drawings s ; te beams ; 131.3 and 14 the design ca the Engineer rication of any ontractor , ac ecific to the pr prior to subm that : and verified e numbers a and co-ordin ntract Docum of each shop d ctor shall no requirements mmence on d until drawin 4 unless appro CTURE s and design 40.3 ; alculations , st r at least 14 y of , but not e cknowledge r roject for whic mission to the all field me nd similar da nated each ents .
drawing by da otify the Eng of the Contra any aspect ngs are receiv oved otherwis n calculations tamped and s Days in adva exclusively lim receipt of dra ch they are su Engineer .
easurements ata meet or shop drawin ate , and sign gineer in writ act Document of the Work ved and retu se by the Eng ITEM : 956 Page 956-1 s for items signed by a ance of the mited to , the awings and ubmitted .
and field exceed the ng with the ature of the ting of any ts .
k for which rned by the gineer .
CO Pag 956 956 ONSTRUCTIO ge 956-2 6.1 .6 In a bea .7 The draw .1 .2 .8 Draw as th .9 Wel .1 .2 .3 .10 The infor .11 Draw and the site 6.2 TEMPO .1 The Eng .2 The num of t Stru .3 The .4 The main exec .5 The any ade ON DRAWING addition to the ms shall supp Contractor s wings .
The Owner m for conforma Identification not imply tha wings shall s he grades an ding done on Welding with valid Qualifie certified in ac Welding outs accordance w Welding to th Contract Doc provisions rmation are a wings bearing being those Contractor , p until the com RARY ACCE Contractor 's ineer .
Contractor mber of the Pr he Work , at ucture .
Contractor s Contractor ntenance , an cution of cons Contractor s property of quacy of any DEPARTM GS AND CAL e above note ply the Engine shall not be r makes no co nce to the Co of any discre t the Owner i how clearly th d/or species o any of the ab hin the Provin ed Welder 's C ccordance wit side the Provi with CSA W5 he permanen cuments or au defined unde also applicable g the seal an submitted an prior to the co pletion of the ESS STRUCT drawings for shall notify t rofessional En least one m hall submit dr shall have d removal of struction meth shall also be r the Owner d temporary ac STA MENT of TR LCULATIONS STANDARD CO ed drawings , eer with two s relieved of re mmitment to ontract Docum epancies from s providing a he size and s of all materia bove items sh nce of New B Certificate issu th CSA W59 .
ince of New B 9. t Structure sh uthorized , in w er 956.2.6 , 9 e to 956.1.1. d signature o d received by mmencemen e Work .
TURES r temporary a the Engineer ngineer ( s ) wh month in adv rawings , upon the sole r temporary su hods required responsible to due to the d ccess Structu ANDARD S RANSPORT S ONDITIONS Contractors sets of beam esponsibility f review the s ments , either i m the require comprehens spacing of all ls .
hall conform t Brunswick sh ued by the Pr Brunswick sh hall only be c writing , by the 956.2.7 and of a Professio y the Enginee t of the Work ccess Structu in writing of ho will be res vance of the n request , for responsibility upports , Struc d in their use .
o the Owner t design , const re .
SPECIFICA TATION an supplying pre layout drawin for results ob submitted sho in part or in w ements of the ive identificat members an to the require all be perform rovince of New hall be perform carried out if e Engineer .
956.2.8 rela onal Engineer er , shall be m k detailed , and ures shall be f the name ponsible for t construction r temporary ac for the de ctures , and fa to make good truction , main ATIONS nd INFRAS ecast prestre ngs .
btained by the op drawings whole .
e Contract Do tion of such d nd their conne ments of CSA med by a we w Brunswick med by a wel specifically in ating to the r , as defined ade available d shall be ma prepared by and licence the design an n of the tem ccess Structu esign , erectio acilities and t d any damage ntenance , su TRUCTUR ITEM : 95 January , 20 essed concret e use of thes or calculation ocuments doe iscrepancies .
ections as we A W59 .
elder holding or by a welde lder certified ndicated in th Owner 's soi under 956.1.2 e at the site , b aintained at th a Profession or registratio nd constructio porary acces ures .
on , operatio the design an e which befal uitability and/o RE 56 15 te se ns es .
ell a er in he ls 2 , by he al on on ss n , nd ls or DEPA CONS Janua 956.2 956.3 ARTMENT STRUCTION D ary , 2015 .6 The Co further on the the Ow purpose .1 The Co res .2 The to t bor Co .3 The dim 956 .4 Item .7 Any su location express Bidder/ the field .8 The Ow implied when m .9 The Co Engine 956.2.2 .1 The .2 The par .3 The DESIGN R .1 Structu the req STAN of TRANS DRAWINGS A ontractor sha soils studies express unde wner in conne e. e data and ntractor may sponsible for o e Contractor the suitability ring data , stud ntractor .
e use of the O minish or dero 6.2.4 and 956 m 926 shall a ubsurface inf ns indicated .
sed or impl /Contractor th d data were c wner further , that the pre made , will be ontractor , prio er written ce 2 , that : e Structure ha e Structure rameters ; and e Structure is EQUIREMEN ral members uirements of NDARD SP PORTATIO AND CALCU STA ll be permitte or reports w erstanding tha ection with the information y erect tempo obtaining any hereby waive y , adequacy a dies , reports , Owner ’ s soil ogate in any w 6.2.5. pply to the W formation ava The Owner ied , with re hat these cond collected .
makes no gu esence or ab representativ or to the load ertification sig as been cons has been c d ready to sup NTS incorporated CSA S6 .
ECIFICATI ON and INF ULATIONS ANDARD CONDI ed access to hich may hav at these data e design of t may not be orary access y further data es any claim and/or accura or other infor boring data a way from the Work .
ailable is ba r makes no espect to an ditions are no uarantees , re bsence of wa e of the actua ding of the te gned by the structed in acc constructed o pport the loads d into tempor IONS FRASTRUC ITIONS the Owner ’ s ve been prep and informat the permanen applicable t s Structures , and informati she/he may acy for the pu rmation availa and informatio responsibilitie ased on the guarantees , ny such info ot necessarily epresentation ater on the s al conditions a emporary acc designated cordance with of sound ma s for which it rary detour S CTURE s soil boring d pared by the O tion have bee nt Structure ( s to the precis and the Co ion required f have against urposes of th able from the on by the Co es of the Con investigation representat ormation , an y typical and m s or warranti site and any at the time of cess Structur Professional h the Contrac aterials cons was designed Structures sha data and any Owner or its en prepared a s ) only , and f se locations ontractor shal for his/her pur t the Owner w he Contractor e Owner and u ontractor , sha ntractor noted n made at t tions , warran d further ca may have cha ies , either ex subsurface e f construction res , shall pro l Engineer , i ctor ’ s Plans ; sistent with d. all be design ITEM : 956 Page 956-3 y applicable consultants and used by for no other where the ll be solely rposes .
with respect r of any soil used by the ll in no way d in 956.2.3 , the specific nties , either autions the anged since xpressed or explorations .
ovide to the dentified in the design ned to meet CO Pag 956 956 956 ONSTRUCTIO ge 956-4 6.3 .2 Tim Stru .1 .2 .3 Stru Stru .1 .2 .3 .4 Tem desi 6.4 GRADIN .1 Tim stam age .2 Tim .3 Stru .1 .2 .3 6.5 PROPR .1 At t pres prop ON DRAWING ber , lumber a uctures shall b Where timbe stresses for J 2 .
Where timbe stresses for S-P-F Grade uctural steel uctures may b CSA S16 for CSA Standa allowance of floor beams i CSA S6 .
mporary conc igned to meet NG and MATE ber and lum mped with th ncies authoriz ber piles used uctural steel s Steel shall be Steel membe design capac Where the gr yield point of RIETARY SHO the time of t senting allow posed to be in DEPARTM GS AND CAL and timber pile be designed t er and lumber Joint and Pla er and lumber r Beam an No .
1. members in be designed to members su ard S16 for m 30 % on live is as specified rete footings t the requirem ERIAL REQU ber used in e grade mar zed to mark lu d in the falsew hall meet the e free of kinks ers with redu city of the me rade of the st f the steel is 2 ORING , FORM the construct wable loads , ncorporated in STA MENT of TR LCULATIONS STANDARD CO es incorporat to meet the re do not bear ank Grades sh do not bear d Stringer corporated in o meet the re bject to static moving loads loading is use d in CSA S6 ; or piers sup ments of CSA UIREMENTS the construc rk used by t umber in Can work shall me requirements s and bends a ced cross-se mbers shall n teel members 200 MPa .
MS AND ACC tion drawing shall be sub nto the Work .
ANDARD S RANSPORT S ONDITIONS ted into tempo equirements o a valid and le hall not excee a valid and le Grades sha nto temporar quirements o c loads ; s , such as c ed and the dis or pporting false A S6 or ACI St ction of false he Canadian nada and/or lu eet the require s of ASTM A3 and shall hav ectional areas not be used .
s is not speci CESSORIES submission , bmitted for a SPECIFICA TATION an orary works o of CSA S269 .
egible grading ed those per egible grading all not exce ry works oth of one of the fo cranes , trucks stribution of w ework or oth tandard 318. ework , formw n Lumber Ma umber approv ements of CS 36 or CSA G4 ve no welds ac s , due to hole fied , the Eng the manufa any proprieta ATIONS nd INFRAS other than tem 1. g stamp , perm rmitted for S-P g stamp , perm eed those her than tem following : s , etc .
provid wheel loads to er such elem work , shall b anufacturing ved by the En SA 056 .
40.21M Grade cross the tens es , cuts , whic ineer shall as cturer ’ s tech ary element TRUCTUR ITEM : 95 January , 20 mporary detou missible desig P-F Grade No missible desig permitted fo mporary detou ded an impa o stringers an ments shall b e graded an association o ngineer .
e 260W .
sion flanges .
ch reduces th ssume that th nical literatur or compone RE 56 15 ur gn o. gn or ur ct nd be nd or he he re nt DEPA FALSE Janua 957.1 ARTMENT EWORK ary , 2015 GENERAL .1 The Co the Wo .2 The Co of all fa .1 The the .2 The tec .3 Falsew and sub .4 The Co comple .5 The Co effects .6 Falsew .7 The foll .1 Fal dea .2 Bra sho .3 Co the .4 Tim .5 The mm .6 Fal loa slab .7 Fal ind .8 The me .9 Sui up initi STAN of TRANS ontractor shall rk in accordan ontractor shal alsework requ e Contractor s e Work so as t e Contractor hniques , seq work shall incl bstantially co ontractor sha eted Structure ontractor shal on the comple ork design sh lowing conditi sework shall ad , live , wind a acing required own clearly on nnection poin computed de mber cap beam e minimum si m in diameter .
sework for s ds that would b ) placed at o sework shall icated in the C e falsework d embers under itable method any settleme ial set of the c NDARD SP PORTATIO STA l be responsib nce with Item ll furnish , con ired for the e shall have tot to ensure it co shall be sole uences , and ude all tempo nstructed and all certify that result from th ll carry out th eted Structure hall be in confo ons are the m be designed and stability lo d to maintain t n all drawings nts of bracing esign load but ms shall be co ize of bolts us upport of the d be imposed one time .
be constructe Contract Docu drawings shal total dead loa ds shall be us ent in the fals concrete has b ECIFICATI ON and INF ANDARD CONDI ble for all fals 956. nstruct , erect , rection of the tal control of t onforms to th ely responsib procedures a orary support d maintained t no perman he falsework d he Work such e result from t ormance with minimum requi and construct oads .
the rigidity of .
members sha t not less than onnected to tim sed in the co e Superstructu were the ent ed to produce uments .
ll clearly show ads .
ed to set the sework which been achieve IONS FRASTRUC ITIONS sework design , maintain an Work .
the Work and e falsework r ble for the de and for co-ord ts and founda to sustain the ent stresses design .
h that no per the falsework .
CAN/CSA S2 irements for a ted to provide the falsework all be designe n 50 % of the e mber piles by onnection poin ure shall be d ire Superstruc a finished Str w the amoun forms to the h may occur d. CTURE n and constru nd subsequen d shall effectiv requirements .
esign , constru dinating the va ations and sh e loads which or other de manent stres .
269.1 and as all falsework d e the necessa k under all loa ed to develop effective stren y drift pins or e nts of bracing designed and cture ( except ructure true to nt of calculate required grad before or dur uction and sha ntly remove a vely direct an .
uction means arious parts o all be proper h will come up etrimental effe sses or other specified here design and co ary rigidity and ading conditio the strength ngth of the me equivalent .
g members sh d constructed portions abov o the lines and ed deflection de or camber ring placeme ITEM : 957 Page 957-1 all carry out and dispose d supervise s , methods , of the Work .
rly designed pon it .
ects on the detrimental ein .
nstruction : d to support ons shall be required by embers .
hall be 19.0 d to support ve the deck d grades as of bending and to take nt and until FA Pag 957 957 957 LSEWORK ge 957-2 7.1.7 .10 7.2 PILES A .1 Fals .2 Mud .1 .2 .3 .3 Piles .1 .4 Whe scre 7.3 REMOV .1 The be c be p .2 Fals inclu stren .3 Fals until com .4 Fals work Anticipated to the falsework .1 These sh .2 Anticipate Engineer .1 Deck settle AND FOUNDA sework shall b dsills shall only Mudsills shal The soil bear may submit a on soil design Engineer .
Soil bearing p s shall be driv The Contrac calculated se en steel scaff ews shall prov VAL release and/ carried out in permissible .
sework shall uding concret ngth .
sework suppo l the concrete mpressive stre sework shall king towards t DEPARTM otal settlemen k drawings .
hall include fal ed settlement r. k slab forms ement relative ATIONS be founded on y be permitted l only be supp ring pressure an alternate be n parameters pressure shal ven to the bea ctor shall prov ervice load on folding type f vide full and ev /or removal of a staged man not be remo te above the orting a contin e in all the spa ngth .
be removed the supports .
STA MENT of TR STANDARD CO nts of falsewo lsework footin ts over 15 mm s between g e to the girders n solid rock or d if approved , ported on a co under mudsi earing pressu determined b l be uniformly aring capacity vide verificati a timber pile falsework is ven force aga f temporary s nner and und oved until the Bridge deck nuous or rigid ans of the con uniformly and ANDARD S RANSPORT ONDITIONS ork and forms ng settlement m will not be a irders shall s. supported on in writing , by ompacted foun lls shall not e ure value supp by field testing y distributed ov as submitted ion of the ca shall not exce used by the ainst mudsills a supports , brac der no circums e compressiv k reaches 80 frame Struct ntinuous unit h d gradually b SPECIFICA TATION an s shall be ind and joint take allowed unless be construct n driven timbe y the Engineer ndation grade exceed 150 k ported by eng g methods , su ver the entire in the falsew apacity to the eed 225 kN .
Contractor , t and ledger be cing , tempora stances will a ve strength o % of the spe ture shall not has reached 8 beginning at t ATIONS nd INFRAS icated by the e-up .
s otherwise p ted with no er or steel piles r. e. kPa , however gineering analy ubject to the a mudsill area .
work design .
e Engineer .
the base plat eams .
ary members a sudden rele f the last pla ecified 28-da be removed 80 % of the sp the centre of TRUCTUR ITEM : 95 January , 20 e Contractor o ermitted by th allowance fo s. the Contracto ysis and base approval of th The maximu tes on all jac and guys mu ease of suppo aced concret y compressiv from any spa pecified 28-da f the span an RE 57 15 on he or or ed he m ck st ort e , ve an ay nd DEPA FALSE Janua 957.3 957.4 ARTMENT EWORK ary , 2015 .5 Falsew prestres .6 Falsew .1 Fal mm FALSEWOR .1 The Co certifica in writin that the .1 In a and .2 Of STAN of TRANS ork for cast-in ssing steel ha ork piling sha sework piling m below the su RK CERTIFIC ontractor shall ation by either ng and bearing e falsework ha accordance w d sound materia NDARD SP PORTATIO STA n-place prestr as been tensio ll be removed for the suppo urface of the o CATION provide , prio r a Profession g the seal and as been const with the falsew als consistent ECIFICATI ON and INF ANDARD CONDI ressed portion oned .
d. ort of Structure original groun or to the place nal Engineer o d signature of ructed : work design s t with the desi IONS FRASTRUC ITIONS ns of Structure es over land s d or the finish ement of conc or a person de f a Profession submitted in a ign parameter CTURE es shall not b shall be remo hed Slopes , w crete or the ap esignated by al Engineer , t accordance w rs .
be released un oved to a minim whichever is lo pplication of a a Professiona to be compete with 957.1.6 a ITEM : 957 Page 957-3 ntil after the mum of 600 ower .
any loading , al Engineer , ent to certify and 957.1.7 ; DEPA FORM Janua 958.1 ARTMENT MWORK ary , 2015 GENERAL .1 The Co the Wo .2 The Co of all fo .1 The the .2 The tec .3 The Co comple .4 The Co effects .1 The we .5 Formwo .6 The foll .1 For all d .2 Bra clea .3 Flu pla the .4 In n hea less .5 For sur form .1 .2 .6 On dist STAN of TRANS ontractor shall rk in accordan ontractor shal ormwork requ e Contractor s e Work so as t e Contractor hniques , seq ontractor sha eted Structure ontractor shal on the comple e Contractor s bs of steel gir ork design sh lowing conditi rmwork shall dead and live acing required arly shown on id pressure a cing Equipme concrete .
no case , shall ad of concrete s than a 2000 rms for expos rface of the co m stiffeners , fo Undulations form fastene Should any concrete su modifications steel girder tribute the loa NDARD SP PORTATIO STA l be responsib nce with Item ll furnish , con ired for the er shall have tot to ensure it co shall be sole uences , and all certify that result from th ll carry out th eted Structure shall not weld rders .
all be in confo ons are the m be designed a loads .
d to maintain n the formwor s lateral thrus ent , the plann wall forms , o e and in no ca 0 mm head .
sed concrete oncrete does orm fasteners shall not exc ers , form stiffe form or formin urface with s , satisfactory Structures , tim ad to the top a ECIFICATI ON and INF ANDARD CONDI ble for all form 956. nstruct , erect , rection of the tal control of t onforms to th ely responsib procedures a t no perman he formwork d he Work such e result from t d any form ha ormance with minimum requi and construct the rigidity of k drawings .
st on vertical f ned rate of pl over 1200 mm ase shall colu surfaces sha not undulate s or wales .
eed 1/270 of eners or wales ng system , ev excessive un y to the Engin mber or steel and bottom fla IONS FRASTRUC ITIONS mwork design , maintain an Work .
the Work and e formwork re ble for the de and for co-ord ent stresses design .
h that no per the formwork .
angers , chairs CAN/CSA S2 irement for al ted to provide f the formwork forms shall be acing concre m in height , be umn forms ove all be designe excessively the centre to s , or 2 mm , wh ven though pr ndulations , it eer have bee l posts shall b anges as deta CTURE n and constru nd subsequen d shall effectiv equirements .
esign , constru dinating the va or other de manent stres s , bar suppor 269.3 and as s l formwork de e the necessa k under all loa e correlated to te and the sl e designed for er 2000 mm i d and constru in any directio centre distan hichever is sm reviously app ts use shall n made .
be used at ea iled on Standa uction and sha ntly remove a vely direct an uction means arious parts o etrimental effe sses or other rts , etc .
to the specified here esign and cons ary rigidity and ading conditio o the capacity ump and tem r less than 12 in height be d ucted so that on between s nce between s maller .
proved for use l be discont ach overhang ard Drawing 9 ITEM : 958 Page 958-1 all carry out and dispose d supervise s , methods , of the Work .
ects on the detrimental e flanges or ein .
struction : d to support ons shall be and type of mperature of 00 mm fluid designed for the formed studs , joists , studs , joists , e , produce a tinued until g bracket to 958-1 .
FO Pag 958 RMWORK ge 958-2 8.2 FORMS .1 Form stren .2 Mate bein .3 Surf mate .4 Form read .1 .5 Plyw perm .6 Plyw .1 .2 .3 .7 Form Stru sand givin .1 .2 .8 The appr .1 .9 Form .1 .10 Exp .1 S ms shall be ngth to resist erials to be us ng used .
faces of and erials before c mwork shall b dy release of t The type of f and shall be a wood or steel mits the use o wood shall be Plywood sha joists .
Form panels Horizontal joi ms for concret uctures expos ded face plac ng a true and Plywood form placed vertica formed with n Rectangular equal width p Contractor m roval of the E Edge contact ms shall be co Column form osed sharp ed Where wood straight grain DEPARTM smooth , mor springing out sed for forms within forms concrete is pla be thoroughly the forms and form coating t applied in acc forms shall b of lumber in sm of a grade an all be placed shall be place nts shall be le te columns , c ed to view sh ced against th high quality s ms for rectang ally .
All colum no vertical join columns with pieces of plyw may use boa ngineer .
t between boa onstructed so marks shall b dges shall be triangular fille lumber and s STA MENT of TR STANDARD CO rtar-tight , true of shape duri shall be thoro shall be cle aced .
coated with a d will not disco to be used sh cordance with be used for ex mall and intrica nd quality satis with the grai ed in a neat a evel and conti capbeams and hall be either he concrete o urface finish .
gular columns mns with the si nts within the f h the side dim ood .
ards to constr ards shall be s that form mar be symmetrica chamfered w ets or chamfe shall be plane ANDARD S RANSPORT ONDITIONS e to the requ ing placing of oughly cleaned aned of dirt , a commercial olour the conc hall be submi the manufact xposed concr ate portions o sfactory to the n of the oute nd symmetric nuous and ve d all portions o faced with a or shall be a s shall be ma ide dimension face width .
mensions grea ruct the forms sufficient to m rks will confor ally spaced .
with 20 mm by er strips are e d on the side SPECIFICA TATION an uired lines an f concrete .
d of all mortar chips , sawdu quality form c crete .
itted to the E turer ’ s instruc rete surfaces of the Work .
e Engineer .
er plies perpe cal pattern .
ertical joints sh of abutments n exterior gra commercial g ade up of the ns equal to or ater than 120 s for concea make forms im rm to the gene y 20 mm triang employed , the exposed to c ATIONS nd INFRAS nd grades an r and foreign ust , nails and coating , which Engineer for w ctions .
except where endicular to th hall be stagge on overpass ade plywood grade steel fo e full 2400 m less than 120 00 mm shall b aled surfaces pervious to m eral lines of th gular fillets .
ey shall be mi concrete .
TRUCTUR ITEM : 95 January , 20 nd of sufficie material befor d other foreig h will permit th written approv e the Enginee he studding o ered .
and underpas ( G1S ) with th orm capable o mm long shee 00 mm shall b be formed wit subject to th mortar .
he Structure .
lled from clea RE 58 15 nt re gn he val er or ss he of ts be th he ar , DEPA FORM Janua 958.2 958.3 958.4 958.5 ARTMENT MWORK ary , 2015 .11 Anchor support .1 The be .12 Anchor .1 Spe .2 Re adj .13 No form FORM TIES .1 Internal .2 Rods , b and so .3 Ties co .4 Forms form tie .5 Bracing CORROSIO .1 Tie wire specifie .2 Form ti below t DECK FOR .1 Hanger minimu mm bel .2 In the e cover o continu required .3 If hang concret .1 Ho STAN of TRANS r devices , of a ting forms or f e use of drive permitted .
ring devices , c ecified cover o movable anc acent/surroun ms shall be lef S AND BRAC l form ties sha bolts or prefa arranged that nsisting of tw for outside su es shall extend g shall be capa ON PREVENT es , bolts , hard ed cover minu es shall be o he finished su RMWORK HA rs for deck fo m of 50 mm low the surfac event that the over the han ously from on d. ger removal le te mortar cons les less than NDARD SP PORTATIO STA a type approv for lifting prec en types of an cast-in-place o over embedde choring devi nding hardene ft in place .
CING all be metal an bricated units t the slack or isted wire loop urfaces shall d through and able of mainta TION dware and ot s 10 mm from f such a type urface of the c NGERS ormwork shall below the su ce .
Contractor 's ngers , a con ne end of the eaves a hole sistent with th 13 mm may b ECIFICATI ON and INF ANDARD CONDI ved by the E ast members chorages for or drilled , shal ed metal anch ices shall b ed or partially nd of a type a s shall be cap spring in the f ps shall not be be constructe d fasten these aining the cor ther embedde m the concrete e that they ca concrete leavi be of a type urface .
Galvan formwork des crete haunch e span to the e of 13 mm o e parent conc be filled with a IONS FRASTRUC ITIONS Engineer , may .
fastening form ll be approved hors shall be m be removed hardened con approved by th pable of main form framing w e permitted .
ed with stiff w e wales .
rrect form align ed metal item e surface .
n be entirely ng no metal w e which can b nized hangers sign does not h extension m other .
No pa or more it sh crete and con an Engineer ap CTURE y be cast into m or form sup d by the Engin maintained .
without ca ncrete .
he Engineer .
taining the co will be elimina wales at right nment and sta ms shall exten removed or c within 50 mm be completely s must be rem provide the a may be utiliz ayment will b hall be cleane taining latex .
pproved seala o the concrete pports to conc neer .
ausing dama orrect concret ated when tigh angles to the ability .
nd to within le cut back 50 m of the surface y removed or moved a min above indicate zed provided e made for th ed and patch ant , such as V ITEM : 958 Page 958-3 e for use in crete will not age to the te thickness htened .
e studs and ess than the mm or more e. removed a imum of 19 ed minimum it extends he concrete hed utilizing Vulkem 116 .
FO Pag 958 958 958 RMWORK ge 958-4 8.6 INSPEC .1 Tem facil .1 .2 .2 Whe conc or S prev .1 8.7 LINES A .1 Form .2 Free align .3 Che requ .1 8.8 FORMW .1 Unle and .2 Mea Doc CTION OPENI mporary openi itate cleaning In restrictive debris .
Openings sha ere deep sect crete is to be Slope shall be vent upward b Where top fo vent air or to AND GRADES ms for girders ely suspende nment can be ecking and co uired before co All wedges sh WORK TOLER ess otherwise dimension sh asurement of c cuments , will n DEPARTM INGS ngs shall be p and inspectio areas , openi all be closed w tions of concre placed contin e addressed bulge or flow .
orms are comp permit vibratin S and slabs sh ed check wir verified .
orrective wed oncrete is in p hall be hardwo RANCES required in th hall be as sho concrete in St not be affected STA MENT of TR STANDARD CO provided at th on .
ngs shall be with patches , ete are reduc nuously , the e by providing plete or large ng of concrete all be camber es shall be ging or shori place .
ood .
he Contract D wn in Table 9 tructures , calc d by the formw ANDARD S RANSPORT ONDITIONS he bottom of d located so t flush with the ced in cross se effect of fluid p partial form enough to tra e. red to achieve stretched at ng shall be c ocuments , the 958-1. culated on the work tolerance SPECIFICA TATION an deep units , su hat water ca e inside surfac ection , as in s pressure on th tops that wi ap air , slots o e the final line reasonable carried out ho e maximum d e dimensions es listed in Ta ATIONS nd INFRAS uch as column n be used to ce of adjacent stepped footin he lower porti ll contain the or holes shall es and grades intervals fro orizontally an deviations from shown in the able 958-1 .
TRUCTUR ITEM : 95 January , 20 ns and walls , t o wash out th t panels .
ngs , and wher ons of the ste e concrete an be provided t s. m which for nd vertically a m line , grade Contract RE 58 15 to he re ep nd to m as DEPA FORM Janua 958.9 ARTMENT MWORK ary , 2015 FORMWOR .1 The Co certifica in writin that the .1 In a and .2 Of STAN of TRANS Finished Brid Concrete Bri Columns , pie Va Misplacemen cap beam an Variation in s Footings Variation in s and wall ope RK CERTIFIC ontractor shall ation by either ng and bearing e formwork ha accordance w d sound materia NDARD SP PORTATIO STA Position in S dge Deck V dge Bearing B V ers , walls , bea V ariation in cros nt or eccentric nd Bridge sea slab thickness mispl sizes and loca enings CATION provide , prio r a Profession g the seal and as been constr with the formw als consistent ECIFICATI ON and INF ANDARD CONDI Tab Formwork T Structure Variation from Block or Seat Variation from ams and simil Variations from ss sectional d city in piers , ts s plan d acement or e ation of slab or to the place nal Engineer o d signature of ructed : work design s t with the desi IONS FRASTRUC ITIONS ble 958-1 Tolerance Lim Grades m tolerance Grades m tolerance ar parts m true line imensions imensions eccentricity - ± d < ement of conc or a person de f a Profession submitted in a ign parameter CTURE mits Tole  3 3 mm in an  3 ±2 mm in 5 mm in a - 5 mm ± 1 - 3 mm - 10 mm , + 50 ± 1 % of footin direction of mi < 50 mm ± 1 crete or the ap esignated by al Engineer , t accordance w rs .
erance 3 mm ny 3 m section 3 mm any direction ny 3m section , + 10 mm 0 mm m , + 5 mm 0 mm g dimension i isplacement b 0 mm pplication of a a Professiona to be compete with 958.1.5 a ITEM : 958 Page 958-5 n n in but any loading , al Engineer , ent to certify and 958.1.6 ; DEPA PART Janua 961.1 961.2 ARTMENT NERING ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 The co coopera method commu monitor PARTNERI .1 The Ow supplie .1 The Par .2 This pa achieve .3 The ob within b .4 This pa .5 A repre develop the Co worksho .1 Per per sup .2 Wh Go Dep invi .3 The ma .6 Costs a semina shared .1 Eac wor .7 Follow- by the C STAN of TRANS TION oncept of Pa ation among a dology for dev unication , pro ring of team p NG wner encoura rs .
e Owner antic rtnering and s artnership sha e reciprocal go bjectives are e budget , on sch artnership shal esentative of pment semina ntract .
These op and the ag rsons required rsonnel , the C pervisor ( s ) as here appropria vernment ( D partment of F ited to attend .
e Contractor anagers on the associated wit r/team buildin equally .
ch party shall rkshop sessio up workshops Contractor and NDARD SP PORTATIO STA artnering is to all key players veloping a sp blem identific erformance .
ages partners cipates consid strongly recom all be structure oals .
effective and hedule , and in ll be bilateral i the Contracto ar/team buildin e representat genda , duratio d to be in atten Contract desig well as key su ate , represent ELG ) , Works Fisheries and O and the Own e project team th partnering i ng workshop s be responsib ons .
s may be held d Owner .
ECIFICATI ON and INF ANDARD CONDI o develop a s in a Contrac pirit of teamw cation and re ship with the derable mutua mmends enteri ed to draw on efficient Con accordance w n makeup , an or and a repr ng workshop ives shall ma on and location ndance shoul gn Engineer ( s ubcontractors tatives of majo safe NB , De Oceans ( DFO ner shall also m. ncluding the f shall be agree le for their ow d periodically t IONS FRASTRUC ITIONS proactive ef ctual relations work and coo esolution , con e Contractor al benefit can ing into a volu n the strength ntract perform with Plans and nd participatio resentative of which should ake arrangem n. d include , but ) and the Con .
or suppliers , D epartment of O ) , utilities and o be required facilitator and ed to by the O wn staff ’ s wage throughout the CTURE ffort and spir ship .
It utilizes operation thro nflict escalati and its princ be achieved untary agreem hs of each org mance and co d Specificatio n shall be tota f the Owner s d be held befo ments to dete t are not limite ntractor 's on-s Department o Natural Res d municipal go d to have He facilities for a Owner and the es and expen e duration of t rit of respect s a structured ugh shared g on procedure cipal subcont on the Contr ment .
ganization to mpletion of th ns .
ally voluntary .
shall initiate a ore Work com ermine attend ed to : key NB site project m of Environmen sources ( DNR overnments s ead Office an a partnering d e Contractor a nses during the the Contract a ITEM : 961 Page 961-1 t , trust and d systematic goals , open es and the ractors and ract through identify and he Contract a partnering mmences on dees at the -DTI District manager and nt and Local R ) , Canada shall also be d/or District development and shall be e partnering as agreed to PA Pag 961 961 RTNERING ge 961-2 1.3 OBJECT .1 In o com .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 1.4 STATEM .1 The Initia agre TIVES OF TH order for the mmitment to ho Each shall fun Each shall as Each shall av Each shall pro Each shall co MENT OF INT Contractor is al Work sched eement .
DEPARTM E PARTNERI partnering pro onesty and int nction within t ssist in the oth void hindering oceed to fulfil ooperate in the TENT s requested to dule under Item STA MENT of TR STANDARD CO ING PROCES ocess to suc tegrity , agree t the laws and s er 's performa the other 's pe its obligation e common end o indicate to t m 906 , any in ANDARD S RANSPORT ONDITIONS SS ceed , the Co to the followin statutes applic nce .
erformance .
diligently .
deavour of the the Owner no tentions rega SPECIFICA TATION an ontractor and ng mutual obje cable to their d e Contract .
o later than th rding entering ATIONS nd INFRAS the Owner , ectives : duties and res he time of sub g into a volunt TRUCTUR ITEM : 96 January , 20 with a positiv sponsibilities .
bmission of th tary partnersh RE 61 15 ve he ip DEPA VALU Janua 962.1 ARTMENT E ENGINEER ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 The Co modifyi reducin product Proposa basis .
.2 This Ite which a howeve Enginee .3 The foll Enginee .1 A s .2 A d Val .3 A s Ow Val .4 Sep Val .5 An Eng .6 A s the Com .4 The Ow any oth .1 The Cha .2 The Eng attr .3 Unt term STAN of TRANS RING TION ontractor may ng the Plans g the total co t. If accepted al shall be sh em applies to a are identified er , nothing h ering Proposa lowing informa ering Proposa statement that description of lue Engineerin statement con wner together lue Engineerin parate detaile lue Engineerin itemization o gineering Prop statement of th Value Engine mpletion Date wner shall pro er proposal w e Owner may ange Order w e Owner shal gineering Pro ributable to an til a proposal ms and condit NDARD SP PORTATIO STA y submit to th s , Specificatio ost of constru d , by the En hared by the C all Value Engi as such by t erein shall b al submitted he ation as a min al : this proposal the difference ng Proposal c ncerning the with an item ng Proposal ; d cost estima ng Proposal c of plan details posal is adopt he date by wh eering Propos e. ocess the Val which would ne y accept in w which shall iden ll not be liable oposal submit ny such propos is effected b tions of the ex ECIFICATI ON and INF ANDARD CONDI e Engineer , i ons or other ction without gineer , the n Contractor and ineering Propo the Contracto be construed ereunder .
nimum shall b is submitted a e between the hange ; basis for the ization of the ates for both th hange ; , design stan ted ; and hich approval sal during the ue Engineerin ecessitate issu whole or in p ntify the Value e to the Cont tted pursuant sal .
by Change O xisting Contrac IONS FRASTRUC ITIONS n writing , a V requirements reducing des net savings r d the Owner osals initiated or at the time as requiring be provided in as a Value En e existing Co e Value Engin e Contract Ite he existing Co dards or Spe must be issu remainder of ng Proposal i uance of a Co part any Valu e Engineering tractor for fai to this provi Order , the Co ct. CTURE Value Enginee s of the Con sign capacity resulting from ( on behalf of d and develop e of their subm g the Engine n the written s ngineering Pro ntract require neering Propo ms and requ ontract require ecifications to ued to obtain t Contract , noti n the same m ontract Chang e Engineering g Proposal on lure to accep ision nor for ntractor shall ering Proposa tract for the or quality of m the Value the Crown ) o ped by the Con mission to th eer to approv submission of oposal ; ements and th osal and ben irements affe ements and th be changed the total cost ng any effect manner as pre ge Order .
g Proposal b which it is bas pt or act upon any delays t remain oblig ITEM : 962 Page 962-1 al ( VEP ) for purpose of the finished Engineering on a fifty-fifty ntractor and e Engineer ; ve a Value each Value he proposed nefits to the ected by the he proposed if the Value reduction of on Contract escribed for by issuing a sed .
n any Value o the Work gated to the VA Pag 962 LUE ENGINE ge 962-2 2.1.4 .4 .5 .5 The subm adm .6 The betw .7 The for im .8 The effec .9 Acce chan auth .10 The Con suita Con .11 Prop diffe not n .12 Whe 2 ( 4 ) alter effec .13 The shal .14 In a Item final .15 One appr shal Cha unit EERING When an ex Contractor 's p the Contracto terminated un The Change net savings a savings be eq Contractor s mission to the ministering a V cost of any ween the Cont Owner reserv mplementatio Contractor 's cting all chang eptance of the nge the Con horizing the Va Owner expre ntracts admini able for applic ntractor .
posed change erent Right-of- normally be co en a Value En of Article II o rations of Con cting the Valu cost of the r ll be paid by th ddition to suc m , one half of t cost of the re e half of the Co roval of the V ll be paid upo ange Order .
Th or by the Cha DEPARTM xecuted Cha proposal spec or may subseq nless the Cont Order effectin agreed upon , p qually divided shall absorb e Owner .
Cos Value Enginee redesign resu tractor and the ves the right t n of the propo fifty percent ges pursuant t e Value Engin ntract Comple alue Engineer essly reserves istered by the cation to othe es in the basi -Way limits or onsidered as ngineering Pro of the Articles ntract quantiti e Engineering revised Work , he standard m ch payment , t the difference evised Work lis ontractor 's sha Value Enginee on completion he final payme ange Order am STA MENT of TR STANDARD CO nge Order h cifies that a de quently have tractor further ng the necess provide for adj between the all costs incu sts incurred by ring Proposal ulting from the e Owner .
to include in t osal .
t share of th to the Value E neering Propo etion Date un ring Proposal .
s the right to a e Owner wh er Contracts w ic design of a r proposals in an acceptable oposal is acce of Agreement ies shall not g Proposal by , as determin monthly Progre the Contracto ( net savings ) sted in the Ch are of the esti ering Proposal n of all Items ent shall be d mount for the l ANDARD S RANSPORT ONDITIONS has not been ecision thereo specified in w r extends the a sary Contract justment in th Contractor an urred in prep y the Owner shall be born e Value Engin the Change O e net saving Engineering P osal and perfo nless specific adopt a Value en it determi without obliga a Bridge or P nvolving Work e Value Engin epted by the O t pertaining to apply to the Change Orde ed in the Val ess Estimates or shall be pa between the hange Order .
imated net sav l Change Ord of Work incl etermined by lump sum Item SPECIFICA TATION an n issued by on should be m writing , evalua approval date modification s e Contract pri nd the Owner .
paring a Valu in evaluating , e by the Own neering Propo Order any con gs shall cons roposal Chan ormance of th cally provided e Engineering ines the Valu ation or comp Pavement type k outside the neering Propos Owner , the pro o adjustment o Items adjuste er .
lue Engineerin s. aid , on a Lum cost of the or vings shall be der .
The rema uded in the V the actual qu ms. ATIONS nd INFRAS J the date up made , or such ation of the pro .
shall establish ices and indic e Engineerin , approving or ner .
osal shall be nditions it dee stitute full com nge Order .
he Work there d for in the g Proposal for ue Engineerin pensation of a e , or changes scope of the sal .
ovisions of Se of Contract Un ed or deleted ng Proposal C mp Sum basis riginal Contrac e paid to the C ainder due to Value Engine uantities for Ite TRUCTUR ITEM : 96 January , 201 pon which th h other date a oposal shall b h the estimate cate that the n g Proposal fo r rejecting , an shared equal ms appropriat mpensation fo eunder shall n Change Orde general use ng Proposal any kind to th s which requir Contract , sha ections 2 ( 3 ) an nit Price due t as a result Change Orde by a separat ct Work and th Contractor upo the Contracto eering Propos ems paid by th RE 62 5 he as be ed et or nd lly te or ot er in is he re all nd to of er , te he on or sal he DEPA ADVIS Janua 971.1 971.2 971.3 ARTMENT SEMENTS ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 This Ite Work .
.2 The fol familiar Work s UTILITIES .1 Utility p compan .2 Underg relocate .3 Delays basis o .4 Althoug concern either e no claim .5 The Co safegua .6 The Co relocate these in RAILWAYS .1 Any rai be don level .
.2 The Co of the W be notif .3 The Co persons otherwi Work w .4 Delays claim .
.5 Delays basis o .6 Notifica STAN of TRANS TION em defines o lowing advise r with the con chedule or pr AND INSTAL poles , lines a ny .
ground servic ed by others d due to Work of claim .
gh the Owne ning Utility in expressed or m on that acc ontractor sha arding , all exi ontractor sha ed Utility inst nstallations .
S ilway crossing e by the appr ontractor shal Work in the pr fied .
ontractor sha s whatsoever ise or indirec within the railw due to the a due to work of claim .
ation shall be NDARD SP PORTATIO STA other activitie ements may ditions of the rogression of LLATIONS nd/or cables es including during the pe k performed b er makes eve nstallations , th implied , with count .
all assume fu sting and relo all be respon allations and g existing wit ropriate autho l notify the En roximity of the all be respons r and for any ctly results fro way ROW .
adjustment of k by the railw provided in th ECIFICATI ON and INF ANDARD CONDI es and circum not apply to e Contract in o Work .
within the W but not limite eriod of the Co by others rela ery reasonab he Owner ma respect to an ll responsibil ocated Utility nsible , at his shall be resp thin the Work ority and shal ngineer at lea e railway land sible , at his/h y damage to t om , is caused the crossing way or sched he Contract a IONS FRASTRUC ITIONS mstances , wh all Contracts order to note Work Site shal ed to water , s ontract .
ated to Utility ble effort to c akes no gua ny such inform ity for determ installations d s own expen ponsible for a k Site may re l be complete ast 14 Days p ds , so that the her own expe the property d by , or is at , by others , s duling require at the time of T CTURE hich may inf s and the Co what other a l be moved b sewer and/or moves shall collect and p rantees , repr mation , and th mining exact during the pro nse , for any any repairs re quire adjustm ed to conform prior to the co e appropriate ense , for any of the railwa ttributable to , shall not be c ements shall Tender , if app fluence the C ontractor shou ctivities may by the approp r drainage pip not be cons present comp resentations , he Contracto locations of , ogress of the damage to esulting from ment and this m with the new onfirmed comm railways auth y injury or de ay , having jur the performa considered as not be consi plicable .
ITEM : 971 Page 971-1 Contractor ’ s uld become limit his/her priate Utility pes may be idered as a plete details warranties , r shall have as well as Work .
existing or damage to Work shall w Pavement mencement horities may eath to any isdiction , or ance of the s a basis of dered as a AD Pag 971 971 971 DVISEMENTS ge 971-2 1.4 CONTR .1 The acce .1 .2 .2 Noti prov 1.5 RIGHT-O .1 Righ .2 Dela claim .3 Noti 1.6 OTHER .1 Othe the shal .2 Wor work .3 Dela shal .4 Noti S ROLLED ACC Contractor s ess , the follow In areas outs not be waive Within the W the Engineer fication as to vided in the C OF-WAY ht-of-Way for ays resulting m. fication shall CONTRACT er contract ( s ) commencem ll have separa rk on this Con k by others .
ays due to co ll not be a bas fication shall DEPARTM ESS HIGHWA should note th wing shall app side the Work d to facilitate Work Site , any r in order to en o the location Contract at the the Contract from the una be provided i T ( S ) ) and/or the O ment of the Co ate and distin ntract must be onflicts betwe sis for claim .
be provided i STA MENT of TR STANDARD CO AY hat for Highwa ply : k Site , regula construction .
y access to th nsure the saf n and extent e time of Tend may not be a availability of in the Contrac Owner ’ s forces ontract or ma ct completion e scheduled s een other co in the Contrac ANDARD S RANSPORT ONDITIONS ays in the are tions pertaini .
he existing Hig fe handling of t of controlled der , if applica available befo Right-of-Way ct at the time s may be con ay commence n dates .
so as not to in ntracts and/o ct at the time SPECIFICA TATION an ea of the Con ng to a contr ghway shall b f traffic .
d access po able .
ore a specific y shall not be of Tender , if nducting work e during the nterfere with o or the Owner of Tender , if ATIONS nd INFRAS ntract which h rolled access be only by pr rtions of Hig date .
e considered applicable .
k that may be period of the or cause dela r ’ s forces and applicable .
TRUCTUR ITEM : 97 January , 20 have controlle Highway sha rior approval o hway shall b d as a basis o e in progress a e Contract an ays to any suc d this Contra RE 71 15 ed all of be of at nd ch ct DEPA LIMITE Janua 996.1 996.2 ARTMENT ED FUNDS ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 The pro for the Limited .2 The typ determ .3 Under t the mea .1 `` Lim eng .2 `` Lim .3 “ Pr yea follo .4 In carry Limited equal to .5 Reques PROVISION .1 The fol and the .1 The refe .2 The wh Fun .3 The of t Co .4 The the .2 In the e of the L the Ow except Funds .1 The gre STAND of TRANS TION ovisions unde provisions of d Funds Date .
pe of Work is ine successfu this Item , and aning ascribe mited Funds '' gineering and mited Funds D resent Fiscal ar in which th owing .
ying out the W d Funds Date o not less tha st for an exten NS lowing provis e payment the e value of th erence to pro e Contractor ich Work of a nds has been e Owner shal the actual va ntract during e Contractor e Present Fisc event the Con Limited Funds wner , at a pre Sunday ( s ) a Date .
e penalty sha eater of the Li DARD SPE PORTATIO STA er this Item a f the Contract .
s not specifie ul performanc d as designate ed to them as '' means the d materials co Date '' means Year '' means he Contract w Work to be pe , perform Wo an 95 % , and n nsion to the Lim sions apply to erefor : he Work perf gress claims , shall cease W a value equal n completed .
ll not be oblig lue of the Wo the Present F shall not aga cal Year , once ntractor does s on or before escribed dail and Statutory all continue to mited Funds .
ECIFICATIO ON and INF ANDARD CONDI re an amend t and provide ed , rather the ce .
ed in the Con follows : e designated osts of the Ow the specified s the fiscal ye was signed , a erformed on th ork having a v not more than mited Funds D o the Work to formed , in co , approved by Work on the C to not less th gated to pay t ork done or 1 Fiscal Year .
ain commence e the Limited not perform W e the Limited y rate as se y Holidays , th o be paid unti ONS FRASTRUC ITIONS dment of , sup for the comp e value of th ntract Docume sum of mo wner ; d date ( year , m ear of the Ow and ending wi he Contract , value calcula n 105 % of the Date shall be o be done wit ompliance wit y the Enginee Contract in th han 95 % , an to the Contra 105 % of the L e Work on th Funds obliga Work having Funds Date , et out in the hat such sho il the value o CTURE pplementary to pletion of a po e Work carri ents , the follo ney which s month and Da wner commen ith March 31 the Contracto ated in accord e Limited Fund made as deta th respect to th this Item , er ; he Present Fis d not more th actor an amou Limited Fund he Contract u ation has been a value equa the Contract Contract Doc ortfall continu of Work comp o and not in ortion of the W ed out shall owing phrases sum is exclus ay ) ; and ncing with Ap of the year i or shall , on or dance with th ds .
ailed in 996.3. the Limited F shall be det scal Year on han 105 % of unt exceeding s , for Work d until after the n completed .
al to or greate tor shall pay a cuments , for ues beyond t pleted is equa ITEM : 996 Page 996-1 substitution Work by the be used to s shall have sive of the pril 1 , of the mmediately r before the he Contract , Funds Date ermined by the Day on the Limited g the lesser done on the last Day of er than 95 % a penalty to each Day , the Limited al to 95 % or LIM Pag 996 996 MITED FUNDS ge 996-2 6.2 .3 With Fun Agre 6.3 CONSID .1 Req Con .2 The thro .1 .2 .3 S hout exceptio ds Date sha eement of the DERATIONS F quests for con ntractor in acco Owner may c ugh no fault o Additional Da that the Extra Additional Da Quantities tha Work and/or m An additional conditions , ex .1 The `` Wo work time DEPARTM on , nothing in ll alter the C e Contract .
FOR ADJUST nsideration of ordance with G consider a req of the Contract ays may be gr a Work could n ays may be an those set f materials bea Day may be xceeds 40 % o ork Time Lost e lost due to w STA MENT of TR STANDARD CO n these provis Contract Com TMENT f extension o General Cond quest for adjus tor .
ranted for Ext not be carried granted for in forth in the Co rs to the Initia granted for e of the Contract t Due to Wea weather condit ANDARD S RANSPORT ONDITIONS sions with res mpletion Date of the Limited ditions `` B '' .
stment to the L tra Work perfo out without in ncreases in W ontract in the l Work Sched ach Day that tor 's normal w ather '' form is tions .
SPECIFICA TATION an spect to Limi specified in d Funds Date Limited Funds ormed , provid nterfering with Work or mate same proport dule .
the number o working hours .
s considered a ATIONS nd INFRAS J ited Funds a Article I of e shall be su s Date if the W ded the Contra his Work Sch erial in great tion of time as of hours lost , .
as official doc TRUCTUR ITEM : 99 January , 201 nd the Limite the Articles o bmitted by th Work is delaye actor can sho hedule .
ter amounts o s the addition due to weathe cumentation o RE 96 5 ed of he ed ow or al er of DEPA SPEC Janua 997.1 997.2 ARTMENT IFIED WORK ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 The pr describ the Con .2 Under t the mea .1 `` Sp def .2 `` Sp Co .3 The Co Specifie Owner .
.4 In carry each S .5 Reques PROVISION .1 When m these p .2 The no therefo .1 The det .2 In t Wo out suc unt .3 Wit Spe Art STAN of TRANS K TION rovisions und bed as Specif ntract Docum this Item , and aning ascribe pecified Work finition of the pecified Work ntract Docum ontractor sha ed Work Dat .
ying out the pecified Work st for an exten NS more than on provisions sha oted provision r. e Specified termined by re the event the ork Date , the C t in the Contra ch shortfall co til the Specifie thout excepti ecified Work icles of Agree NDARD SP PORTATIO STA der this Item fied Work , sha ents .
d as designate ed to them as k '' means a scope of the k Date '' mean ments .
ll note that t te within the Work to be p k Date , perfor nsion to the Sp ne instance o all apply for ea ns following Work perform eference to p Contractor d Contractor sh act Document ontinues beyo ed Work is co on , nothing Date shall alt ement of the C ECIFICATI ON and INF ANDARD CONDI m specify tha all be comple ed in the Con follows : defined task Work shall be ns the design here may be terms of the performed on rm the Specif pecified Work f Specified W ach case exc shall apply t med and co rogress estim does not perfo hall pay a pen ts , for each D ond the Speci ompleted .
in these pro ter the Contra Contract .
IONS FRASTRUC ITIONS at certain Wo eted by the S ntract Docume having a fin e fully describ nated date ( y e more than Contract , de n the Contrac fied Work , in e Date shall be Work is identif clusively .
to Specified ompleted in c mates approve orm the Spec nalty to the Ow Day , except S ified Work Da ovisions with act Completio CTURE ork under th pecified Work ents , the follo nite and mea bed in the Con year , month , D one instance epending on ct , the Contra each case .
e made as det fied in the Co Work to be compliance w ed by the Eng cified Work on wner , at a pre Sunday ( s ) and ate , and this s respect to S on Date as sp he Contract , k Date , as de owing phrases asurable scop ntract Docum Day ) as spec e of Specified the requirem actor shall , o tailed in 997.3 ontract Docum done and th with this Item gineer .
n or before th escribed daily d Statutory Ho shall continue Specified Wo pecified in Art ITEM : 997 Page 997-1 hereinafter esignated in s shall have pe and the ments .
cified in the d Work and ments of the n or before 3 ments , then he payment m shall be he Specified y rate as set olidays , that e to be paid ork and the ticle I of the SP Pag 997 ECIFIED WO ge 997-2 7.3 CONSID .1 Req Con .2 The dela .1 .2 .3 ORK DERATIONS F quests for con ntractor in acco Owner may ayed through n Additional Da that the Extra Additional Da Quantities tha Work and/or m An additional conditions , ex .1 The `` Wo Work tim DEPARTM FOR ADJUST nsideration of ordance with G consider a r no fault of the ays may be gr a Work could n ays may be an those set f materials bea Day may be xceeds 40 % o ork Time Lost e lost due to w STA MENT of TR STANDARD CO TMENT f extension of General Cond request for ad Contractor .
ranted for Ext not be carried granted for in forth in the Co rs to the Initia granted for e of the Contract t Due to Wea weather condi ANDARD S RANSPORT ONDITIONS f the Specifie ditions `` B '' .
djustment to tra Work perfo out without in ncreases in W ontract in the l Work Sched ach Day that tor 's normal w ather '' form is itions .
SPECIFICA TATION an ed Work Date the Specified ormed , provid nterfering with Work or mate same proport dule .
the number o working hours .
s considered a ATIONS nd INFRAS J e shall be su d Work Date ded the Contra his/her Work erial in great tion of time as of hours lost , .
as official doc TRUCTUR ITEM : 99 January , 201 bmitted by th if the Work actor can sho Schedule .
ter amounts o s the addition due to weathe cumentation o RE 97 5 he is ow or al er of DEPA COMP Janua 998.1 998.2 ARTMENT PLETION DAT ary , 2015 DESCRIPT .1 The Co Contrac .2 In the specifie in the C shortfa the Wo .3 Reques CONSIDER .1 Reques Contrac .2 The Ow delayed .1 Add sho Sch .2 Add Qu Wo .3 An con .1 STAN of TRANS TE TION ompletion Dat ct Documents event the Co ed , the Contra Contract Doc ll continues b ork is complete st for an exten RATIONS FO sts for consid ctor in accord wner may co d through no ditional Days ow that the E hedule .
ditional Days antities than t ork and/or mat additional Da nditions , excee The `` Work T work time los NDARD SP PORTATIO STA te shall be as s. ontractor doe actor shall pa uments , for e beyond the sp ed .
nsion to the C R ADJUSTM deration of e dance with Ge onsider a req fault of the Co s may be gra Extra Work c may be gra those set forth terials bears to ay may be gra eds 40 % of th Time Lost Du st due to weat ECIFICATI ON and INF ANDARD CONDI s stated in the es not comple ay a penalty t each Day , ex pecified Comp Completion Da ENT extension of eneral Condit quest for adj ontractor .
anted for Extr could not be nted for incre h in the Contr o the Initial W anted for each he Contractor's ue to Weathe ther condition IONS FRASTRUC ITIONS e Articles of A ete the Work to the Owner xcept Sunday pletion Date , a ate shall be m the Complet ions `` B '' .
justment to t ra Work perf carried out w eases in Wo ract in the sam Work Schedule h Day that the s normal work er '' form is co s. CTURE Agreement a k on or befo , at a prescrib ( s ) and Statu and this shall made as deta tion Date sha the Completi formed , provi without interf rk or materia me proportion .
e number of h king hours .
onsidered as nd/or as spec re the Comp bed daily rate utory Holidays continue to b iled in 998.2. all be submit on Date if th ided the Con fering with hi al in greater n of time as th ours lost , due official docum ITEM : 998 Page 998-1 cified in the pletion Date e as set out s , that such be paid until tted by the he Work is ntractor can is/her Work amounts or he additional e to weather mentation of STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS DEPARTMENT of TRANSPORTATION and INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARD DRAWINGS ITEM : 999 Staking for Back of Ditch and Shoulder Offsets at Right of Way As Shoulder and BOD staking is done , reference stakes should be set next to the Right of Way .
As the Shoulder and BOD stakes are graded , the reference stakes should also be graded .
This will enable the Contractor , the Engineer and/or others to check the grades without having to set up , stake , and grade .
The front face of the reference stake should indicate the offset distance to the Shoulder as well as the grade .
The back face of the reference stake should indicate the offset distance to the back of ditch as well as the grade .
The edge of the reference stake can be used to reference the stationing .
Standard Stake Markings January , 2015 STANDARD CONDITIONS Standard Drawing 941-1 STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS DEPARTMENT of TRANSPORTATION and INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARD DRAWINGS ITEM : 999 Safety Net Support System Abutments January , 2015 STANDARD CONDITIONS Standard Drawing 952-1 File : 952-1 DETAILS OF SUPPORT SYSTEM FOR SIDE ELEVATION OF ABUTMENT TO BE A MAX.OF 1 mm LARGER THAN HP 310 x 132 HOLES FOR ANCHOR BOLT ( See Note 1 ) SEE NOTE ( 1 ) HOLES FOR ANCHOR BOLT ( See Note 1 ) HP 310x132 ( 2 ) ( 1 ) NOTES : CABLE TO BE 16mm CABLE , 6x19 SEALE , IMPROVED PLOW STEEL PREFORMED , LANG LAY , I.W.R.C .
ANCHOR BOLT ANCHOR BOLT SEE NOTE ( 1 ) ANCHOR BOLT CLEVIS ( ALLOWABLE LOAD HP 310 x132 FRONT FACE OF FRONT FACE OF BREASTWALL BRIDGE SEAT BRIDGE SEAT A SECTION A SECTION B CONFORMING TO ASTM A325 .
ANCHOR ASSEMBLIES BRIDGE CONTRACTOR .
ANCHOR BOLT ASSEMBLY TO BE ACROW RICHMOND ASSEMBLY DRILLED HOLE FOR PIN 10 TONNES MINIMUM ) AT WORKING STRESS IS C DRILLED HOLE L ASSEMBLY ASSEMBLY SEE NOTE ( 2 ) TO BE SUPPLIED BY D.T.I .
AND INSTALLED BY B SAFETY NET LINES AT ABUTMENTS CABLE BREASTWALL L C L C CL L C 75 440 300 200 124 225 112 112 63 224 63 62 62 440 200 STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS DEPARTMENT of TRANSPORTATION and INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARD DRAWINGS ITEM : 999 Safety Net Support System Piers January , 2015 STANDARD CONDITIONS Standard Drawing 952-2 File : 952-2 HP 310x132 SEE NOTE ( 1 ) SECTION B CLEVIS ( ALLOWABLE LOAD AT WORKING STRESS IS 10 TONNES MINIMUM ) BOLT ASSEMBLY HOLES FOR ANCHOR BOLT ( See Note 1 ) HP 310 x132 ANCHOR BOLT TOP OF CAPBEAM AT OUTSIDE EDGE PIER AND ANCHOR SIDE ELEVATION OF PIER ( 2 ) ( 1 ) NOTES : ANCHOR BOLT ASSEMBLY TO BE ACROW ANCHOR BOLTS CONFORMING TO ASTM A325 .
ANCHOR ASSEMBLIES TO BE SUPPLIED BY D.T.I .
AND INSTALLED BY BRIDGE CONTRACTOR .
CABLE TO BE 16mm CABLE , 6x19 SEALE , IMPROVED PLOW STEEL PREFORMED , LANG LAY , I.W.R.C .
SAFETY NET LINES AT PIERS HP 310x132 SEE NOTE ( 1 ) TOP OF CAPBEAM SECTION A C DRILLED HOLE FOR MAX .
OF 1mm LARGER HOLES FOR ANCHOR BOLT ( See Note 1 ) ASSEMBLY BOLT ASSEMBLY 62 62 DRILLED HOLE PIER AND ANCHOR CABLE SEE NOTE ( 2 ) L 124 FOR PIN DETAILS OF SUPPORT SYSTEM FOR B A L C CL 112 112 L C CL 63 63 224 225 300 200 200 200 75 75 350 STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS DEPARTMENT of TRANSPORTATION and INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARD DRAWINGS ITEM : 999 Deck Overhang Bracket Steel Girder January , 2015 STANDARD CONDITIONS Standard Drawing 958-1 APPENDIX PROVINCE OF NEW BRUNSWICK SHORT FORM CONTRACT CROWN CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTS ACT SHORT FORM CONTRACT PROVINCE OF NEW BRUNSWICK 77-1120E ( 1/92 ) THIS CONTRACT MADE IN DUPLICATE THIS ............................................. DAY OF ........................................... 20 .........
BETWEEN : HER MAJESTY THE QUEEN IN RIGHT OF THE PROVINCE OF NEW BRUNSWICK REPRESENTED HEREIN BY THE MINISTER OF TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE HEREIN AFTER REFERRED TO AS THE “ OWNER “ OF THE FIRST PART AND .................................................................................................................................................................................................................................... HEREINAFTER REFERRED TO AS THE “ CONTRACTOR ” OF THE SECOND PART .
WITNESSETH THAT IN CONSIDERATION OF THE MUTUAL COVENANTS AND AGREEMENTS HEREIN CONTAINED , AND SUBJECT TO THE TERMS AND CONDITIONS HEREINAFTER SET OUT , THE PARTIES COVENANT AND AGREE AS FOLLOWS : 1 .
THE OWNER SHALL ( a ) PAY TO THE CONTRACTOR IN CONSIDERATION OF THE WORK TO BE PERFORMED BY THE CONTRACTOR THE SUM OF WHICH SUM SHALL BE SUBJECT TO ( I ) A FIVE PERCENT HOLDBACK WHERE A PERFORMANCE BOND , A LABOUR AND MATERIALS PAYMENT BOND OR A SECURITY DEPOSIT IS APPLICABLE TO THE CONTRACT .
( II ) A FIFTEEN PERCENT HOLDBACK WHERE NO SUCH BONDS OR SECURITY DEPOSIT IS APPLICABLE , AND THE CONTRACT VALUE IS GREATER THAN FIVE THOUSAND DOLLARS OR ( III ) A FIFTEEN PERCENT HOLDBACK WHERE NO SUCH BONDS OR SECURITY DEPOSIT IS APPLICABLE , THE CONTRACT VALUE IS FIVE THOUSAND DOLLARS OR LESS AND THE OWNER HAS IN SECTION 6 ELECTED TO RETAIN A HOLDBACK .
( b ) PAY THE HOLDBACK MONIES TO THE CONTRACTOR LESS ANY PORTION THEREOF OR PROPERLY RETAIN BY THE OWNER UPON THE EXPIRATION OF SIXTY DAYS FROM COMPLETION OF THE WORK , AND ( c ) MAKE THE PAYMENT SET OUT IN PARAGRAPH ( a ) LESS HOLDBACK UPON COMPLETION OF THE WORK 2 .
THE CONTRACTOR SHALL ( a ) PERFORM THE WORK DESCRIBED IN SECTION 5 ( 2 ) IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE TERMS OF THIS CONTRACT , THE TENDER DOCUMENTS AND THE SPECIFICATIONS ATTACHED HERETO , IF ANY , ( b ) FURNISH ALL PLANT , LABOUR , EQUIPMENT , TOOLS AND MATERIALS , OTHER THAN THOSE SUPPLIED BY THE OWNER IN ACCORDANCE WITH SECTION 4 , NECESSARY TO COMPLETE THE WORK , AND ( c ) COMPLETE THE WORK TO THE SATISFACTION OF THE ENGINEER-ARCHITECT ON OR BEFORE THE ...................... DAY OF ........................... 20 ..... . 3 .
THIS CONTRACT IS SUBJECT TO THE FOLLOWING TERMS AND CONDITIONS : ( a ) TIME IS OF THE ESSENCE , ( b ) AS FAR AS PRACTICABLE , NEW BRUNSWICK LABOUR AND MATERIAL SHALL BE UTILIZED BY THE CONTRACTOR , ( c ) THE CONTRACTOR SHALL NOT , WITHOUT THE PRIOR WRITTEN CONSENT OF THE OWNER , ASSIGN OR SUBLET ALL OR ANY PORTION OF THIS CONTRACT , ( d ) NO CLAIM FOR EXTRA WORK SHALL BE RECOGNIZED BY THE OWNER UNLESS APPROVED IN WRITING BY THE ENGINEER-ARCHITECT , ( e ) THE CONTRACTOR SHALL ALLOW OFFICERS OF THE OWNER FREE ACCESS TO THE WORK , AND ( f ) THE ENGINEER-ARCHITECT MAY IN WRITING DESIGNATE PERSONS TO ACT ON HIS BEHALF .
4 .
THE OWNER WILL SUPPLY THE FOLLOWING MATERIALS FREE ON BOARD THE LOCATION INDICATED ( IF NONE INDICATE N/A ) N/A OR AS PER THE DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS AND PARTICULAR SPECIFICATIONS 5 .
( 1 ) THIS CONTRACT IS A LUMP SUM UNIT PRICE ( 2 ) THE CONTRACTOR SHALL COMPLETE THE FOLLOWING DESCRIBED WORK IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE TERMS OF THIS CONTRACT , AND , IF A UNIT PRICE CONTRACT , CARRY OUT THAT WORK AT THE PRICES SET OUT HEREIN .
THE ATTACHED TENDER SUBMISSION AND MARKED “ F ” FORMS PART OF THIS CONTRACT THE FOLLOWING ATTACHED ARTICLES OF AGREEMENT FORM PART OF THIS CONTRACT 1 .
GENERAL CONDITIONS FOR BUILDING MOVES AND MARKED “ B ” 2 .
ADDENDUM NO .
............ AND MARKED “ C ” 3 .
INSURANCE SCHEDULE AND MARKED “ E ” 4 .
TENDER SUBMISSION AND MARKED “ F ” 5 .
PARTICULAR SPECIFICATIONS AND MARKED “ G ” 6 .
PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS AND MARKED “ G ” 7 .
AFFIDAVIT AND MARKED “ I ” ALL WORK SHALL BE CARRIED OUT ACCORDING TO THE DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS AND UNDER THE SUPERVISION AND TO THE SATISFACTION OF THE DISTRICT TRANSPORTATION ENGINEER , ............................ OR HIS/HER REPRESENTATIVE .
ALL WORK SHALL BE CARRIED OUT UNDER THE SUPERVISION AND TO THE SATISFACTION OF THE DISTRICT TRANSPORTATION ENGINEER , ........................ N.B .
OR HIS/HER REPRESENTATIVE .
ALL WORK SHALL BE CARRIED OUT UNDER THE SUPERVISION AND TO THE SATISFACTION OF THE DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE DIRECTOR OF .................................................. , FREDERICTON , N.B. , OR HIS/HER REPRESENTATIVE .
6 .
IF THIS SECTION IS INITIALLED BY THE OWNER , IT SIGNIFIES THAT THE OWNER HAS ELECTED TO RETAIN A HOLDBACK AND IF NOT INITIALLED , THAT HE HAS ELECTED NOT TO RETAIN A HOLDBACK .
........................... ( INITIALS ) 7 .
THE CONTRACTOR CERTIFIES THAT HE NOW HAS AND WILL KEEP IN FORCE DURING THE TERM OF THE CONTRACT LIABILITY INSURANCE PER THE ATTACHED CONFIRMATION OF COVERAGE .
8 .
THE CONTRACTOR HEREBY AGREES TO INDEMNIFY AND SAVE HARMLESS THE OWNER FROM AND AGAINST ALL CLAIMS , DEMANDS , SUITS , ACTIONS OR PROCEEDINGS WHICH MAY NOW OR HEREAFTER BE BROUGHT , MAINTAINED OR INSTITUTED AGAINST THE OWNER BY ANY PERSON ARISING OUT OF IN RELATING TO OCCASIONED BY OR IN ANY WAY ATTRIBUTABLE TO THE CARRYING OUT OF THE WORK HEREUNDER BY THE CONTRACTOR , HIS SUBCONTRACTORS , SUPPLIERS , SERVANTS OR AGENTS OR IN ANY WAY RELATING TO THE INFRINGEMENT OF ANY PATENT OR COPYRIGHT BY ANY OF THEM IN RELATION TO THE WORK .
IN WITNESS WHEREOF THE RESPECTIVE PARTIES HAVE EXECUTED THIS CONTRACT ON THE DAY AND YEAR FIRST ABOVE WRITTEN OWNER SIGNATURE MINISTER OF TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE ............................................................................................................... ........................................................................
WITNESS ........................................................................
CONTRACTOR SIGNATURE ........................................................................ ................................................................................................................ ........................................................................
WITNESS ........................................................................ CONTRACT NO PROJECT NO FILE PROJECT NAME ISSUED BY THE DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE ISSUED TO AWARD OF CONTRACT RECOMMENDED DEPOSIT : C. CHEQUE $ /NO DEPOSIT / DEPOSIT : BONDS PROVINCE OF NEW BRUNSWICK STANDARD CONSTRUCTION CONTRACT CROWN CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTS ACT PROJECT : INDEX TO STANDARD CONSTRUCTION CONTRACT I ARTICLES OF AGREEMENT II TERMS OF PAYMENT T.P .
# 1 Total Payment 2 Detail of Paragraph 1 ( a ) 3 Detail of Paragraph 1 ( b ) 4 Progress Payments 5 Claim Payment Not Acceptance 6 Owner 's Delay in Payment 7 Owner 's Right of Set-off 8 Payment When Contract Terminated 9 Interim Release of Holdback III GENERAL CONDITIONS G.C .
# 1 Definition of Terms ; References ; and Interpreting Documents 2 Contract Binding 3 Assignment 4 Subcontracting 5 Scope of Work 6 No Implied Obligation 7 Time of the Essence 8 Indemnity by Contractor 9 Indemnity by Owner 10 Elected Members 11 Serving Notices 12 Adjustments Due to Soil Conditions , Neglect or Delay 13 Owner 's Title to Plant , Etc .
14 Contractor ’ s Liability for Damage to Owner ’ s Plant 15 Extension of Time and Penalty For Delay in Completion 16 Default or Removal of Work From Contractor 17 Contractor ’ s Continuing Obligation 18 Suspension of Work 19 Termination of Contract 20 Payment by Owner of Contracting Obligations 21 Access to Work by Owner 22 Clean Up 23 Contractor ’ s Superintendent 24 Removal of Contractor ’ s Employees G.C .
# 25 Escalation - Labour - Materials 26 Use of Local Labour and Material 27 Safety 28 Protection of Work 29 Public Ceremonies 30 Insurance 31 Fire Loss 32 Contractor ’ s Responsibilities 33 Interpretations of Contract Documents - Claims Arising 34 Defects and Omissions 35 Owner ’ s Right to Complete Work 36 Contractor ’ s Rights on Disputed Decision 37 Changes in the Work 38 Relations with Other Contractors 39 Interim Certificate of Completion 40 Conversion of Security Deposit 41 Return of Security Deposit 42 Permits and Licences 43 Determination of Cost - Unit Price 44 Determination of Cost - Agreement 45 Determination of Cost - Cost Plus 46 Definition or Determination of Cost 47 Maintain Records by Contractor 48 Work Schedule 49 Cost Breakdown of Lump Sum Work 50 Contractor ’ s Job Office 51 Record of Imported Plant 52 Copy Purchase Orders 53 Arbitration ARTICLES OF AGREEMENT Page 1 ARTICLES OF AGREEMENT THESE ARTICLES OF AGREEMENT made in duplicate this day of 20 : BETWEEN : HER MAJESTY THE QUEEN IN RIGHT OF THE PROVINCE OF NEW BRUNSWICK REPRESENTED HEREIN BY THE MINISTER OF TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE ( referred to in the documents forming the contract as the “ Owner ” ) AND : _________________________ , A DULY INCORPORATED COMPANY UNDER THE LAWS OF THE PROVINCE OF NEW BRUNSWICK ( referred to in the documents forming the contract as the “ Contractor ” ) WITNESS that the Owner and the Contractor covenant and agree as follows : ARTICLE I The Contractor shall in a careful and workmanlike manner execute the following work within the time herein limited : which work is more particularly described in the documents that are attached hereto , entitled “ Plans and Specifications ” marked “ G ” ( referred to in the documents forming the contract as the “ Plans and Specifications ” ) at the place and in the manner therein set out .
ARTICLE II 1 The Owner shall pay to the Contractor as consideration for the execution of the portion of the work to which the fixed price arrangement is applicable the sum of $ ( subject to any additions or deductions provided for in these Articles , the General Conditions , the Terms of Payment or the Labour Conditions , except any addition or deduction which is expressly stated to be applicable only to a unit price arrangement ) , at the times and in the manner set out or referred to in the document that is attached hereto entitled “ Terms of Payment ” and marked “ A ” ( referred to in the documents forming the contract as the “ Terms of Payment ” ) .
2 ( 1 ) The Owner shall pay to the Contractor as consideration for the execution of the portion of the work to which the unit price arrangement is applicable a sum equal to the number of units of measurement of each class of labour , plant or material actually performed , used or supplied by the Contractor in the execution of the work as measured by the Engineer-Architect and set out in the Engineer-Architect ’ s Final Certificate multiplied by the price of each such unit of measurement as set out in the Unit Price Table as added to or amended in accordance with subsections ( 2 ) , ( 3 ) and ( 4 ) ( such sum being subject to any additions or deductions provided for in the General Conditions , Terms of Payment , Labour Conditions , except any addition or deduction which is expressly stated to be applicable only to a fixed price arrangement ) at the times and in the manner set out or referred to in the document that is attached hereto entitled “ Terms of Payment ” and marked “ A ” ( referred to in the documents forming the contract as the “ Terms of Payment ” ) .
2 ( 2 ) The Engineer-Architect and the Contractor may by agreement in writing add to the Unit Price Table , as set out in the contract documents , classes of labour , plant or material together with units of measurement , prices per unit and estimated quantities therefor where any labour , plant or material which will be included in the Engineer-Architect ’ s Final Certificate is not included in any class of labour , plant or material set out in the Unit Price Table .
ARTICLES OF AGREEMENT Page 2 2 ( 3 ) The Engineer-Architect and the Contractor may by agreement in writing amend the price per unit set out in the Unit Price Table for any class of labour , plant or material included therein where an estimated quantity is set out therein for that class of labour , plant or material , if the Engineer-Architect ’ s Final Certificate shows or will show that the total quantity of that class of labour , plant or material performed , used or supplied by the Contractor in executing the work is less than seventy-five percent of that estimated quantity , and the price per unit agreed under this subsection shall apply to the number of units supplied .
2 ( 4 ) The Engineer-Architect and the Contractor may by agreement in writing amend the price per unit set out in the Unit Price Table for any class of labour , plant or material included therein where an estimated quantity is set out therein for that class of labour , plant or material , by establishing a price per unit for units of that class of labour , plant or material performed , used or supplied by the Contractor in executing the work which are in excess of one hundred and twenty-five percent of that estimated quantity , and the price per unit agreed to under this subsection shall be applicable only to those units which are in excess of one hundred and twenty-five percent of the estimated quantity .
2 ( 5 ) For the information and guidance of the Contractor and the persons administering the contract on behalf of the Owner , but not so as to constitute a warranty , representation or undertaking of any nature , either by the Owner to the Contractor or by the Contractor to the Owner , it is estimated that the total amount payable by the Owner to the Contractor for the portion of the work to which the unit price arrangement is applicable is. . 3 Section 1 is not applicable where the unit price arrangement applies to the whole of the work .
4 Section 2 is not applicable where the fixed price arrangement applies to the whole of the work .
ARTICLE III 1 Subject to sections 2 and 3 of this Article , bound documents ( A ) and ( B ) in addition to attached documents ( C ) , ( D ) , ( E ) , ( F ) , ( G ) and ( H ) hereto entitled ( A ) “ Terms of Payment ” and marked “ A ” ; ( B ) “ General Conditions ” and marked “ B ” ; N/A ( C ) “ Supplementary General Conditions ” and marked “ C ” ( if none , insert not applicable ) ; N/A ( D ) “ Labour Conditions ” and marked “ D ” ; ( E ) “ Insurance Schedule ” and marked “ E ” ; ( F ) “ Tender Submission ” and marked “ F ” ; ( G ) “ Plans and Specifications ” and marked “ G ” ; N/A ( H ) “ Post-tender Documents ” and marked “ H ” ; and ( I ) “ Affidavit ” and marked “ I ” all form part of the contract between the Owner and the Contractor .
2 Any provisions of these Articles , the Terms of Payment and the General Conditions which are expressly stated to be applicable only to a unit price arrangement are not applicable to the whole or to the portion of the work to which the fixed price arrangement is applicable .
3 Any provisions of these Articles , the Terms of Payment and the General Conditions which are expressly stated to be applicable only to a fixed price arrangement are not applicable to the whole or to the portion of the work to which the unit price arrangement is applicable .
ARTICLES OF AGREEMENT Page 3 ARTICLE IV 1 With respect to the execution of the work by the Contractor , ( a ) the security deposit having a current market value of $ that has been deposited with the Owner by the Contractor for the due fulfilment of the contract shall be dealt with in accordance with the provisions concerning security deposit in the General Conditions , or ( b ) a surety company has furnished or has undertaken to furnish a Performance Bond , ( insert details - name of company , amount , date , etc . )
and a Labour and Material Payment Bond , ( insert details - name of company , amount , date , etc . )
which bond or bonds shall operate according to their tenor .
2 Where bonds are provided under paragraph 1 ( b ) , the Contractor shall post on the site of the work a notice that a Labour and Material Payment Bond is in force together with the name and address of the surety company thereunder , a definition of those persons protected thereunder and outline of the procedure for submitting a claim thereunder .
ARTICLE V For all purposes of or incidental to the contract , the Contractor ’ s address shall be deemed to be : ARTICLE VI The Unit Price Table is the Unit Price Table contained in the Tender .
SIGNED , SEALED AND DELIVERED In the Presence of : Witness “ The Owner ” MINISTER OF TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE Witness “ The Contractor ” TERMS OF PAYMENT Page A 1 TERMS OF PAYMENT “ A ” A TOTAL PAYMENT 1 Subject to the provisions of sections 16 and 19 of the General Conditions , the Owner shall pay to the Contractor at the times and in the manner hereinafter set out the amount by which ( a ) the aggregate of the amounts described in section 2 exceeds ( b ) the aggregate of the amounts described in section 3 and the Contractor shall accept the payment as full consideration for everything furnished and done by him in respect of the work .
DETAIL OF PARAGRAPH 1 ( a ) 2 The amounts referred to in paragraph 1 ( a ) are : ( a ) the amount payable to the Contractor pursuant to Article II of the Articles of Agreement ; ( b ) the amount , if any , payable to the Contractor pursuant to section 12 of the General Conditions relating to soil conditions , neglect or delay ; ( c ) the amount , if any , payable to the Contractor on account of a suspension of work pursuant to section 18 of the General Conditions ; ( d ) the amount , if any , payable to the Contractor pursuant to section 36 of the General Conditions relating to work not required to be done under the contract but done by the Contractor under a disputed decision or direction of the Engineer-Architect ; and ( e ) the amount , if any , payable to the Contractor by reason of an order or change pursuant to section 37 of the General Conditions .
DETAIL OF PARAGRAPH 1 ( b ) 3 The amounts referred to in paragraph 1 ( b ) are : ( a ) the amount , if any , payable to the Owner pursuant to section 12 of the General Conditions relating to soil conditions ; ( b ) the amount , if any , which the Contractor is liable to pay to the Owner pursuant to section 14 of the General Conditions relating to damage to the Owner ’ s material , plant and real property ; ( c ) in the event of a delay in completing the work , the amount payable to the Owner pursuant to section 15 of the General Conditions ; ( d ) the amount , if any , paid by the Owner in satisfaction of obligations of the Contractor or a subcontractor pursuant to section 20 of the General Conditions or pursuant to the Labour Conditions ; Page A 2 TERMS OF PAYMENT ( e ) the amount , if any , payable by the Contractor to the Owner pursuant to section 35 of the General Conditions relating to matters done by the Owner which the Contractor refused or failed to do ; and ( f ) the amount , if any , by which the cost of the work to the Contractor was decreased by reason of dispensations or changes pursuant to section 37 of the General Conditions .
PROGRESS PAYMENTS 4 ( 1 ) For the purposes of this section , “ Payment Period ” means an interval of thirty days or such other interval as the Contractor and Engineer-Architect agree upon .
4 ( 2 ) The Contractor and Engineer-Architect shall , either before or immediately after the signing of the Articles of Agreement , agree on a schedule of provisional unit prices to be used in the preparation of progress claims .
4 ( 3 ) On or after the end of each Payment Period , a progress claim in writing showing the amount of each class of work performed and materials furnished during such Payment Period , with the value thereof computed in accordance with the schedule of provisional unit prices where applicable or the table of unit prices where applicable , shall be prepared by the Contractor and submitted in triplicate to the Engineer-Architect for approval .
4 ( 4 ) The Engineer-Architect shall within ten days endorse his approval or amended approval on the copies of the progress claim , after making such alterations therein as he may deem proper , and shall forward one copy to the Owner , return one copy to the Contractor , and retain one copy in his possession and the progress claim so approved shall be the basis of the payment by the Owner under subsection ( 6 ) .
4 ( 5 ) In respect of each progress claim , the Contractor shall deliver to the Owner ( a ) a Statutory Declaration deposing , or ( b ) if required by the Owner , documentary proof verifying , the fact that all his lawful obligations to subcontractors , workmen and suppliers of material in respect of the work as at a date not greater than forty-five days prior to the date of the progress claim have been fully discharged .
4 ( 6 ) The Owner shall , within twenty days after receipt of the approved progress claim from the Engineer-Architect and receipt of the statutory declaration or proof of payment required under subsection ( 5 ) , pay to the Contractor an amount equal ( a ) when a Labour and Material Payment Bond was required of and furnished by him , to ninety-five percent of the amount of progress claim , or ( b ) when a security deposit was required of and furnished by him , to eighty-five percent of the amount of the progress claim .
4 ( 7 ) Upon the expiration of sixty days from the date of issuance of an Interim Certificate of Completion under subsection 39 ( 1 ) of the General Conditions or thirty days after the Contractor has delivered to the Owner an invoice approved by the Engineer-Architect , showing the method by which the amount claimed therein was calculated , whichever is the later date , and if the Contractor has made and delivered to the Owner his Statutory Declaration deposing or proof of payment , if required by the Owner , verifying the fact that all his lawful obligations to subcontractors , workmen and suppliers of material in respect of the work are fully discharged and that all other lawful claims against him in respect of the work including Workers ’ Compensation assessments have been satisfied or provided for , the amount described in section 1 as estimated by the Engineer-Architect less the aggregate of ( a ) all payments made pursuant to subsection ( 6 ) , TERMS OF PAYMENT Page A 3 ( b ) an amount equal to double the estimated cost to the Owner of completing the items and doing the things described in the Interim Certificate of Completion which , in the opinion of the Engineer-Architect , are brought about by defects and faults in the work , ( c ) an amount equal to double the cost to the Owner of completing the items and doing the things described in the Interim Certificate of Completion other than items or things to which paragraph ( b ) applies , ( d ) all payments made pursuant to section 9 , and ( e ) all amounts retained pursuant to a maintenance and guarantee provision , if any , contained in the contract shall become due and be payable by the Owner to the Contractor .
4 ( 8 ) Upon the expiration of sixty days from the date of issuance of the Final Certificate of Completion under subsection 39 ( 2 ) of the General Conditions or thirty days after the Contractor has delivered to the Owner an invoice approved by the Engineer-Architect , showing the method by which the amount claimed therein was calculated , whichever is the later date , and if the Contractor has made and delivered to the Owner his Statutory Declaration or proof of payment , if required by the Owner , verifying the fact that all his lawful obligations and lawful claims against him , arising out of the work , have been discharged and satisfied , the amounts described in section 1 less the aggregate of ( a ) all payments made pursuant to subsection ( 6 ) , ( b ) all payments made pursuant to subsection ( 7 ) , ( c ) all payments made pursuant to section 9 , and ( d ) all amounts retained pursuant to a maintenance and guarantee provision , if any , contained in the contract shall become due and be payable by the Owner to the Contractor .
4 ( 9 ) Where the Contractor does not provide the Owner with a Statutory Declaration or proof of payment required by subsection ( 5 ) , ( 7 ) or ( 8 ) within the time limited therein , the Owner may withhold payment of the monies which would otherwise have become due until such time as the Statutory Declaration or proof of payment is provided by the Contractor to the Owner and the Owner during this period of time shall not be required to pay interest as provided for in section 6 .
CLAIM PAYMENT NOT ACCEPTANCE 5 Neither a Progress Claim nor a payment by the Owner pursuant thereto shall be construed as evidence that the work , material or any part thereof is complete , is satisfactory or is in accordance with the contract .
OWNER ’ S DELAY IN PAYMENT 6 Delay by the owner in making a payment when it becomes due and is payable shall , if the delay continues for more than fifteen days , entitle the Contractor to interest on the overdue payment and the Owner shall pay to the Contractor interest thereon from the said fifteenth day until paid at the rate being charged by the Canadian chartered banks in Fredericton on prime commercial accounts as of the date from which such interest was payable .
OWNER ’ S RIGHT OF SET - OFF 7 ( 1 ) Without restricting any right of set-off given or implied by law , the Owner may set-off against any amount payable to the Contractor under the contract , any amount payable to the Owner by the Contractor under this contract or under any current contract and , without restricting the Page A 4 TERMS OF PAYMENT generality of the foregoing , the Owner may when making payment pursuant to section 4 deduct from the amount payable any amount which is then payable to the Owner or the Province of New Brunswick by the Contractor under the contract or which , by virtue of the right of set-off , may be retained by the Owner .
7 ( 2 ) For the purposes of this section “ current contract ” means ( a ) a contract between the Owner and the Contractor under which the Contractor has an undischarged obligation to perform or supply work , labour or materials , or ( b ) a contract between the Owner and the Contractor in respect of which the Owner has since the date on which this contract was entered into exercised the right to take the work , the subject of that contract , out of the Contractor ’ s hands .
PAYMENT WHEN CONTRACT TERMINATED 8 In the event that the contract is terminated pursuant to section 19 of the General Conditions , the Owner shall as soon as is practicable under the circumstances pay to the Contractor the amount , if any , payable to the Contractor pursuant to that section .
INTERIM RELEASE OF HOLDBACK 9 ( 1 ) The Owner may at any time , but not more than twice during the term of the contract , on the written application of the Contractor and with the approval of the surety , pay to the Contractor all , or a portion of , the percentage amounts retained up to that time in respect of payments on Progress Claims under subsection 4 ( 6 ) .
9 ( 2 ) Subject to the approval of the surety , the making of any such payment , and the amount thereof , are wholly in the discretion of the Owner .
GENERAL CONDITIONS Page B 1 GENERAL CONDITIONS “ B ” B DEFINITION OF TERMS 1 ( 1 ) In the documents forming the contract , unless the context otherwise requires : “ Engineer-Architect ” means the ............................................................................... ........................................................................................................................................ of .......... ............................................................................................................................ and includes a person authorized by him to perform on his behalf any function under the contract ; “ herein , ” “ hereby , ” “ hereof , ” “ hereunder ” and similar expressions refer to the contract as a whole and not to any particular subdivision or part thereof ; “ material ” includes all materials , commodities , articles and things required to be furnished under the contract for incorporation in the work ; “ Owner ” means that Minister , agency or corporation set forth in the Articles of Agreement as the Owner ; “ plant ” includes all animals , tools , implements , machinery , vehicles , buildings , structures , equipment , articles and things required for the execution of the work ; “ security deposit ” means the security given by the Contractor to the Owner in accordance with the contract ; “ subcontractor ” means a person , firm or corporation having a contract with the Contractor ( a ) for the execution of a part or parts of the work included in this contract , or ( b ) for the furnishing of material called for in this contract and worked to a special design according to the Plans and Specifications provided such contract is made pursuant to section 4 ; “ superintendent ” means the employee of the Contractor who is designated by the Contractor as being in full charge of the field operations of the Contractor for the purposes of the contract ; “ work ” includes all labour , material and services required , as shown or described in the contract , supplied and installed or erected complete at the place of building .
1 ( 2 ) The marginal notes , if any , in the contract documents form no part of the contract but shall be deemed to be inserted for the convenience of reference only .
REFERENCES 1 ( 3 ) Unless the context otherwise requires , where in a contract document reference is made to a section , subsection or paragraph , the reference is deemed to be a reference ( a ) in the case of section , to a section in the contract document , ( b ) in the case of a subsection , to a subsection of the section , and Page B 2 GENERAL CONDITIONS ( c ) in the case of a paragraph , to a paragraph in the section or subsection , in which the reference appears .
INTERPRETING DOCUMENTS 1 ( 4 ) In interpreting the contract in the event of discrepancies or conflicts between anything in the Plans and Specifications and the General Conditions , the General Conditions shall govern .
1 ( 5 ) In interpreting the Plans and Specifications : ( a ) in the event of discrepancies or conflicts between the Plans and Specifications , the Specifications shall govern ; ( b ) in the event of discrepancies or conflicts between the Plans , the Plans drawn with the largest scale shall govern ; and ( c ) in the event of discrepancies or conflicts between figured dimensions and scaled dimensions , the figured dimensions shall govern .
CONTRACT BINDING 2 The contract shall inure to the benefit of and be binding upon the parties hereto and their heirs , executors , administrators , successors , and assigns .
ASSIGNMENT 3 The contract may not be assigned without the written consent of the Owner and until sections 51 and 52 of the Financial Administration Act , chapter F-11 of the Revised Statutes of New Brunswick , 1973 , have been complied with where applicable .
SUBCONTRACTING 4 ( 1 ) Except for the subcontracting proposed by the Contractor in his accepted tender , neither the whole nor any part of the work may be subcontracted by the Contractor without the consent of the Engineer-Architect .
4 ( 2 ) Every subcontract by the Contractor , whether as proposed in the approved tender or as approved by the Engineer-Architect under subsection ( 1 ) , shall provide that the subcontractor shall comply with all terms and conditions of this contract which can reasonably be applied to his undertaking including , without limiting the generality of the foregoing , the provisions of section 52 .
SCOPE OF WORK 5 ( 1 ) The description of the work and material set out in the contract includes not only the particular kind of work and material mentioned but also all labour , plant and material necessary for the full execution , completion and delivery ready for use of the work and material .
5 ( 2 ) The Contractor shall provide everything necessary for execution of the work except things in respect of which the contract expressly provides otherwise and except the site of work if the work when completed is to remain permanently affixed thereon .
NO IMPLIED OBLIGATION 6 No implied obligation of any kind by or on behalf of the Owner shall arise from anything in the contract , and the express covenants and agreements herein contained and made by the Owner are and shall be the only covenants and agreements upon which any right against the Owner are to be founded , and , without limiting the generality of the foregoing , the contract GENERAL CONDITIONS Page B 3 supersedes all communications , negotiations and agreements , either written or oral , relating to the work and made prior to the date of the contract .
TIME OF THE ESSENCE 7 Time is of the essence of the contract .
INDEMNITY BY CONTRACTOR 8 ( 1 ) Except as provided in section 9 , the Contractor shall indemnify and save harmless the Owner from and against all claims , demands , losses , costs , damage , actions , suits , or proceedings by whomsoever made , brought or prosecuted in any manner based upon , arising out of , related to , occasioned by or attributable to the activities of the Contractor in executing the work under the contract or to an infringement or an alleged infringement by the Contractor of a patent of invention .
8 ( 2 ) For the purposes of subsection ( 1 ) , “ activities ” includes an act improperly carried out , an omission to carry out an act and delay in carrying out an act .
INDEMNITY BY OWNER 9 The Owner shall indemnify and save harmless the Contractor from and against all claims , demands , losses , costs , damage , actions , suits or proceedings arising out of his activities under the contract which are directly attributable to ( a ) a lack of title , a defect in title or an alleged lack of title or defect in title to the site of the work , or ( b ) an infringement or an alleged infringement of any patent of invention in executing anything for the purposes of the contract , the model , plan or design of which was supplied by the Owner to the Contractor .
ELECTED MEMBERS 10 ( 1 ) No member of the Legislative Assembly of the Province of New Brunswick shall be admitted to any share or part of the contract or to any benefit arising therefrom .
10 ( 2 ) No member of the House of Commons of Canada shall be admitted to any share or part of the contract or to any benefit arising therefrom if Government of Canada funds are involved , whether directly or indirectly , in the payment for or financing of such contract .
SERVING NOTICES 11 ( 1 ) Notices for the purposes of paragraph 16 ( 1 ) ( a ) , section 18 and section 19 shall be in writing and shall ( a ) be delivered to the Contractor in person , or , if the Contractor is a corporation or partnership , be delivered to the superintendent or to a senior administrative officer of the corporation or partnership , or ( b ) be sent by mail to the Contractor or his superintendent addressed to the address mentioned in the contract , and if any question arises as to when any such notice was given to or received by the Contractor it shall be deemed to have been sufficiently given to and received by him , ( c ) if it was delivered pursuant to paragraph ( a ) , on the day it was delivered , or ( d ) if it was sent by mail pursuant to paragraph ( b ) , on the day it was received by the Contractor or on the sixth day after it was mailed , whichever is the earlier .
Page B 4 GENERAL CONDITIONS 11 ( 2 ) Any notice , order , direction , decision or communication , other than a notice to which subsection ( 1 ) refers , which may be given to the Contractor pursuant to the contract may be given in any manner , but it shall be deemed to have been sufficiently given to the Contractor if it was put in writing and the writing was ( a ) delivered to the Contractor in person , or , if the Contractor is a corporation or partnership , was delivered to the superintendent or to a senior administrative officer of the corporation or partnership , ( b ) left at the Contractor ’ s office , or , if he has more than one office , at one of them , or ( c ) sent by mail to the Contractor or his superintendent addressed to the address mentioned in the contract or to the Contractor ’ s last known place of business or residence .
ADJUSTMENTS DUE TO SOIL CONDITIONS , NEGLECT OR DELAY 12 ( 1 ) No payment , in addition to the payment expressly promised by the contract , shall be made by the Owner to the Contractor on account of any extra expense , loss or damage incurred or sustained by the Contractor including a misunderstanding on the part of the Contractor as to any fact , whether or not such misunderstanding is attributable directly or indirectly to the Owner or any of the Owner ’ s agents or servants , and whether or not any negligence or fraud on the part of the Owner ’ s agents or servants is involved , unless , in the opinion of the Engineer-Architect the extra expense , loss or damage is directly attributable to ( a ) a substantial difference between information relating to soil conditions at the site of the work , or a reasonable assumption of fact based thereon , in the Plans and Specifications or other documents or material communicated by the Owner to the Contractor for his use in preparing his tender and the real soil conditions encountered at the site of the work by the Contractor when executing the work , or ( b ) neglect or delay occurring after the date of the contract on the part of the Owner in providing any information or in doing any act which the contract either expressly requires the Owner to do or which would be done by an Owner in accordance with the usage of the trade to enable his Contractor to carry out an undertaking similar to the work being executed under the contract for the Owner , in which case , if as a condition precedent the Contractor has given to the Engineer-Architect written notice of his claim before the expiration of thirty days from the encountering of the soil conditions giving rise to the claim or from the day on which the neglect occurs or the delay commences , as the case may be , the Owner shall pay to the Contractor , in respect of the additional expense , loss or damage incurred or sustained by reason of that difference , neglect or delay , an amount equal to the cost of the additional plant , labour and material necessarily involved .
12 ( 2 ) If , in the opinion of the Engineer-Architect , the Contractor has effected a saving of expenditure by reason of the execution of the work by the Contractor being rendered less difficult and less costly because the soil conditions actually encountered by the Contractor at the site if the work when executing the work are substantially different from soil conditions indicated in information , or a reasonable assumption of fact based thereon , in the Plans and Specifications or other documents or material communicated by the Owner to the Contractor for his use in preparing his tender , the amount set out in Article II of the Articles of Agreement shall be reduced by an amount equal to the saving effected by the Contractor .
12 ( 3 ) Paragraph ( 1 ) ( a ) and subsection ( 2 ) are applicable only to a fixed price arrangement .
12 ( 4 ) If information relating to soil conditions at the site of the work appeared in the Plans and Specifications or in other documents or material communicated by the Owner to the Contractor for his use in preparing his tender and if the real soil conditions encountered at the site of the work by the Contractor when executing the work are substantially different from such information , or a reasonable assumption of fact based thereon , so that the cost to the GENERAL CONDITIONS Page B 5 Contractor of executing the work is directly and substantially increased or decreased by reason of such difference , the Engineer-Architect and the Contractor may by agreement in writing amend the price per unit for any class of plant , labour or material involved therein , so that the benefit of a substantial decrease in cost shall accrue to the Owner and the burden of a substantial increase in cost shall not be borne by the Contractor .
12 ( 5 ) Subsection ( 4 ) is applicable only to a unit price arrangement .
12 ( 6 ) No claim by the Contractor shall be valid in situations where subsection ( 4 ) is applicable unless he has given written notice thereof to the Owner within thirty days from the encountering of the soil conditions giving rise to such claim .
OWNER ’ S TITLE TO PLANT , ETC .
13 ( 1 ) All material and plant and the interest of the Contractor in all real property , licences , powers and privileges acquired , used or provided by the Contractor for the work shall from the time of being so acquired , used or provided , become and they are the property of the Owner for the purposes of the work and they shall continue to be the property of the Owner ( a ) in the case of material , until incorporated in the work or until the Engineer-Architect certifies that he is satisfied that it will not be required for the work , and ( b ) in the case of plant , real property , licences , powers and privileges , until the Engineer- Architect certifies that he is satisfied that the interest vested in the Owner therein is no longer required for the purposes of the work .
13 ( 2 ) Material or plant that is the property of the Owner by virtue of this section shall not be taken away from the site of the work , or used or disposed of , except for the purposes of the work , without the consent in writing of the Engineer-Architect .
13 ( 3 ) The Owner is not liable for loss or damage to material or plant that is the property of the Owner by virtue of this section and the Contractor is liable for such loss or damage notwithstanding that the material or plant is the property of the Owner .
CONTRACTOR ’ S LIABILITY FOR DAMAGE TO OWNER ’ S PLANT 14 ( 1 ) The Contractor is liable to the Owner for loss of or damage to material , plant or real property , whether attributable to causes beyond his control or not , supplied or made available by the Owner to the Contractor for use in connection with the work other than loss or damage resulting from and directly attributable to reasonable wear and tear .
14 ( 2 ) The Contractor shall not use material , plant or real property to which this section applies except for the purpose of carrying out this contract .
14 ( 3 ) When the Contractor has failed to make good any loss or damage for which he is liable under this section within a reasonable time after being required by the Engineer-Architect to do so , the Engineer-Architect may cause the loss of damage to be made good , and the Contractor shall thereupon be liable to the Owner for the cost thereof and shall on demand pay to the Owner an amount equal to such cost .
14 ( 4 ) The Contractor shall keep such records of material , plant and real property to which this section applies as the Engineer-Architect from time to time requires and shall , from time to time as the Engineer-Architect requires , satisfy the Engineer-Architect that such material , plant and real property are at the place and in the condition that they ought to be .
EXTENSION OF TIME AND PENALTY FOR DELAY IN COMPLETION 15 ( 1 ) The Engineer-Architect may , on the application of the Contractor if made in accordance with the time limits in subsection 33 ( 2 ) and made before the day fixed by Article I of the Articles of Agreement for completion of the work or any specified portion thereof or before any new date Page B 6 GENERAL CONDITIONS for completion previously fixed under this subsection , if in his opinion it is in the public interest , extend the time for completion of the work or any specified portion or portions thereof by fixing a new day for such completion .
15 ( 2 ) Where the Contractor does not complete the work or any specified portion thereof by the day fixed by Article I of the Articles of Agreement for such completion or by such subsequent day , if any , to which the time for completion has been extended under subsection ( 1 ) , but does complete the work or portion thereafter , the Contractor shall pay to the Owner ( a ) where no statutory penalty is provided by subsection ( 3 ) , ( i ) an amount equal to all salaries , wages and travelling expenses paid by the Owner to persons superintending the work during the period of delay , which would not otherwise have been payable , ( ii ) an amount equal to the value to the Owner of the use of the completed work for the period of delay , and ( iii ) an amount equal to all other expenses and damages incurred or sustained by the Owner as a result of the work or specified portion thereof not being completed during the period of delay , or ( b ) where a statutory penalty is provided for by subsection ( 3 ) , the amount prescribed therein for each day the work or specified portion therefor was not complete during the period of delay .
15 ( 3 ) ( a ) The Contractor shall pay to the Owner ( i ) for each day of the period of delay during which the work in its entirety is not complete , the sum of ............................................ , and ( ii ) for each day of the period of delay during which the following specified portions of the work are not complete , the sum stated for such portion ( A ) ............................................................................................... ( B ) ............................................................................................... ( C ) ............................................................................................... ( b ) Where no penalty is stipulated in paragraph ( a ) , the Contractor is not bound by this subsection .
15 ( 4 ) For the purposes of this section , ( a ) the work is deemed to be completed on the day specified by the Engineer-Architect in his Interim Certificate of Completion , and ( b ) “ period of delay ” means the period commencing on the day fixed by Article I of the Articles of Agreement for completion of the work or any portion thereof or such subsequent day , if any , to which the time for completion has been extended under subsection ( 1 ) and ending on the day immediately preceding the day on which the work or portion thereof is completed .
15 ( 5 ) The Engineer-Architect may waive the right of the Owner to the whole or any part of a payment payable pursuant to subsection ( 2 ) .
GENERAL CONDITIONS Page B 7 DEFAULT OR REMOVAL OF WORK FROM CONTRACTOR 16 ( 1 ) In any of the following cases , namely , ( a ) where the Contractor has made default or delayed in commencing or in diligently executing the work or any portion thereof to the satisfaction of the Engineer-Architect and the Engineer-Architect has given notice thereof to the Contractor and has by such notice required the Contractor to put an end to such default or delay and such default or delay continues for six days after such notice was given , ( b ) where the Contractor has made default in the completion of the work , or any portion thereof , within the time limited for such completion by the contract , ( c ) where the Contractor has become insolvent , ( d ) where the Contractor has committed an act of bankruptcy , ( e ) where the Contractor has abandoned the work , ( f ) where the Contractor has made an assignment of the contract without the required consent , or ( g ) where the Contractor has otherwise failed to observe or perform any of the provisions of the contract , the Owner may , without any other authorization , take all or any portion of the work out of the Contractor ’ s hands and may employ such means as he may see fit to complete the work .
16 ( 2 ) Where the work or any portion thereof has been taken out of the Contractor ’ s hands under subsection ( 1 ) , the Contractor shall not , except as provided in subsection ( 3 ) , be entitled to any further payment in respect of the work so affected including payments then due and payable but not paid , and the obligation of the Owner to make payments in respect thereof as provided for in the Terms of Payment shall be at an end with respect to that portion of the work taken out of his hands , and the Contractor shall be liable to and upon demand therefor shall pay to the Owner an amount equal to all loss and damage suffered by the Owner by reason of the non-completion of the work by the Contractor .
16 ( 3 ) Where the work or any portion thereof has been taken out of the Contractor ’ s hands under subsection ( 1 ) and is subsequently completed by the Owner , the Engineer-Architect shall thereafter determine the amount , if any , of holdback and progress claims of the Contractor in respect thereof unpaid at the time of taking the work out of the Contractor ’ s hands that in his opinion are not required by the Owner for the purposes of the contract and the Engineer- Architect shall , if he is of the opinion that no financial prejudice to the Owner will result , authorise payment of the amount to the Contractor .
CONTRACTOR ’ S CONTINUING OBLIGATION 17 ( 1 ) The taking of the work , or any portion thereof , out of the Contractor ’ s hands pursuant to section 16 does not relieve or discharge the Contractor from any obligation under the contract or imposed upon him by law except the obligation under the contract to complete the physical execution of that portion of the work so taken out of his hands .
17 ( 2 ) If the work or any portion thereof is taken out of the Contractor ’ s hands pursuant to section 16 , all material and plant and the interest of the Contractor in all real property , licences , powers and privileges acquired , used or provided by the Contractor for the purpose of the work shall , notwithstanding subsection 13 ( 1 ) , be the property of the Owner without compensation to the Contractor .
Page B 8 GENERAL CONDITIONS 17 ( 3 ) If the Engineer-Architect certifies that any property interest of the Owner by virtue of subsection ( 2 ) is no longer required for the purposes of the work and that it is not in the interests of the Owner to retain the interest , it shall revert to the Contractor subject to the provisions of subsection 13 ( 3 ) .
SUSPENSION OF WORK 18 ( 1 ) The Engineer-Architect may require the Contractor to suspend execution of the work either for a specified or unspecified period by giving notice to that effect to the Contractor .
18 ( 2 ) The Contractor upon receiving notice of the Owner ’ s requirement pursuant to subsection ( 1 ) shall suspend all operations except those which , in the Engineer-Architect ’ s opinion , are necessary for the care and preservation of the work , material and plant .
18 ( 3 ) During the period of suspension the Contractor shall not remove from the site any part of the work , any material or any plant without the consent of the Engineer-Architect .
18 ( 4 ) If the period of suspension is thirty days or less , the Contractor , upon the expiration of the period of suspension , shall resume the execution of the work and except where the suspension order was due to the Contractor not diligently prosecuting the work or failing to prosecute the work in a good and workmanlike manner he is entitled to be paid the cost of any plant , labour and material necessary involved in complying with the suspension .
18 ( 5 ) If the period of suspension is more than thirty days and if , upon the expiration of the period of suspension , the Engineer-Architect and the Contractor agree that the execution of the work be completed by the Contractor , the Contractor shall resume operations and complete the execution of the work in accordance with any terms and conditions agreed upon by the Engineer-Architect and the Contractor .
18 ( 6 ) If upon the expiration of a period of suspension of more than thirty days , the Engineer- Architect and the Contractor do not agree that the work will be completed by the Contractor or they are unable to agree upon the terms and conditions under which the Contractor will complete the work , the notice of suspension shall be deemed to be a notice of termination pursuant to section 19 .
TERMINATION OF CONTRACT 19 ( 1 ) The Owner may at any time by giving notice to that effect terminate the contract .
19 ( 2 ) The Contractor shall upon receipt of a notice pursuant to subsection ( 1 ) cease all operations forthwith .
19 ( 3 ) If the contract is terminated pursuant to subsection ( 1 ) , the Owner shall pay to the Contractor an amount equal to the lesser of ( a ) the value as agreed upon by the Contractor and the Engineer-Architect of all work performed by the Contractor as of the date of termination or , if the Contractor and the Engineer-Architect can not agree , as calculated in accordance with the formula set out in section 45 , less all amounts already paid to the Contractor by the Owner and less all amounts which the Contractor is liable to pay to the Owner , and ( b ) the amount calculated in accordance with the terms of payment which would have been payable to the Contractor had he completed the work .
19 ( 4 ) If the contract is terminated pursuant to subsection ( 1 ) , the Owner shall pay to the Contractor an amount equal to the value as agreed upon by the Contractor and the Engineer-Architect of all work performed by the Contractor as of the date of termination or , if the Contractor and the Engineer-Architect can not agree , as calculated in accordance with the formula set out in section 45 , less all amounts already paid to the Contractor by the Owner and less all the amounts which the Contractor is liable to pay to the Owner .
GENERAL CONDITIONS Page B 9 19 ( 5 ) Subsection ( 3 ) is applicable only to a fixed price arrangement and subsection ( 4 ) is applicable only to a unit price arrangement .
PAYMENT BY OWNER OF CONTRACTING OBLIGATIONS 20 ( 1 ) The Owner may , in order to discharge lawful obligations of and satisfy lawful claims against the Contractor or a subcontractor arising out of the execution of the work , pay an amount which is due and payable to the Contractor , under any provision of the contract , directly to the obligees of and the claimants against the Contractor or the subcontractor .
20 ( 2 ) A payment made pursuant to subsection ( 1 ) is to the extent of the payment a discharge of the Owner ’ s liability under the contract to the Contractor .
20 ( 3 ) The Contractor shall discharge all his lawful obligations and shall satisfy all lawful claims against him arising out of the execution of the work as the same become due .
20 ( 4 ) The Contractor shall , whenever so requested by the Engineer-Architect , make a statutory declaration deposing to the existence and condition of the obligations and claims referred to in subsection ( 3 ) .
ACCESS TO WORK BY OWNER 21 The Contractor shall permit the Engineer-Architect to have access to the work and to all areas where portions of the work are being fabricated or manufactured at all times during the execution of the work , shall provide the Engineer-Architect with full information concerning what is being done to execute the work and shall give the Engineer-Architect every possible assistance in respect of the performance of his duty to see that the work is executed in accordance with the contract and also in respect of the performance and exercise of the duties and powers specially imposed or conferred on him by the contract .
CLEAN UP 22 The Contractor shall upon completion of the work clear and clean the work and its site to the satisfaction of and in accordance with any directions of the Engineer-Architect .
CONTRACTOR ’ S SUPERINTENDENT 23 ( 1 ) The Contractor shall , during working hours , until the work has been completed , keep on the site of the work a competent superintendent who has authority to receive on behalf of the Contractor any order , direction or other communication that may be given under the contract .
23 ( 2 ) The Contractor shall , upon the request of the Engineer-Architect , remove any superintendent who , in the opinion of the Engineer-Architect , is incompetent or has been conducting himself improperly and shall replace a superintendent so removed with another superintendent as described in subsection ( 1 ) .
REMOVAL OF CONTRACTOR ’ S EMPLOYEES 24 The Contractor shall , at the request of the Engineer-Architect , remove from the work any person employed on the work who , in the opinion of the Engineer-Architect , is incompetent or has been conducting himself improperly and the Contractor shall not permit a person so removed to remain on the site of the work .
ESCALATION - LABOUR - MATERIAL 25 ( 1 ) Except where the Labour Conditions contain an escalation clause , the amount payable to the Contractor under the contract shall not be increased or decreased by reason of any increase or decrease in the cost of the work brought about by an increase or decrease pursuant to the Labour Conditions .
Page B 10 GENERAL CONDITIONS 25 ( 2 ) Notwithstanding section 12 and subsection ( 1 ) of this section , the amount set out in Article II of the Articles of Agreement shall be adjusted , in the manner provided in subsection ( 3 ) , in the event of any change in any tax imposed under the Social Services and Education Tax Act , chapter S-10 of the Revised Statutes of New Brunswick , 1973 , or the Excise Tax Act , chapter E-13 of the Revised Statutes of Canada , 1970 , ( a ) after the date of the submission by the Contractor of the tender for the contract , and ( b ) that applies to the material incorporated or to be incorporated in the work and that affects the cost to the Contractor of such material .
25 ( 3 ) In the event of any change after the date of submission of the tender for the contract by the Contractor in any tax described in subsection ( 2 ) that applies to the material incorporated or to be incorporated in the work and that affects the cost to the Contractor of such material , the amount set out in Article II of the Articles of Agreement shall ( a ) be increased where the cost to the Contractor of any material has been increased by virtue of the change , or ( b ) be decreased where the cost to the Contractor of any material has been decreased by virtue of the change .
by an amount equal to such amount as it is established upon examination of the relevant records of the Contractor referred to in section 47 , represents the increase or decrease , as the case may be , in the cost to the Contractor of the material involved that is directly attributable to the change in the tax levied on or in respect of such material .
25 ( 4 ) For the purpose of determining the adjustment in the amount set out in Article II of the Articles of Agreement by virtue of any change in any tax described in subsection ( 2 ) , where such tax is changed after the date of submission of the tender by the Contractor but public notice of such change has been given by the Minister of Finance of the Province or the Federal Government , as the case may be , before the date of submission of the tender , the change of such tax shall , for the purposes of this section , be deemed to have occurred before the date of submission of the tender .
25 ( 5 ) The Contractor is not entitled to any part of a rebate of taxes obtained by the Owner .
USE OF LOCAL LABOUR AND MATERIAL 26 ( 1 ) The Contractor shall use Canadian labour and material in carrying out the work , to the full extent to which they are procurable , consistent with proper economy and the expeditious carrying out of the work .
26 ( 2 ) Subject to subsection ( 1 ) , the Contractor shall employ labour and obtain material from the locality where the work is being executed to the extent to which it is available and shall use the offices of the Canada Employment Centre in the recruitment of workmen wherever practicable .
26 ( 3 ) Subject to subsections ( 1 ) and ( 2 ) , the Contractor shall employ a reasonable proportion of persons who have served on active service with the armed forces of Canada and have been honourably discharged therefrom .
SAFETY 27 ( 1 ) If , in the opinion of the Engineer-Architect , the Contractor is not conducting construction of the work with proper safety precautions for workmen as prescribed by the Occupational Health and Safety Regulation - Occupational Health and Safety Act , the Engineer-Architect may , by giving notice in writing to the Contractor , stop the work .
GENERAL CONDITIONS Page B 11 27 ( 2 ) Where under subsection ( 1 ) the Engineer-Architect has stopped the work , the Contractor shall immediately cease his operations until the provisions of the Occupational Health and Safety Regulation - Occupational Health and Safety Act have been complied with to the satisfaction of the Engineer-Architect .
27 ( 3 ) No extension of time or monetary allowances shall be made to the Contractor for loss or delay arising from any stoppages in work under this section .
PROTECTION OF WORK 28 The Contractor shall guard or otherwise protect the work and shall protect the specifications , plans , drawings , information , material , plant and real property provided by the Owner to the Contractor against loss or damage from any cause .
PUBLIC CEREMONIES 29 ( 1 ) The Contractor shall not allow or permit any public ceremony in connection with the work without the permission of the Owner .
29 ( 2 ) The Contractor shall not erect or permit the erection of any sign or advertising on the work without the approval of the Engineer-Architect .
INSURANCE 30 ( 1 ) The Contractor shall at his own expense maintain such insurance policies , if any , as are required under this contract in a form and with companies approved by the Owner and of the nature , in the amounts , for the periods and containing the terms and conditions , if any , set out in the Insurance Schedule .
30 ( 2 ) All insurance policies covering the work and maintained by the Contractor pursuant to subsection ( 1 ) shall provide that the proceeds thereof are payable to the Owner , except where the Insurance Schedule otherwise provides .
30 ( 3 ) The Contractor shall deposit with the Engineer-Architect the originals of all policies of insurance maintained by the Contractor pursuant to subsection ( 1 ) and the Contractor shall , when required by the Engineer-Architect , submit to him proof that such policies are in force .
30 ( 4 ) Upon application by the Contractor , the Engineer-Architect may waive compliance with subsections ( 2 ) and ( 3 ) .
FIRE LOSS 31 ( 1 ) If the work or any portion thereof is lost or destroyed and monies are paid to the Owner in respects of the loss or damage under a policy of insurance maintained by the Contractor pursuant to section 30 , the monies shall be held by the Owner for the purposes of the contract .
31 ( 2 ) The Owner may elect to retain absolutely the monies held under subsection ( 1 ) and , in such event , the monies belong absolutely to the Owner and ( a ) the Contractor is liable to the Owner in an amount equal to the amount by which the insurance monies payable is less than the loss and damages suffered and sustained by the Owner , including costs associated with clearing and cleaning the site of the work , and ( b ) there shall be a financial accounting between the Owner and the Contractor in respect of the portion of the work which was lost or damaged and respect of which monies have been retained absolutely by the Owner and there shall be included in the financial accounting all amounts paid or payable by the Owner under the contract to the Contractor , together with all amounts paid or payable by the Contractor under the contract to the Owner and the Owner shall pay to the Contractor any balance .
Page B 12 GENERAL CONDITIONS 31 ( 3 ) Upon payment as required by subsection ( 2 ) by the Owner or the Contractor as the case may be , the Owner and the Contractor are discharged from all rights and obligations under the Contract in respect of the portion of the work which was lost or damaged and in respect of which monies have been retained absolutely by the Owner as though such portion of the work had been fully completed and executed by the Contractor in accordance with the contract .
31 ( 4 ) If an election is not made under subsection ( 2 ) , the Contractor shall restore and replace the portion of the work lost or damaged and the insurance monies shall be disbursed by the Owner to the Contractor in the manner and subject to the terms and conditions governing monies payable under the contract to the Contractor by the Owner , except that for the purpose of this subsection “ one hundred percent ” shall be substituted in subsection 4 ( 6 ) of the Terms of Payment for “ ninety-five percent ” and “ eighty-five percent ” .
CONTRACTOR ’ S RESPONSIBILITIES 32 ( 1 ) The Contractor shall at his own expense do whatever is necessary to ensure that ( a ) no person , property , right , easement or privilege is injured , damaged or infringed by reason of the Contractor ’ s activities under this contract , ( b ) pedestrian and other traffic on any public or private road or waterway is not unduly impeded , interrupted or endangered by the execution or existence of the work and plant , ( c ) fire hazards are eliminated and in the case of a fire in or about the work that it is promptly extinguished , ( d ) the health of all persons employed on the work is not endangered , ( e ) adequate medical supervision of all persons employed on the work is maintained , ( f ) adequate sanitation measures in respect of the work are taken , and ( g ) all stakes , buoys , lines , levels , and marks placed on or about the works by or under the authority of the Engineer-Architect are protected and are not removed , defaced or altered .
32 ( 2 ) The Engineer-Architect may direct the Contractor to do such things and to construct such works which the Engineer-Architect considers reasonable and necessary to ensure compliance with or to remedy a breach of subsection ( 1 ) .
32 ( 3 ) The Contractor shall at his own expense comply with a direction of the Engineer-Architect made pursuant to subsection ( 2 ) .
INTERPRETATIONS OF CONTRACT DOCUMENTS - CLAIMS ARISING 33 ( 1 ) If at any time before the work has been completed and the Engineer-Architect has issued his Final Certificate of Completion , any question arises as to whether anything has been done as required by the contract or as to what the Contractor is required by the contract to do , and in particular , and without limiting the generality of the foregoing , as to ( a ) the meaning of anything in the Plans and Specifications , ( b ) the meaning to be given to the Plans and Specifications in case of any error therein , an omission therefrom , or an obscurity or discrepancy in the wording or intention thereof , ( c ) whether the quality or quantity of any material or workmanship meets the requirements of the contract , ( d ) whether the plant , material or workmen provided by the Contractor for executing the work and carrying out the contract are adequate to ensure that the work will be executed in GENERAL CONDITIONS Page B 13 accordance with the contract and that the contract will be carried out in accordance with its terms , ( e ) what quantity of any kind of work has been completed by the Contractor , or ( f ) the timing and scheduling of the various phases of the execution of the work , the question shall be decided by the Engineer-Architect whose decision is final and binding .
33 ( 2 ) In matters arising other than under section 12 , the Contractor shall , where he intends to submit a claim for additional time or money arising out of the construction of the work , give written notice of his intention to claim ( a ) in the case of changes or alterations of the work ordered by the Engineer-Architect , within fourteen days of receipt of the notice of change , and ( b ) in the case of a dispute arising out of interpretation of the contract , within thirty days of the first occurrence of the circumstances giving rise to the dispute .
33 ( 3 ) In matters arising other than under section 12 , the Contractor may submit a claim for additional time or money only on those matters covered by the notice of intention to claim given under subsection ( 2 ) and such claim if not submitted within thirty days of the occurrence of the portion of the work out of which the claim arises shall be barred .
33 ( 4 ) The Engineer-Architect shall within thirty days of receipt of a notice of claim under this section render his decision in writing to the Contractor .
33 ( 5 ) The Contractor shall construct the work in accordance with the decisions and directions of the Engineer-Architect given under this section and in accordance with any consequential decisions and directions given by the Engineer-Architect .
DEFECTS AND OMISSIONS 34 ( 1 ) Without restricting any warranty or guarantee implied or stipulated by law , the Contractor shall at his own expense rectify and make good any defect or fault or omission that appears in the work within twelve months or within such additional period of time stipulated in the Specifications concerning particular portions of the work from the date of the Engineer- Architect ’ s Final Certificate of Completion , or where an Interim Certificate of Completion has been issued under section 39 , from the date of such Interim Certificate .
34 ( 2 ) If any defect , fault or omission appears in the work and the Engineer-Architect is of the opinion that it is one which the Contractor , either under subsection ( 1 ) or under a warranty or guarantee implied or stipulated by law , is obliged to remedy and make good , the Engineer- Architect may direct the Contractor to remedy and make good the defect , fault or omission by giving notice to the Contractor of the existence of the defect , fault or omission and the notice shall specify the time within which the defect , fault , or omission is to be rectified and made good .
34 ( 3 ) The Contractor shall rectify and make good the defect , fault or omission described in a notice given pursuant to subsection ( 2 ) within the time specified in the notice .
OWNER ’ S RIGHT TO COMPLETE WORK 35 ( 1 ) Where the Contractor has failed to comply with any decision or direction given by the Engineer-Architect under section 22 , 32 , 33 , or 34 , the Engineer-Architect may employ such methods as he may deem expedient to do that which the Contractor failed to do .
35 ( 2 ) The Contractor shall on demand pay to the Owner all costs , expenses and damages incurred or sustained by the Owner by reason of the Contractor ’ s non-compliance with any decision or Page B 14 GENERAL CONDITIONS direction given by the Engineer-Architect under this section 22 , 32 , 33 , or 34 and by the action taken by the Engineer-Architect pursuant to subsection ( 1 ) .
CONTRACTOR ’ S RIGHTS ON DISPUTED DECISION 36 If the Contractor has , within ten days of communication to him by the Engineer-Architect of any decision or direction of the Engineer-Architect under section 22 , 32 , 33 , or 34 , given notice to the Engineer-Architect in writing disputing such decision or direction and stating the ground or grounds which form the basis of such dispute , the Owner shall pay to the Contractor the cost of the additional labour , material and plant necessarily involved in carrying out the decision or direction beyond what the Contract , correctly understood and interpreted , would have required the Contractor to do .
CHANGES IN THE WORK 37 ( 1 ) The Engineer-Architect may at any time before he issues his Final Certificate of Completion , in writing , ( a ) order work or material in addition to that provided for in the Plans and Specifications , and ( b ) delete work or change the dimensions , nature , character , quantity , quality , description , location or position of the whole or any part of the work or material provided for in the Plans and Specifications or as ordered pursuant to paragraph ( a ) , and the Contractor shall execute the work in accordance with such orders , deletions , and changes as if the same had appeared in and been part of the Plans and Specifications .
37 ( 2 ) The Engineer-Architect shall determine whether anything done or not done by the Contractor pursuant to an order , deletion or change made by the Engineer-Architect pursuant to subsection ( 1 ) increased or decreased the cost of the work to the Contractor .
37 ( 3 ) If the Engineer-Architect determines under subsection ( 2 ) that the cost has been increased , the Owner shall pay to the Contractor the cost of the additional labour , material and plant necessarily involved .
37 ( 4 ) If the Engineer-Architect determines under subsection ( 2 ) , that the cost has been decreased , the Owner may reduce the amount payable to the Contractor under the contract by the amount equal to the reduction in cost of the labour , material and plant involved .
37 ( 5 ) Where provision for the calculation of increased and decreased cost under subsections ( 3 ) and ( 4 ) is contained in the Contract Documents , such cost shall be calculated in accordance therewith .
RELATIONS WITH OTHER CONTRACTORS 38 ( 1 ) Wherever work being done by the Owner ’ s forces or by other contractors is contiguous to work covered by this contract , the respective rights of the various interests involved shall be established by the Engineer-Architect to secure the completion of the various portions of the work in general harmony .
38 ( 2 ) The Owner reserves the right to let other contracts in connection with this project and the Contractor shall afford other contractors reasonable opportunity for the introduction and storage of their material and the execution of their work and shall properly connect and co- ordinate his work with theirs .
38 ( 3 ) If any part of the Contractor ’ s work depends for proper execution or results upon the work of any other contractor , the Contractor shall inspect and promptly report to the Engineer- Architect any defects in such work that render it unsuitable for such proper execution or results and his failure so to inspect and report shall constitute an acceptance of the other GENERAL CONDITIONS Page B 15 contractor ’ s work as fit and proper for the reception of his work except as to defects which may develop in the other contractor ’ s work after the execution of this work .
38 ( 4 ) To insure the proper execution of his subsequent work , the Contractor shall measure work already in place and shall at once report to the Engineer-Architect any discrepancy between the executed work and the drawings .
INTERIM CERTIFICATE OF COMPLETION 39 ( 1 ) If the Engineer-Architect is satisfied that the work is substantially completed and is acceptable for use by the Owner , he may at any time before issuance of a Final Certificate of Completion issue to the Contractor an Interim Certificate of Completion , and shall describe therein the portions of the work not completed to his satisfaction , state those quantities which require additional measurements and all things which must be done by the Contractor before a Final Certificate of Completion can be issued .
39 ( 2 ) As soon as reasonably possible after ( a ) the work has been completed , and ( b ) the Contractor has complied with the contract and all orders and directions made pursuant thereto , to the satisfaction of the Engineer-Architect , he shall issue to the Contractor a Final Certificate of Completion .
39 ( 3 ) The Engineer-Architect , before issuing a Final Certificate of Completion , may , in addition to the matter described in the Interim Certificate of Completion , require the Contractor to rectify any other portions of the work not completed to the satisfaction of the Engineer-Architect and to do any other things necessary for the completion of the work .
39 ( 4 ) The Engineer-Architect shall measure and keep records of his measurements of the quantities of labour , material and plant performed , used and supplied by the Contractor in executing the work and shall , at the request of the Contractor , inform him of his measurements and the Contractor shall assist and co-operate with the Engineer-Architect in such measuring and is entitled to inspect the records of measurements kept by the Engineer- Architect .
39 ( 5 ) On the day that the Engineer-Architect issues his Final Certificate of Completion under subsection ( 2 ) , he shall issue a Final Certificate of Measurement showing the quantity of labour , plant and material performed , used and supplied by the Contractor in executing the work and all measurements included therein shall be binding upon the Owner and the Contractor and are exclusive between them as to the quantity of any labour , plant or material performed , used or supplied by the Contractor in executing the work .
39 ( 6 ) Subsections ( 4 ) and ( 5 ) are applicable only to a unit price arrangement .
CONVERSION OF SECURITY DEPOSIT 40 ( 1 ) If the work is taken out of the Contractor ’ s hands pursuant to section 16 or if the contract is terminated pursuant to section 19 or if the Contractor is in breach of or in default under the contract , the Owner may negotiate the security deposit , in the case of bonds , or convert the security deposit to the Owner ’ s own use , in the case of money , and the amount realized by the Owner shall be deemed to be a debt by the Owner to the Contractor and the Owner shall have the right of set-off and may set-off against the debt any sum or amount which the Contractor may be liable to pay to the Owner and the balance of the debt , if any , after the right of set-off has been exercised , shall if such balance , in the opinion of the Engineer- Architect , is not required for the purpose of the contract and subject always to the provisions of section 20 be paid by the Owner to the Contractor .
Page B 16 GENERAL CONDITIONS 40 ( 2 ) The Owner may retain for the purpose of the contract any balance of moneys , otherwise payable to the Contractor under subsection ( 1 ) .
RETURN OF SECURITY DEPOSIT 41 ( 1 ) Upon the Engineer-Architect ’ s Interim Certificate of Completion being issued , the Owner shall , if the Contractor is not in breach of or in default under the contract , return to the Contractor that part of the security deposit covering performance of the work which , in the opinion of the Engineer-Architect , is not required for the purposes of the contract .
41 ( 2 ) Where the security deposit was converted to cash , the Owner shall pay to the Contractor the interest accrued thereon to the date of payment to the Contractor , but in no case shall the interest payable by the Owner exceed the amount paid to the owner thereon as a result of the Owner complying with subsection 20 ( 2 ) of the General Regulation - Crown Construction Contracts Act and in no case shall interest be paid by the Owner to the Contractor on that portion of the security deposit taken or used by the Owner in accordance with the provisions of this Agreement .
PERMITS AND LICENCES 42 ( 1 ) The Owner shall furnish all surveys unless otherwise specified .
42 ( 2 ) Permits and licences of a temporary nature normally required for the prosecution of the work shall be secured and paid for by the Contractor .
42 ( 3 ) Easements or other authorizations for permanent structures or permanent changes in existing facilities shall be secured and paid for by the Owner unless otherwise specified .
42 ( 4 ) No extension of time for completion of the work shall be allowed due to delay for any cause in the obtaining by the Contractor of the licences and permits described in subsection ( 1 ) , ( 2 ) , or ( 3 ) except where such delay is the direct result of actions of the Owner .
DETERMINATION OF COST - UNIT PRICE 43 Whenever it is necessary for the purposes of sections 12 , 18 , 36 and 37 to determine the cost of labour , plant or material , the Unit Price Table shall be used , that is , the cost shall be equal to the product of the agreed quantity of such labour , plant or material expressed in the appropriate unit of measurement multiplied by the price in respect of such unit .
DETERMINATION OF COST - AGREEMENT 44 If the method of determination in section 43 can not be used because the labour , plant or material involved is not included in the Unit Price Table , the cost of the labour , plant or material for the purposes of sections 12 , 18 , 36 and 37 shall be the amount agreed upon from time to time by the Contractor and the Engineer-Architect .
DETERMINATION OF COST - COST PLUS 45 ( 1 ) Where the method of determination provided for in section 43 can not be used and the Engineer-Architect and Contractor do not agree as provided in section 44 , the Owner and the Contractor may , by an agreement in writing , agree to determine the cost of labour , plant or material for the purposes of section 12 , 18 , 36 and 37 to be equal to the aggregate of ( a ) all reasonable and proper amounts actually expended by or legally payable by the Contractor in respect of the labour , plant or material which fall within any of the classes of expenditure described in subsection ( 2 ) ( being costs which are directly attributable to the execution of the work and are not costs in respect of which the allowance in paragraph ( b ) is made ) , and GENERAL CONDITIONS Page B 17 ( b ) fifteen percent of the total of the expenditures of the Contractor that meet the test in paragraph ( a ) , as an allowance for all other expenditures by the Contractor and for profit , and without limiting the generality of the foregoing , being also an allowance for payments and charges relating to overhead , head office expenses and general administration costs of the Contractor , including finance and interest charges , or , five percent of such expenditures where the Contractor has the work done by a subcontractor : provided that such allowance shall not be applied to any portion of the expenditures identified under paragraph ( 2 ) ( h ) in which the Machine Rental Regulation - Crown Construction Contracts Act is used to calculate such expenditure ; but where the cost determination arises solely out of a change order issued pursuant to section 37 and the value of that change order , as estimated by the Engineer-Architect at the time of its issue , is $ 2,500 or less , then twenty percent of the total of the expenditures of the Contractor that meet the test in paragraph ( a ) , as an allowance for all other expenditures by the Contractor and for profit , and without limiting the generality of the foregoing , being also an allowance for payments and charges relating to overhead , head office expenses and general administration costs of the Contractor , including finance and interest charges , or , ten percent of such expenditures where the Contractor has the work done by a subcontractor : provided that such allowance shall not be applied to any portion of the expenditures identified under paragraph ( 2 ) ( h ) in which the Machine Rental Regulation - Crown Construction Contracts Act is used to calculate such expenditure .
45 ( 2 ) Classes of expenditure that are allowable are : ( a ) payments to subcontractors , agreed to by the Owner ; ( b ) wages , salaries and travelling expenses of employees of the Contractor while they are actually and properly engaged on the work , other than wages , salaries , bonuses , living and travelling expenses , of personnel of the Contractor generally employed at the head office or at a general office of the Contractor unless such personnel is engaged at the site of the work with the approval of the Engineer-Architect ; ( c ) payments for material necessary for and incorporated in the work , or necessary for and consumed in the execution of the work ; ( d ) payments for consumable tools , other than tools customarily provided by tradesmen , necessary for and used in the execution of the work ; ( e ) payments for preparation , inspection , delivery , installation and removal of material necessary for the execution of the work ; ( f ) payments for renting , erecting , maintaining , and removing temporary offices , sheds and similar structures necessary for and used by the Contractor in executing the work ; ( g ) assessments in respect to the work payable under any statutory requirement or other agreements relating to payroll burdens ; ( h ) payments for renting plant and allowances for plant owned by the Contractor necessarily for the execution of the work providing that such payments or allowances are reasonable and do not exceed the equipment rental rate set out in the Machine Rental Regulation - Crown Construction Contracts Act ; ( i ) payments for inspection , delivery , installation and removal of plant necessary for the execution of the work ; and ( j ) other payments made with the approval of the Engineer-Architect that are necessary for the execution of the work .
DEFINITION OR DETERMINATION OF COST Page B 18 GENERAL CONDITIONS 46 ( 1 ) For the purposes of sections 44 and 45 and except as in those sections specifically provided , plant does not include tools .
46 ( 2 ) For the purposes of sections 43 , 44 and 45 , “ Unit Price Table ” means the table referred to in Article VI of the Articles of Agreement .
MAINTAIN RECORDS BY CONTRACTOR 47 ( 1 ) The Contractor and each subcontractor shall maintain ( a ) the detail of the compilation of his estimate showing labour , material , plant , overhead and all other elements entering into his unit or lump sum prices as prepared for the purpose of tender , and ( b ) full records of the actual cost to him of the work together with all proper tender calls , quotations , contracts , correspondence , invoices , receipts and vouchers relating thereto , and shall make them available to audit and inspection by the Owner , the Comptroller of the Province of New Brunswick , or by persons acting on their behalf , shall allow them to make copies thereof and to take extracts therefrom , and shall furnish them with any information which they may require from time to time in connection with such records .
47 ( 2 ) The records maintained by the Contractor and each subcontractor pursuant to this section shall be kept intact until the expiration of two years from the date of issuance of the Final Certificate of Completion under subsection 39 ( 2 ) or until the expiration of such other period as the Owner may direct .
47 ( 3 ) The Contractor shall require all subcontractors and all firms , corporations and persons directly or indirectly controlled by or affiliated with the Contractor and all firms , corporations and persons directly or indirectly having control of the Contractor to comply with subsections ( 1 ) and ( 2 ) as if they were the Contractor .
WORK SCHEDULE 48 ( 1 ) Except as otherwise provided in the Contract Documents , the Contractor shall submit to the Engineer-Architect within thirty days of the formal notice of award of contract a work schedule satisfactory to the Engineer-Architect showing therein the time , rate , and order of construction he proposes for the various portions of the work .
48 ( 2 ) No progress claims shall be paid by the Owner during the time while the Contractor is in default under subsection ( 1 ) .
COST BREAKDOWN OF LUMP SUM WORK 49 The Contractor shall , on contracts which are wholly lump sum or partly lump sum and partly unit price , submit a schedule to the Owner showing the cost breakdown of the lump sum work to assist the Engineer-Architect in assessing progress claims .
CONTRACTOR ’ S JOB OFFICE 50 ( 1 ) The Contractor shall provide a temporary weather tight job office , located in an area approved by the Engineer-Architect , for his own use complete with facilities for filing drawings , specifications , correspondence , purchase orders and such other appurtenances as are necessary for the proper conduct of the work and shall remove same upon completion of the work .
50 ( 2 ) The Contractor shall provide a telephone in the job office described in subsection ( 1 ) where practicable .
GENERAL CONDITIONS Page B 19 50 ( 3 ) The Contractor shall at all times during construction of the work maintain in the job office required by subsection ( 1 ) a complete and current set of plans , specifications and change orders for this contract .
RECORD OF IMPORTED PLANT 51 The Contractor shall deliver to the Engineer-Architect each time a Progress Claim is submitted a statement , signed by a responsible person on behalf of the Contractor , setting forth an accurate record of the serial number , type and date of arrival in the Province of all construction equipment brought into the Province and used during the immediately preceding Payment Period in performance of the work , the arrival of which had not been previously reported , together with the date of departure from the Province of any such equipment which had been so used .
COPY PURCHASE ORDERS 52 ( 1 ) Where the accepted tender for the construction of the work exceeds fifty thousand dollars , the Contractor shall maintain on the construction site one copy of every purchase order used in acquiring services and material for incorporation into the work of this contract and allow the Engineer-Architect or his authorized representative access thereto .
52 ( 2 ) A copy of each purchase order shall be made available to the Engineer-Architect at the job site prior to incorporation of the material purchased thereby into the work .
ARBITRATION 53 ( 1 ) Any claim or dispute involving the Owner and the Contractor may , by mutual agreement of the parties , be submitted to arbitration .
53 ( 2 ) Should the Owner in accordance with this section agree to enter into an Agreement to Arbitrate , the Agreement shall be limited to matters contained in the claim submitted by the Contractor and shall stipulate that the arbitration is not binding on either party .
INSURANCE Page E 1 E This document is the document referred to as “ Insurance Schedule ” and marked “ E ” in the Articles of Agreement entered into on the ...................... day of ......................... 20 ........ between the Owner and the Contractor .
{ DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION { AND INFRASTRUCTURE { { { Signed { { Owner { { { { { Contractor INSURANCE SCHEDULE General Items 1 ) The Contractor shall at his own expense , procure and maintain insurance policies which shall include the endorsements and extensions as detailed below .
2 ) The Contractor shall provide the Department with proof of coverage in the form of a certificate issued by WorkSafeNB identifying the contractor as registered and in good standing with WorkSafeNB .
Such proof of coverage will be provided to the Department in conjunction with the execution of the contract as well as is stipulated under the Terms of Payment A of the contract .
3 ) The Contractor shall provide to the Department of Transportation a Confirmation of Coverage as required by the Department which shall be signed by an authorized representative of the Insurer .
Part A - Course of Construction The Insurance Policy required under this Part A shall include : a ) a limit of coverage equal to 100 % of the value of the Structure ( s ) b ) Broad Form coverage including Flood and Earthquake c ) a Replacement Cost basis of settlement d ) all designated parties as Loss Payees e ) a Waiver of Subrogation f ) coverage for “ By-laws ” g ) a 30 day notice provision h ) resultant damage coverage All as detailed on the Department ’ s Confirmation of Coverage form .
continued ... INSURANCE Page E 2 Part B - Commercial General Liability The Insurance policy required under this Part B shall include : a ) an “ occurrence ” definition of “ accident ” b ) the Province as an Additional Insured c ) Owners and Contractors Protective Liability d ) a Cross Liability clause e ) a waiver of subrogation f ) Blanket Contractual Liability g ) Products/Completed Operations Liability h ) Broad Form Property Damage i ) Non-owned Automobile Liability j ) Contingent Employers Liability k ) Personal Injury extension of Bodily Injury l ) coverage for machinery attached to vehicles m ) a 30 day notice provision n ) coverage for operations involving explosives , pile driving , support of any property ( XCU ) performed by sub-contractors .
Where the Contractor performs such operations himself he shall obtain suitable coverage and shall provide the Department with a Confirmation of Coverage signed by an Authorized Representative of the Insurer signifying the validity of the Coverage .
Such Confirmation shall be provided to the Department prior to the commencement of any XCU work and shall include all Schedule E requirements for Liability Insurance ( Items a to o inclusive ) o ) Liability Limits of not less than $ 2,000,000 or as currently carried by the Contractor whichever is greater and such policy shall not be on a “ Claims Made ” Form .
All as detailed on the Department ’ s Confirmation of Coverage form Part C - Automobile Liability The Insurance policy required under this Part C shall include : a ) coverage for the liability for all vehicles owned , hired , or leased in the performance of the Project b ) Limits of Liability of not less than $ 2,000,000 or as currently carried by the Contractor whichever is greater continued ... INSURANCE Page E 3 Part D - Special Items a ) The Department reserves the right to require the Contractor to insure his property , plant and equipment , for such amounts as the Department deems adequate , and to require the Contractor to file with the Department evidence of such insurance in a format acceptable to the Department .
b ) The Department further reserves the right to require the Contractor to carry such other insurances as are deemed appropriate by the Department having regard to the nature of the project undertaken .
c ) The insurance requirements as set out in this Schedule E and supporting forms shall not in any way limit the Contractor ’ s liability arising out of the project , contract or otherwise .
d ) All insurances required to be provided and maintained by the Contractor shall be negotiated for , procured from , and the premium paid to a resident agent of an Insurance Company licensed to do business in the Province of New Brunswick .
e ) The requirement of the Contractor to provide Confirmations of Coverage to the Department shall survive the completion of the project .
The Department reserves the right to ask for and the Contractor specifically agrees to provide evidence of insurance covering the period subsequent to the term of the project contract for such eventualities as warranty periods , maintenance periods , the completion of deficiency lists , etc .
Revised January 01 , 2006 INSURANCE Page E 4 CONTRACT NO .
CONFIRMATION OF COVERAGE The Insurance coverages procured and maintained by the Contractor for this contract are understood and agreed to include the following : COURSE OF CONSTRUCTION ( BUILDERS RISK )  Broad Form coverage ( IBC 4042 or better ) including Flood and Earthquake in an amount equal to 100 % of the value of the structure ( s ) ( Schedule E items a and b )  Replacement Cost basis ( Item c )  Policy written in the name of Her Majesty the Queen in Right of Province of New Brunswick , Represented by the Minister of Transportation and Infrastructure ( “ Owner ” ) , the Contractor and the sub- contractors as their interests may appear ( Item d )  Insurer ’ s Waiver of Subrogation against Her Majesty the Queen et al ( Item e )  Deletion of “ By-laws ” exclusion ( Item f )  Thirty days prior written notice to the Department of Transportation and Infrastructure of any change to , cancellation or lapse of the Insurance coverage ( Item g )  Coverage for resultant damage of faulty or improper material , workmanship and/or design ( Item h ) Name of Insurance Company : Policy Number : Date Signature of Authorized Representative of Insurance Company Revised January 01 , 2005 INSURANCE Page E 5 CONTRACT NO .
CONFIRMATION OF COVERAGE The Insurance coverages procured and maintained by the Contractor for this contract are understood and agreed to include the following : COMMERCIAL GENERAL LIABILITY  “ Occurrence ” definition of “ accident ” ( Schedule E , Item a )  Her Majesty the Queen in Right of the Province of New Brunswick Represented by the Minister of Transportation and Infrastructure included as Additional Insured The addition of the Province as Additional Insured shall not prevent recovery in any situation in which recovery would have been available had the Province not been so named ( Item b )  Owners and Contractors Protective Liability ( Item c )  Cross Liability Clause respecting All Insureds ( Item d )  Insurer ’ s Waiver of Subrogation against Her Majesty the Queen et al ( Item e )  Blanket Contractual Liability ( Item f )  Products/Completed Operations Liability ( Item g )  Broad Form Property Damage ( Item h )  Non-owned Automobile Liability ( Item i )  Contingent Employers Liability ( Item j )  Personal Injury ( Item k )  Coverage extended to include machinery attached to automobiles ( Item l )  Thirty days prior written notice to the Department of Transportation and Infrastructure of any change to , cancellation or lapse of the Insurance coverage ( Item m )  Coverage for a ) Property Damage arising out of operations involving explosives , pile driving , or removal or weakening of support of any property , ( XCU ) where the work is performed by sub-contractors and b ) for Property Damage arising out of the same perils ( XCU ) included within the Products or Completed Operations coverage whether performed by the Contractor or sub-contractors .
( Item n )  Limit of Liability of not less than $ 2,000,000 or as currently carried by the contractor whichever is greater ( Item o ) INSURANCE Page E 6  Occurrence Policy Form ( not Claims Made ) Name of Insurance Company : Policy Number : ______________________________________ Date Signature of Authorized Representative of Insurance Company Revised January 01 , 2005 INSURANCE Page E 7 CONTRACT NO .
CONFIRMATION OF COVERAGE The Insurance coverages procured and maintained by the Contractor for this contract are understood and agreed to include the following : AUTOMOBILE LIABILITY  Covering all motor vehicles owned , hired or leased in the performance of the Project  Limit of Liability of not less than $ 2,000,000 or as currently carried by the contractor whichever is greater Name of Insurance Company : Policy Number : Date Signature of Authorized Representative of Insurance Company Revised January 01 , 2005 INSURANCE Page E 8 CONTRACT NO .
CONFIRMATION OF COVERAGE The Insurance coverages procured and maintained by the Contractor for this contract are understood and agreed to include the following : GENERAL LIABILITY FOR BLASTING OPERATIONS  `` Occurrence '' definition of `` accident '' ( Schedule E , Item a )  Her Majesty the Queen in Right of the Province of New Brunswick Represented by the Minister of Transportation and Infrastructure included as Additional Insured The addition of the Province as Additional Insured shall not prevent recovery in any situation in which recovery would have been available had the Province not been so named ( Item b )  Owners and Contractors Protective Liability ( Item c )  Cross Liability Clause respecting All Insureds ( Item d )  Insurer ’ s Waiver of Subrogation against Her Majesty the Queen et al ( Item e )  Blanket Contractual Liability ( Item f )  Products/Completed Operations Liability ( Item g )  Broad Form Property Damage ( Item h )  Non-owned Automobile Liability ( Item i )  Contingent Employers Liability ( Item j )  Coverage extended to include machinery attached to automobiles ( Item l )  Thirty days prior written notice to the Department of Transportation and Infrastructure of any change to , cancellation or lapse of the Insurance coverage ( Item m ) INSURANCE Page E 9  Limit of Liability of not less than $ 2,000,000 or as currently carried by the contractor whichever is greater ( Item o )  Occurrence Policy Form ( not Claims Made ) Name of Insurance Company : Policy Number : Date Signature of Authorized Representative of Insurance Company Revised January 01 , 2005 FORM OF TENDER Page F 1 F PROVINCE OF NEW BRUNSWICK DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE FORM OF TENDER FOR CONTRACT No .
FORM OF TENDER Page F 2 ITEM ITEM No .
UNIT PRICE , LUMP SUM PRICE ( FIXED PRICE ) , AS THE CASE MAY BE , SHALL BE EITHER TYPEWRITTEN , PRINTED OR WRITTEN IN INK IN WORDS IN THE SPACE PROVIDED FOR EACH ITEM IN THIS COLUMN MEASURE APPROXIMATE QUANTITIES UNIT PRICE ( IN FIGS ) TOTAL ........................................ Dollars and ................................... cents $ ¢ ........................................ Dollars and ................................... cents ........................................ Dollars and ................................... cents ........................................ Dollars and ................................... cents ........................................ Dollars and ................................... cents ........................................ Dollars and ................................... cents ........................................ Dollars and ................................... cents ........................................ Dollars and ................................... cents ........................................ Dollars and ................................... cents ........................................ Dollars and ................................... cents ........................................ Dollars and ................................... cents ........................................ Dollars and ................................... cents ........................................ Dollars and ................................... cents ........................................ Dollars and ................................... cents Carried Forward FORM OF TENDER Page F 3 Brought Forward ...
Page # ITEM ITEM No .
UNIT PRICE , LUMP SUM PRICE ( FIXED PRICE ) , AS THE CASE MAY BE , SHALL BE EITHER TYPEWRITTEN , PRINTED OR WRITTEN IN INK IN WORDS IN THE SPACE PROVIDED FOR EACH ITEM IN THIS COLUMN MEASURE APPROXIMATE QUANTITIES UNIT PRICE ( IN FIGS ) TOTAL ........................................ Dollars and ................................... cents $ ¢ ........................................ Dollars and ................................... cents ........................................ Dollars and ................................... cents ........................................ Dollars and ................................... cents ........................................ Dollars and ................................... cents ........................................ Dollars and ................................... cents ........................................ Dollars and ................................... cents ........................................ Dollars and ................................... cents ........................................ Dollars and ................................... cents Total Bid TOTAL CONTRACT NO .
$ ¢ TOTAL HST CONTRACT NO .
$ ¢ FORM OF TENDER Page F 4 We/I , ............................................................ do hereby offer to furnish all and every kind of labour , tools , machinery , implements , and other plant , services , and materials , whatsoever necessary to perform the undermentioned Work within the limits of the time specified ; namely : PROVINCE OF NEW BRUNSWICK DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE CONTRACT NO .
................ Name of Project In accordance with the Contract Documents , specifications , plans , profiles , and drawings , prepared , or to be prepared , for the purpose of such Work and upon the terms and conditions set out in the printed form of Contract to be furnished , and in every respect to the satisfaction of the Chief Engineer , all the Work of the different kinds hereinafter mentioned in the said specifications so far as the same are applicable to the class of Work hereby tendered for and required in the construction of the Work tendered .
At and for the prices set opposite the different Items .
FORM OF TENDER Page F 5 Accompanying this tender is one of the following : 1 ) A Bid Security Deposit in the form of a Certified Cheque payable to the Minister of Finance in the amount of ........................................................................................................................................................................ OR 2 ) A Bid Bond with HER MAJESTY THE QUEEN in right of the Province of New Brunswick as represented by the Minister of Transportation and Infrastructure as obligee in the amount of ............................................................................................................................................................................ ......................... in accordance with the terms of the advertisement calling for this tender .
We/I do hereby declare and agree that in the case of our/my refusal to execute a formal Contract with the Department within 14 days after the notification of acceptance of this tender , the said bid bond shall be forfeited in accordance with Section 24 of Regulation 82-109 under the Crown Construction Contracts Act to the Department as liquidated damages for the said refusal .
We/I , the undersigned have examined the Contract Documents , plans , and specifications for ( including all revisions thereto ) , and have visited and examined the location of the above described Work and are fully informed as to the nature of the Work and the condition relating to its performance , and understand the quantities shown in the estimate are approximate only and are subject to either increase or decrease , and hereby agree to conform to all respects to the terms and conditions of this tender , and to sign a formal Contract therefore upon demand .
Dated at ................................................................................................ this ................ day of ............ 20 ......
Contractor ........................................................................................................................................................ Signature of Authorized Representative ...........................................................................................................
Address ............................................................................................................................................................ .......................................................................................................................................................................... TO : THE MINISTER OF TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE PROVINCE OF NEW BRUNSWICK FREDERICTON , NEW BRUNSWICK STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS Page G 1 G This document is the document referred to as “ Plans and Standard Specifications ” and marked “ G ” in the Articles of Agreement entered into on the day of 20 , between the Owner and the Contractor .
( ( ( ( ( ( OWNER signed ( ( ( ( ( ( CONTRACTOR PROVINCE OF NEW BRUNSWICK DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS PROJECT : AFFIDAVIT Page I 1 I This document is the document referred to as “ Affidavit ” and marked “ I ” in the Articles of Agreement entered into on the ...................... day of ......................... 20 ........ between the Owner and the Contractor .
{ { { Signed { { Owner { { { { Contractor I , ...................................................... of the ...................................................................................................... in the County of ................................... and the Province of ............................................................................ make oath and say : 1 .
That I am secretary-Treasurer of ......................................................................................................... ................................................................... , a body corporate under and by virtue of the laws of the Province of ............................................................. having its Head Office at ................................................................. ......................................................... in the County of ........................................................................................ and the Province of ................................................................. and I have custody of the Corporate Seal of the said Company .
2 .
That the Corporate Seal affixed to the aforegoing Indenture is the Corporate Seal of the said ........... ................................................................................ and was affixed thereto by me by authority of the Board of Directors thereof .
.3 That the signature “ .......................................................... ” set and subscribed to the said Indenture as President of ....................................................................................... is in true and proper handwriting of ................................................................................................ who is the President of the said Company and the signature “ ...................................................................... ” set and subscribed thereto as Secretary- Treasurer of the said Company is in true and proper handwriting of me , this deponent .
SWORN to me at the City of ................................... in the ..................................................... County of ................................ Secretary-Treasurer and the Province of ...................... this ..................... day of ................... 20 ..... . ............................................. Commissioner of Oaths 40-1280 SUBJECT INDEX DEPA Janua Abbrev Adjust Adjust Advise Aggreg Applic Armou Aspha Aspha Aspha Aspha Author Back - Backfi Backfi Bitumi Borrow Bridge Cast-in Sign o Chain Chip S Clearin Cold M Comm Compa Compl Concre Concre Concre Concre Concre ARTMENT ary , 2015 viations ment of Catch B ment for Asphalt ements gate Base/Subba ation of Water ur Stone Protectio alt Concrete - Me alt Concrete Core lt Concrete - End alt Sidewalk rity of the Engine - Up Alarms ll For Structures lling Around Stru nous Tack Coat w e Pot Bearings n-Place Concrete or Light Base Link Fence Seal ( Single and ng Milling - Asphalt C mon Excavation action letion Date ete Encase Road ete in Structures ete Pipe ete Pipe - Large ete Sidewalk STAN of TRANS A asins and Manho t Binder Price ase on thod Specificatio e Data d Result Specific eer B uctures C e Barrier Double ) Concrete dbed Duct NDARD SP PORTATIO oles on cation ( ERS ) ECIFICATI ON and INF INDEX SUBJECT INDE 002 408 821 971 203 191 610 260 927 261 420 005 934 167 166 259 121 342 520 540 182 265 101 208 106 936 998 529 302 140 141 416 IONS FRASTRUC EX Construction Dra Construction Ro Construction Tra Culvert Erosion Curb and Gutter Definitions Detours Disposal Areas Ditching Energy-Absorbin Engineered Fill Environmental R Erosion Control Examination of S Excavation With Extra Work Falsework Fertilizing Filter Screen Fine Grading Finger Joint Ass Fish Rescue Fixed Rates Force Account Formwork Foundation Exca Frame With Gra Free-Draining B Full Depth Recy CTURE awings and Calc oads affic Control Protection r D E ng Guide Rail Te Requirements Structure Soils Information hin Cofferdams F semblies avation ate or Cover Backfill ycling culations D E erminal n F Page 1 of 4 956 921 576 623 416 003 918 947 116 515 365 948 605 926 322 812 957 615 603 205 344 622 810 811 958 161 407 366 263 DEPA Janua Gabion Geotex Geotec Grave Grubb Guide Guide Guide Haulag Haulag Heavy Hiring Hydros Individ Induce Insura Jute M Light S Limited Lines a ARTMENT ary , 2015 ns xtile chnical Instrume l for Fish Habitat ing Posts Rail Rail System - St ge- Asphalt Conc ge -Soil , Rock an y Equipment Practices seeding dual Rock Placem ed Trench nce Schedule Mats Standard d Funds and Grades STAN of TRANS G entation t tructures H crete nd Aggregate I ment J L NDARD SP PORTATIO ECIFICATI ON and INF INDEX SUBJECT INDE 607 601 928 612 102 510 512 346 802 801 933 912 614 611 169 913 604 542 996 941 IONS FRASTRUC EX Maintenance of Median Flashing Metal Pipe Metal Pipe - Lar Microsurfacing Mobilization Mulching Overhaul - Com Overhaul - Solid Overhaul - Uncla Overhead Sign Overhead Sign S Overhead Sign S Partial Depth Re Partnering Pavement Mark Paving Catch Ba Payment Adjust Permits Pipe Zone Mate Pits and Quarrie Portland Cemen Post-Tensioning Power Point Precast Catch B Precast Concret Precast Prestres Private Trucks Production of Hi Pulverizing CTURE M Traffic Flow g Light rge O mmon Excavation d Rock Excavatio assified Excavat Structure Structure Found P ecycling kings asin Apron tments erial es nt Concrete g System Basin te Box Culvert ssed Concrete B ighway Aggregat M O on tion ation P Beams tes Page 2 of 4 919 544 130 131 264 825 616 806 808 807 557 555 554 262 961 571 410 820 006 415 922 301 332 533 404 142 331 932 201 267 DEPA Janua Rando Reinfo Reloca Remov Remov Remov Remov Remov Remov Remov Remov Remov Remov Remov Remov Remov Remov Remov Remov Remov Reloca Remov Remov Remov Roads Rock W Root W Safety Scales Sched Screw ARTMENT ary , 2015 om Riprap orcing Steel ation of Catch Ba val of Asphalt Co val of Curb and G val of Deck Conc val of Energy-Ab val of Erosion Co val of Fence val of Guide Pos val of Guide Rail val of Isolated Tr val of Light Stand val of Median Fla val of Overhead val of Overhead val of Power Poi val of Roadside S val of Screw Bas val of Sidewalk ation of Sign or L val of Sign Post val of Structures val of Undergrou side Sign Weir Wads y Support System s and Weighing P uling Base STAN of TRANS R asin oncrete - Structu Gutter crete bsorbing Guide R ontrol Structure sts rees dard ashing Light Sign Sign Structure nt Sign se Light Base und Services S ms Procedures NDARD SP PORTATIO res Rail Terminal ECIFICATI ON and INF INDEX SUBJECT INDE 608 304 409 371 423 372 516 606 186 511 513 103 543 545 558 556 534 553 539 424 541 551 381 425 552 609 617 952 931 905 538 IONS FRASTRUC EX Sealed Expansio Sediment Contro Service Duct - S Shoring Shoulder Materi Shoulder Proces Shoulder Rumb Shoulder Subdra Sign Post Signs Sign or Light Ba Sluice Box Soil Reinforcem Solid Rock Exca Specified Work Standard Drawin Standard Drawin Standard Drawin Standard Drawin Standard Drawin Standard Drawin Standard Drawin Steel Ballastwal Steel H Piles Steel Laminated Steel Pipe Piles Steel Sheet Pile Steel Superstruc Storm Sewer Pi Subcontractors Subdrain Subdrain Outlet Supply of Mater CTURE on Joint Assemb ol Fence Structures ial ssing le Strips ain ase ment avation ngs ngs ngs ngs ngs ngs ngs ll Angle d Bearings s e Cofferdams cture pe rials blies Page 3 of 4 343 602 348 361 204 284 210 231 550 916 540 406 630 108 997 199 299 399 499 599 699 999 345 311 341 312 321 335 401 907 136 137 908 DEPA Janua Table Table Table Table Table Table Table Table Table Table Tempo Tempo Tensio Termin Topso Traffic Trees Unclas Under Underg Underg Value ARTMENT ary , 2015 of Contents of Contents of Contents of Contents of Contents of Contents of Contents of Contents of Contents of Contents orary Water Barr orary Water Cont on Splices nology il Control Persons and Shrubs ssified Excavatio Roadbed Duct ground Duct ground Junction Engineering STAN of TRANS T rier trol Works s U on Box V NDARD SP PORTATIO ECIFICATI ON and INF INDEX SUBJECT INDE 000 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900 620 621 305 001 613 917 618 107 530 531 532 962 IONS FRASTRUC EX Waterproofing Work Progressio Work Schedule Working Conditi CTURE W on ons W Page 4 of 4 351 946 906 951 STANDARD DRAWING INDEX DEPA Janua Divisio Divisio Divisio Divisio ARTMENT ary , 2015 on 000 none on 100 106 - 1 108 - 1 136 - 1 137 - 1 140 - 1 161 - 1 161 - 2 161 - 3 161 - 4 161 - 5 161 - 6 161 - 7 182 - 1 182 - 2 on 200 210 - 1 231 - 1 260 - 1 260 - 2 on 300 302 - 1 302 - 2 302 - 3 311 - 1 311 - 2 311 - 3 311 - 4 311 - 5 312 - 1 312 - 2 331 - 1 342 - 1 345 - 1 351 - 1 351 - 2 351 - 3 366 - 1 STAN of TRANS Shaping Solid Ro Subdrain Subdrain Tension Case 1.1 Case 1.2 Case 2.1 Case 2.2 Case 3.1 Foundati Foundati Chain Li Chain Li Should Should Constr Constr Roadwa Roadwa Concret Steel H Steel H Steel H Steel H Steel H Steel Pip Steel Pip Prestres Bridge P Ballastw Deck at Ballast W Waterpr Free Dra NDARD SP PORTATIO STAN of Overburde ock Transition n n Outlet Rod/Bar Ass 1 - Cross Culv 2 - Cross Culv 1 - Cross Culv 2 - Cross Culv 1 - Storm Drai ion Excavatio ion Excavatio nk Fence nk Gate der Rumble S der Subdrain a ruction Detail ruction Details ay Drain for S ay Drain Deta e Limits For F Piles - Pile C Piles - Pile P Piles - Splice Piles - Seque Piles - Seque pe Piles - Pile pe Piles - Spl ssed Beam Li Pot Bearings wall Protection Barrier Wall/C Wall Waterpro roofing Requi aining Backfil ECIFICATI ON and INF INDEX DARD DRAWIN en at Top of S s ( longitudina embly vert : Subgrad vert : Subgrad vert : Original vert : Original inage Culvert on for Footing on for Footing trip Installatio and Outlet De of a Transver s at a Structu tructures ils Foundation O ap Details oint Details e Details ences for Wel ences for Wel e Point Detail lice Details fting Device D Nomenclature n Details Curb Waterpr oofing System rements on B l Placement D IONS FRASTRUC G INDEX Solid Rock Ba al ) de above Orig de above Orig Ground abov Ground abov t Longitudinal s - Solid Roc s - Common on etails rse Key Joint re Overexcavatio lds for Horizo lds for Flat Po s Details - Vert e roofing Detail m Details Box Culvert or Details CTURE ackslope ginal Ground ginal Ground ve Subgrade ve Subgrade l to the Centre k and Commo over Solid Ro t on ontal Position osition ical Only ls r Rigid Frame - Trench  1 - Trench > 1 .
- Trench  2 - Trench > 2. eline of Road on Cases ock Case e Page 1 of 3 .2 m .2 m 2.2 m .2 m dway DEPA Janua Divisio Divisio ARTMENT ary , 2015 on 400 401 - 1 404 - 1 404 - 2 406 - 1 406 - 2 406 - 3 407 - 1 407 - 2 410 - 1 416 - 1 416 - 2 416 - 3 419 - 1 419 - 2 419 - 3 420 - 1 on 500 510 - 1 510 - 2 512 - 1 512 - 2 512 - 3 520 - 1 529 - 1 530 - 1 531 - 1 532 - 1 533 - 1 533 - 2 538 - 1 540 - 1 540 - 2 540 - 3 540 - 4 540 - 5 542 - 1 542 - 2 542 - 3 542 - 4 544 - 1 550 - 1 552 - 1 552 - 2 552 - 3 552 - 4 552 - 5 552 - 6 554 - 1 554 - 2 STAN of TRANS Typical T Precast C Typical C Typical S Typical S Typical S Typical F Typical F Paving C Curb and Curb and Curb and Concrete Joint Lay Joint and Asphalt S Guide Po Guide Po Beam Gu Guide Ra Guide Ra Cast-in-P Concrete Under Ro Undergro Undergro Power Po Power Po Screw Ba Type “ E ” Type “ F ” Type “ G ” Sign or L Angulatio Light Sta Light Sta Light Sta Light Sta Median F Roadside Roadside Roadside Roadside Roadside Roadside Roadside Overhead Overhead NDARD SP PORTATIO STAN Trench Cross Catch Basin D Catch Basin E Sluice Box and Sluice Box Ins Sluice Box Ins Frame With G Frame With Co Catch Basin A d Gutter Detai d Gutter Detai d Gutter Detai e Sidewalk De yout d Isolation Det Sidewalk Deta ost Details ost and Guide uide Rail Deta ail / Structure ail / Structure Place Concret e Encased Du oadbed Duct ound Duct De ound Junction oint , Multiple oint , Single Li ase Detail Sign or Light Sign or Light Sign or Light Light Base De on of Sign Fou ndard Detail - ndard Wiring ndard Wiring ndard Anchor Flashing Light e Sign Post A e Sign Details e Sign Strap S e Sign Strap S e Sign Strap S e Sign Strap S e Sign Strap S d Sign Structu d Sign Structu ECIFICATI ON and INF INDEX DARD DRAWIN Sections Details Excavation d Pipe Detail stallation Behi stallation Into rate - Square over - Round Apron ils ils ils etails tails ails e Rail Details ails Details Details te Barrier Det uct Bank Syste Details tails n Box Detail Lights ight t Base Details Base Details t Base Details tail - Bedrock undations - Single and D Details - 120 Details - 240 r Details t Details Anchor Details s Sequence Sequence Sequence Sequence Sequence ure Foundatio ure Foundatio IONS FRASTRUC G INDEX ind the Curb a the Curb and e tails em s - Soil Found s - Soil Found s - Soil Found k Foundation Double Davit 0 v 0 v s on - Anchorag on - Base Pla CTURE and Gutter d Gutter dation dation dation ge Details ate and Template Details Page 2 of 3 DEPA Janua Divisio Divisio ARTMENT ary , 2015 on 600 602 - 1 604 - 1 605 - 1 605 - 2 605 - 3 605 - 4 605 - 5 605 - 6 605 - 7 607 - 1 609 - 1 610 - 1 617 - 1 621 - 1 623 - 1 623 - 2 on 900 941 - 1 952 - 1 952 - 2 958 - 1 STAN of TRANS Sedimen Jute Mat Type A - Type A - Type B - Type B - Type C - Type C - Type D - Gabion B Rock We Armour S Root Wa Tempora End Trea End Trea Standard Safety N Safety N Deck Ov NDARD SP PORTATIO STAN nt Control Fen t Details Spillway Stru Spillway Stru Erosion Con Erosion Con - Erosion Con - Erosion Con - Erosion Con Backfilling De eir Details Stone Protect ad Detail in Po ary Working P atment for Cu atment for Cu d Stake Marki et Support Sy et Support Sy verhang Brack ECIFICATI ON and INF INDEX DARD DRAWIN nce ucture for Sed ucture Details trol Structure trol Structure ntrol Structure ntrol Structure ntrol Structure etails tion System D ool Pad ulverts ≤ 1500 ulverts ≤ 1500 ings ystem - Abutm ystem - Piers ket - Steel Gir IONS FRASTRUC G INDEX diment Pond s e for Ditches e Details e for Ditches e Details e for Ditches Details 0mm ID - Roa 0mm ID - Roa ments rder CTURE adway Foreslo adway Foreslo ope 3:1 or Ste ope Flatter tha Page 3 of 3 eeper an 3:1
